===== Page 1 =====
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO
A PASSIVE TREE
Now that we have quantified the behavior of the cell in response to current pulses and
current steps as delivered by the physiologist's microelectrode, let us study the behavior
of the cell responding to a more physiological input. For instance, a visual stimulus in the
environment will activate cells in the retina and its target, neurons in the lateral geniculate
nucleus. These, in turn, make on the order of 50 excitatory synapses onto the apical tree
of a layer 5 pyramidal cell in primary visual cortex such as the one we use throughout the
book, and about 100-150 synapses onto a layer 4 spiny stellate cell (Peters and Payne,
1993; Ahmed et al., 1994, 1996; Peters, Payne, and Rudd, 1994). All of these synapses
will be triggered within a fraction of a millisecond (Alonso, Usrey, and Reid, 1996). Thus,
any sensory input to a neuron is likely to activate on the order of 102 synapses, rather than
one or two very specific synapses as envisioned in Chap. 5 in the discussion of synaptic
AND-NOT logic.
This chapter will reexamine the effect of synaptic input to a realistic dendritic tree. We
will commence by considering a single synaptic input as a sort of baseline condition. This
represents a rather artificial condition; but because the excitatory postsynaptic potential and
current at the soma are frequently experimentally recorded and provide important insights
into the situation prevailing in the presence of massive synaptic input, we will discuss them
in detail. Next we will treat the case of many temporally dispersed synaptic inputs to a leaky
integrate-and-fire model and to the passive dendritic tree of the pyramidal cell. In particular,
we are interested in uncovering the exact relationship between the temporal input jitter and
the output jitter.
The bulk of this chapter deals with the effect of massive synaptic input onto the firing
behavior of the cell, by making use of the convenient fiction that the detailed temporal
arrangement of action potentials is irrelevant for neuronal information processing. This
allows us to derive an analytical expression relating the synaptic input to the somatic current
and ultimately to the output frequency of the cell. Under these conditions, continuous input
variables—the firing rates of the presynaptic neurons—are mapped onto a continuous output
frequency.
402
18


===== Page 2 =====
18.1 Action of a Single Synaptic Input 
· 403
18.1 Action of a Single Synaptic Input
In general, it is very difficult to quantify the effect that an individual synapse has on the
potential at the soma or on the firing frequency of the cell using a single measure. The
reason is, of course, that synaptic input needs to be treated as a time-varying conductance
change somewhere in the dendritic tree acting upon a nonlinear and nonstationary system.
In neural network models, this is quite a different manner, since the complexity of synapses
is reduced to a scalar weight w¡j, all synaptic input arrives at a single compartment, and the
spiking nonlinearity is a stationary one (Chap. 14).
18.1.1 Unitary Excitatory Postsynaptic Potentials and Currents
Figure 18.1 illustrates the local and somatic EPSPs in response to a single excitatory, voltage-
independent synapse at one of three different locations in the tree (apical and basal dendrite
and the soma; see Fig. 18.6). The resultant EPSP is sometimes also called unitary EPSP.
We include the situation of an excitatory synapse at the soma—even though no or only
very few excitatory synapses are located at the cell body of pyramidal neurons—because
it represents a sort of baseline against which the other cases can be judged. Furthermore,
a significant fraction of excitatory synapses on smooth, that is, inhibitory, interneurons is
made onto or close to the soma.
The local EPSPs peak within 1-1.2 msec, gradually returning to the resting potential
with a time course dictated by Tm. The somatic EPSPs undershoot Vrest before returning to
base levels. This small hyperpolarizing response is caused by activation of two potassium
Fig. 
18.1 VOLTAGE-INDEPENDENT
UNITARY SYNAPTIC INPUT 
Excita-
tory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) at
the site of the synapse (A) and at the
soma (Β). A single fast AMPA synapse
(gpeak = 1 nS; fpeak = 0.5 msec) was
either located in the apical tree (ar-
row in Fig. 18.6; dotted line), toward
the end of a basal dendrite (arrow
in Fig. 18.6; dashed line), or at the
soma (solid line). The undershoot in
the somatic EPSPs is caused by activa-
tion of potassium currents. (C) Excita-
tory postsynaptic current (EPSC) at the
soma for the same three synaptic inputs
while the membrane potential at the
soma is clamped to Vrest. The resulting
current flows inward, plotted negative
by convention, and peaks prior to the
peak in the associated somatic EPSP.


===== Page 3 =====
404 
· 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
currents /A and /M . Phenomenologically, the undershoot arises from the linear but inductive
nature of the potassium currents for small voltage excursions around rest (Sec. 10.1 and
Fig. 10.5).
Figure 18.1 also depicts /C]amp in response to the three synaptic inputs when the somatic
potential is clamped to Vrest = — 65 mV. The peak current varies fiftyfold, from —1.2 ρ A
for the distal apical input to —64 pA for the somatic one. The somatic EPSCs peak earlier
than the associated somatic EPSPs, compatible with the notion that the current leads the
voltage expected of an RLC circuit dominated by the resistive and capacitive components.
Note that the EPSC does not correspond to the current flowing during the somatic
EPSP, since in the former case the somatic potential is clamped (explaining the lack of
a positive, outward current during the late phases of the EPSC). The actual current flowing
across the membrane during the EPSP will show such an outward component due to the
hyperpolarizing swing of the membrane potential. Yet, because the membrane potential
during the EPSP does not deviate much from Vrest under the conditions extant in Fig. 18.1,
the EPSC is qualitatively similar to the current flowing during the EPSP.
Activating a single synapse whose conductance is halfway split between voltage inde-
pendent AMPA receptors and voltage-dependent NMDA receptors perturbs this picture but
little. Its primary effect is to prolong the duration of the EPSP and the EPSC. The reason
for the discrepancy between the small effect of voltage-dependent input in the situation
considered here and the much larger effect apparent in the experiment of Stern, Edwards,
and Sakmann (1992) pictured in Fig. 4.9 is that in the former the local EPSP barely reaches
8 mV, an insufficient depolarization to remove the magnesium blockage of the NMDA
receptor channels. Thus, blocking the NMDA component (as in Fig. 4.9B) has little effect.
In the experiment, focal stimulation recruited a much larger number of synapses which
locally depolarized the membrane sufficiently to activate NMDA input.
How do these simulated EPSPs and EPSCs stack up against experimental data from layer
5 pyramidal cells in the rat visual cortex? Figure 18.2 histograms the time course and the
peak amplitudes of about 1000 spontaneous EPSCs (clamped around the resting potential)
and close to 500 spontaneous EPSPs (from the monumental efforts of Smetters, 1995).
The time courses of experimentally recorded somatic EPSPs and EPSCs are comparable
to those of Fig. 18.1, compatible with a very fast (ipeak = 0.5 msec), AMPA-mediated
conductance change and a slow membrane time constant. The amplitude histograms of
the EPSCs encompass the three simulated values from Fig. 18.1C. (The locations of
the synapses that gave rise to the data in Fig. 18.2 are not known, but are assumed
to be distributed throughout the dendritic tree.) The somatic EPSPs are, however, much
larger than the simulated ones, due to a mismatch in input impedances in the two cases.
This is expected, since the simulated pyramidal cell receives 2 Hz synaptic background
activity, which substantially lowers the input impedance everywhere (see the following
section).
Close inspection of Fig. 18.2 reveals a systematic dependency of the rise time of the
EPSPs with their width. Rail (1967; Rail et al., 1967) first derived the relationship expected
between the rise time of a unitary EPSP and its halfwidth; for more distant input, the rise
time of the somatic EPSP will be longer and it will be more spread out. Plotting these
two measures of dispersion against each other, known as a shape index plot (Rail et al.,
1967), can reveal something about the distance between the synapse and the soma. As
applied to spinal motoneurons, these techniques played an important role in establishing
the importance of dendritic location (Redman and Walmsley, 1983).


===== Page 4 =====
18.1 Action of a Single Synaptic Input
405
Fig. 18.2 EXPERIMENTALLY RECORDED UNITARY EPSPs AND EPSCs 
Spontaneous (A) EPSPs
and (C) EPSCs recorded from layer 5 pyramidal cells in slices of rat visual cortex in the presence of
bicuculline to block synaptic inhibition. The histograms of (B) the peak amplitude of the EPSPs (n =
479) and (D) the EPSCs (n = 953) reveal a broad distribution, due to the fact that the synaptic origins
of the observed events are distributed throughout the dendritic tree. Reprinted by permission from
Smetters(1995).
18.1.2 Utility of Measures of Synaptic Efficacy
As discussed extensively in Sec. 3.2, Rail (1962,1964) showed that under certain conditions
a dendritic tree can be reduced to a single finite cable, the equivalent cylinder. In particular,
at each branch point the £/3/2 law, governing the relationship between parent and daughter
branches, must hold and all dendrites must terminate at the same electrical distance from
the soma. Unfortunately though, dendritic branch points of pyramidal cells, according to
Larkman et al., (1992; see also Hillman, 1979; Brown, Fricke, and Perkel, 1981; Johnston,
1981) do not obey the ¿?3/2 law. Furthermore, the apical tree is electrically much longer
than the basal dendrites, violating another condition needed to reduce the cell to a single
cylinder.
In Sec. 3.5, we introduced several measures of synaptic "efficiency," such as the
electrotonic distance between a site ζ and the soma L¡s (a cumulative measure of the
normalized electrotonic distance between i and the soma) and the logarithm of the voltage
attenuation Lv
is (Eq. 3.38). Recall that in an infinite cable, L = Lv. In Table 18.1 these
factors are evaluated for the apical and basal synaptic input of Fig. 18.1, where L"f is
the logarithm of the actual voltage attenuation experienced by the synaptic input. (L"s is
computed from the dc input and transfer resistances as in Eq. 3.38.) Because the dendritic tree
cannot be approximated by an equivalent cable but has pronounced asymmetries—current
flows much more easily toward than away from the soma—the electrotonic distance L is


===== Page 5 =====
406
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
pretty much useless as a quantitative indicator for attenuation. The log attenuation predicted
by the stationary input and transfer resistances does a much better job, coming within 14%
of the true log attenuation. This difference is, of course, due to the transient nature of the
synaptic input.
The discrepancies between the actual attenuation of the EPSPs and the attenuation
predicted by the electrotonic length apparent in Table 18.1 provide a convincing numerical
argument against using the electrotonic distance L—derived from solving the linear cable
equation in finite cables—as a measure of the coupling of a synapse to the soma.
18.1.3 What Do Unitary EPSPs and EPSCs Tell Us about the Threshold?
As we learned in the previous chapter, the pyramidal cell model possesses a voltage threshold
Vth (around —49 mV) for rapid synaptic input. We should therefore be able to estimate the
number of simultaneously excitatory synaptic inputs needed to reach threshold n^ as the
effective threshold voltage, Vtn — Vrest = 16 mV, divided by the peak unitary somatic EPSP
amplitude. For an excitatory input at the soma, νρε3)ί = 0.28 mV (solid trace in Fig. 18.1),
leading to nm = 57. From numerical simulations, we know that the actual number is
«th = 64. This estimate does not take the changing driving potential into account. (At
—65 mV, the driving potential for the synaptic input is 16 mV larger than at threshold.)
The effect of synaptic saturation (Fig. 4.11) at high-impedance sites, such as the distal,
apical, or the basal tree, complicates this simple analysis. Many distal sites are prevented
from generating sufficiently large somatic EPSPs to ever reach threshold. At the soma, the
input (slope) conductance of 60.6 nS is large enough compared to the peak conductance
change of a single synapse (0.5 nS) for saturation not to play a role. Furthermore all
voltage-dependent currents but sodium activation can be considered to be stationary, thereby
approximating the conditions under which Vth was estimated. We conclude that the unitary
EPSP amplitude can be used to predict the voltage threshold remarkably well (see also
Koch, Bernander, and Douglas, 1995).
Applying the same logic to estimate 7th predicts that nine such somatic inputs, each
delivering 33 pA (Fig. 18.1C), suffice to reach 7th, underestimating the actual number by a
factor of 7. But, as we pointed out in Sec. 17.3.4, the concept of a current threshold is only
applicable for sustained inputs. The highly transient EPSCs cannot be used to estimate the
threshold. (This was illustrated in Fig. 17.5 A, in which the total synaptic current flowing onto
the spike initiating membrane /S0ma exceeds /th numerous times without initiating a spike.)
We conclude that when considering rapid synaptic input, the somatic potential due to
synaptic activity is a more relevant variable than the current obtained under voltage clamp
for predicting when the cell will trigger an action potential.
{
  "table_name": "TABLE 18.1",
  "description": "Voltage Attenuation of Synaptic Input",
  "columns": ["Position", "Kit", "Kt,", "Kss", "L", "Γ", "L'"],
  "rows": [
    {"Position": "Basal", "Kit": 387.79, "Kt,": 18.47, "Kss": 16.48, "L": 0.24, "Γ": 3.32, "L'": 4.32},
    {"Position": "Apical", "Kit": 341.68, "Kt,": 10.47, "Kss": 16.48, "L": 0.56, "Γ": 3.48, "L'": 5.07}
  ]
}

Actual and expected voltage attenuation between the two synaptic sites used in Fig. 18.1 and the soma as computed from the
stationary input (Kn in ΜΩ) and transfer resistance (K¡s in ΜΩ). e
L's is the attenuation expected from the electrotonic length
measurement (Eq. 3.33); L"is is defined via Eq. 3.38 as the logarithm of the voltage attenuation. In an infinite cable L = V. Due
to the pronounced asymmetries in the cable structure, these two measures here differ markedly. The natural logarithm of the actual
voltage attenuation L"'*, as defined by the peak EPSP values in Fig. 18.1, is larger than L"¡s due to the distributed capacitances
that preferentially remove high temporal frequencies (in particular for the distal, apical input).


===== Page 6 =====
18.2 Massive Synaptic Input 
· 407
18.2 Massive Synaptic Input
Now that we have seen the effect of a single synapse, we are ready to deal with the much more
physiological situation in which a hundred or more synapses are simultaneously activated.
How will this affect the somatic potential and current and, ultimately, the firing frequency of
the cell? Because of the nonlinear relationship between synaptically induced conductance
changes and the membrane potential, this question is not easy to answer in general. Let
us start by studying the situation when the neuron is bombarded with numerous individual
excitatory and inhibitory inputs.
18.2.1 Relationship between Synaptic Input and Spike Output Jitter
When a cortical neuron is presented with the appropriate stimulus, it rapidly and reliably
increases its probability of firing. Individual cortical neurons respond to a dynamic random
dot motion stimulus with a highly reproducible temporal modulation of their firing rate,
precise to a few milliseconds (Fig. 15.11). The time that it takes for such a cell to significantly
modulate its firing rate—as determined by averaging over many presentations of an identical
stimulus—is almost always less than 10 msec and occurs in neurons that are at least six
synapses removed from the periphery. This precision is surprising because the propagation
of an input through a multilayer network with continuous mean rates causes rise times to
become increasingly shallow (due to the low-pass filtering effect treated in Sec. 14.2.4).
Yet, as the sensory triggered "wave" of activity propagates through many layers of the
cortex, the signal does not appear to become appreciably rounded off, but is only delayed
between consecutive stages by about 10 msec. This has been assessed directly by comparing
the latency and rise time of neurons in different cortical areas to the same stimulus. In the case
of an awake monkey, neurons in the primary visual cortex responded to a visual stimulus
with an average 10-90% rise time of 8 msec while neurons in a subsequent processing
stage, cortical area V4, show a virtually identical rise time of 7 msec but with an additional
26 msec latency (Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell, 1997).
Let us address this important problem in the following manner. Suppose an instantaneous
sensory event in the world triggers a volley of activity in η excitatory synaptic inputs. We
will assume that the arrival time of the input is centered around t — 0 and that its standard
deviation in time, here called input jitter, is o-m. If we further suppose that these η synapses
are sufficient to trigger one (or more) spikes (that is, η > n^) we can compute the standard
deviation in time, termed the output jitter σοιη, of the spike triggered in response to this
input. This will help us understand to what extent temporal jitter in the input is preserved,
amplified, or reduced by multiple processing stages.
We first deal with a simplified problem by assuming that the probability density of the
arriving synaptic inputs p-m(t) is the uniform density on the interval [0,1]. (p-m(t) = I
for ί € [0, 1], and 0 otherwise.) Different from before, we assume that each input only
triggers a single synaptic event of postsynaptic strength ae. These inputs are integrated onto
the capacitance of a nonleaky integrate-and-fire unit (of voltage threshold Vth = «««*)·
Together with the uniform density, this assures us that at t = 1 the voltage will be exactly
nae (in the absence of a threshold).
The probability that the voltage at time t has attained the value η^αβ is given by the beta
density (Papoulis, 1984)
(18.1)


===== Page 7 =====
408 
· 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
The standard deviation of this distribution is
Or, the output jitter is inversely proportional to the number of excitatory synaptic inputs.
This makes sense, since the time it takes to reach threshold will be proportional to the drift
that is dictated by n. The jitter in the time to threshold is inversely related to the drift.
Of course, our derivation only holds under conditions when the membrane leak can be
neglected (that is, when most of the synaptic input arrives within a fraction of τ).
Detailed simulations using a leaky integrate-and-fire model as well as our customary
layer 5 pyramidal cell compartmental model bear this out (Fig. 18.3A; for the details,
consult Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell, 1997). In the presence of massive excitatory input
(n = 250, with nth = 66; see previous section), whose arrival time has a Gaussian
distribution in time, the relationship between a-m and aout is a linear one, with a slope of
around 0.116, as expected from the approximation in Eq. 18.4. Adding inhibitory synaptic
input increases this slope, but not substantially (Fig. 18.3B). Any more inhibition and the
cell fails to reach threshold in a growing fraction of all trials.
In the case of massive synaptic input, the temporal output jitter will be smaller than the
input jitter. It follows that for a cascade of spiking cells, the output jitter converges to zero
(Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell, 1997; see also Abeles et al., 1994; Hermann, Hertz, and
Priigel-Bennett, 1995). In real networks the jitter is unlikely to become vanishingly small
since we neglect several additional sources of timing variability. The two most dominant
sources are likely to be:
1. The inhomogeneous spike propagation times between consecutive layers of neurons due
to variations in the diameter and length of the associated axons and axonal terminations
(wiring jitter). We considered these axonal delays in Fig. 6.17 and found that they are
small (on the order of ±0.5 msec).
2. Jitter in the delay between presynaptic spikes and the opening of the postsynaptic synaptic
channels (synaptic jitter).
We conclude that the output jitter in a network with many layers of spiking neurons (such
as in Abeles's (1990) synfire-chain model) converges to a fixed but small number, bounded
by the "jitter" in the anatomical connections and in the synaptic transduction process.
(18.2)
In the case of the uniform probability density, a¡n = 1/2 V3, allowing us to rescaleEq. 18.2
in terms of the output jitter,
(18.3)
What happens if the number of synaptic inputs n greatly exceeds the number of inputs
required to bring the cell to fire «th? Making the approximations that n + 3 "» n + 2^ n,
that n + 1 — «th ^ n> and nth + 1 ^ n^, we arrive at
(18.4)


===== Page 8 =====
18.2 Massive Synaptic Input 
· 409
Fig. 18.3 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INPUT AND OUTPUT JITTER 
What is the relationship between
the standard deviation in time of synaptic input a-m and the standard deviation in time of the resultant
output spike σοΜΊ Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell (1997) treated this question using a leaky integrate-
and-fire model and the more complex layer 5 pyramidal cell compartmental model. (A) 250 excitatory
fast voltage-independent synaptic inputs are triggered once. The probability density function p-m(t)
is Gaussian with standard deviation a-m. For the integrate-and-fire model, synapses are assumed to be
linear current sources, with ae = 0.23 mV; τ = 10 msec. For the compartmental model, synapses are
of the fast AMPA type, distributed throughout the dendritic tree. In both cases, the effective voltage
threshold Vth = 16 mV and «u, = 66. Equation 18.4 predicts a linear relationship between σ,η and aout
with slope 0.116 (line labeled "approximation"). Error bars correspond to the standard deviation from
five runs with 50 spikes each. (B) A qualitatively similar result is obtained if 62 inhibitory synapses are
added (hyperpolarizing current synapses with a, = 0.23 mV for the integrator and GABAA synapses
for the more detailed model). Any more inhibition, and the cell frequently fails to trigger a spike.
Thus, a spiking cell with a passive dendritic tree can reduce input jitter provided that η is much bigger
than no,. Reprinted by permission from Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell (1997).


===== Page 9 =====
410 
· 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
18.2.2 Cable Theory for Massive Synaptic Input
Standard one-dimensional passive cable theory (Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Rail, 1989)
assumes that the electrotonic structure of the cell does not change in response to synaptic
input. As long as synaptic input is treated as a de- or hyperpolarizing current this is certainly
true. The independence of the electrical structure from the input allows us to characterize
the spatio-temporal integrative properties of the cable or the cell in terms of the transfer
and input impedances as well as space and time constants.
Yet as we emphasized from the beginning of this book, even the activity of a single
synapse has an impact on the input impedance Ki{ (t) (e.g., Eq. 4.24). While the actual
size of this effect is negligible for one or a few isolated synaptic inputs, it can dominate
the behavior of the system for large inputs. This is particularly true given that patch-clamp
recordings of pyramidal and Purkinje cells find very high values for the passive membrane
resistance (on the order of 100,000 Ω-cm
2; see Appendix A).
Let us exemplify our argument with some numbers. Assume a small, spherical cell with a
radius equal to r = 15 μπι. Its input conductance Gjn = 4nr
2/Rm amounts to only 0.28 nS
and its time constant to 100 msec for Rm = 100, 000 Ω-cm
2. Activation of a single synapse
with gpeak = 0.5 nS will immediately, albeit briefly, triple the effective input conductance
and reduce the time constant to a third of its original value. A second synapse will not
find the same electrotonic structure present as the first one did. It is immaterial for this
argument whether the synapse considered is excitatory or inhibitory, as long as it increases
the local membrane conductance. The fact that synaptic inputs can significantly affect the
electrotonic structure of the cell depends on the fact that Rm is high relative to the inverse of
the synaptic-induced conductance change. For low values of Rm, say in the neighborhood of
2,000 Ω -cm
2, many more synaptic inputs would have to be activated in order for the synaptic
conductance to dominate the conductance contributed by the passive membrane of the cell.
As expressed in a perfunctory manner in Sec. 4.9.1, Eq. 4.24 describes the dependency of
Kn(t) on the exact timing of the synaptic input gsyn(t). Clearly, for two or more synapses,
the dependency can be considerably more complex, since the input impedance and other
cable properties also depend on the relative timing between the inputs and whether or not
they are correlated.
In order to study the effect of massive synaptic input on the cell, we will disregard such
temporal effects by assuming that the inputs arriving at different synapses are independent
of each other and replace the series of presynaptic spikes by an instantaneous rate f¡. We
also disregard any detailed dynamics of the spiking by a "suitable" temporal averaging
procedure that reduces the total synaptic input from η independent synapses to any one
particular compartment to a single number,
(18.5)
where g[ represents the integrated conductance for a single input,
(18.6)
When g¡ (t) has the form of an α function (Eq. 4.5), g[ = egpeakfpeak- If the synapse is of the
NMDA type, this average conductance will be voltage dependent, rendering the following
equations slightly more complex. Obviously, this averaging method does not incorporate
any short-term synaptic changes observed in brain slices (Sec. 13.5.4), such as short-term
depression and facilitation.


===== Page 10 =====
18.3 Effect of Synaptic Background Activity 
· 411
With this averaging procedure in place, we can replace the different types of synapses in
each compartment (AMPA, NMD A, GAB A A , and so on) as well as the leak conductance
by a single "effective" conductance,
(18.7)
in series with a single effective battery,
(18.8)
where A is the membrane area of the compartment needed to convert the leak conductance
per unit area, Gm, into an absolute conductance. Equation 18.7 tells us that as the presynaptic
firing frequency (f¡) increases, so does the postsynaptic membrane conductance, regardless
of whether the synapses are excitatory or inhibitory. Only the conglomerate reversal poten-
tial £eff is influenced by the signs and amplitudes £,· of the synaptic batteries: if inhibitory
cells fire more strongly than excitatory ones, the effective synaptic reversal potential will be
pulled toward more hyperpolarizing values and vice versa. We conclude that the effective
membrane resistance should not be thought of as a fixed parameter, but as a dynamic variable
that can change within a fraction of a second, in contrast to the intracellular resistivity and
the membrane capacity, which appear much more difficult to modulate rapidly.
For a single infinite cylinder with the appropriate boundary condition, we can write down
a slightly modified cable equation,
(18.9)
which contains a single term accounting for all synaptic conductances. Defining the length
constant of the cable (Eq. 2.13) as
(18.10)
and the time constant as
(18.11)
we arrive back at the standard normalized cable equation (Eq. 2.7),
(18.12)
In the remainder of this chapter, we will deal with three distinct scenarios of time-averaged
massive synaptic input. We start off by analyzing the effect of diffuse synaptic activity
that occurs throughout the cell before we turn toward an analysis of the effect of massive
excitatory and shunting inhibitory synaptic activity on the cell.
18.3 Effect of Synaptic Background Activity
Neurons, just like people, do not exist in isolation but are embedded within a tightly
interwoven network of other nerve cells. A typical neocortical pyramidal cell is the recipient
of anywhere between 5000 and 20,000 synapses from other neurons, while Purkinje cells


===== Page 11 =====
412 · SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
in the cerebellum may receive up to 200,000 synapses. In the lightly anesthetized animal as
well as in the awake behaving animal, these cells are "spontaneously" active, which means
in practice that they generate action potentials that cannot readily be accounted for by the
presence of any simple sensory stimulus (such as a bright bar or a loud tone). The origin of
this spontaneous activity is presently unknown but could be due to several sources: (1) the
remnants of spontaneous activity at the sensory periphery that has percolated to the more
central stages (e.g., photon shot noise in the photoreceptors), (2) the spontaneous spiking
due to channel fluctuations (Sec. 8.3.2), or (3) the spontaneous release of synaptic vesicles
in the absence of significant presynaptic activity.
Experimentally recorded values of the spontaneous firing in cortex range, from low
values of 0.25-2.5 spikes per second in the anesthetized cat visual cortex (Gilbert, 1977;
Leventhal and Hirsch, 1978) to larger values of 5-10 Hz in extrastriate areas, such as the cat
motor cortex (Woody, Gruen, and McCarley, 1984), the rat sensory-motor cortex (Bindman
and Prince, 1983), the auditory cortex in rhesus monkeys and baboon (Abeles, 1990), and the
inferior temporal cortex of the behaving monkey (R. Desimone, personal communication).
These nonzero rates of background activity are in sharp contrast to the situation prevailing
for brain slices or for cultured neurons. The removal of afferent fibers (by cutting to
extract the slice from the brain), combined with the absence of the right combination
of neuromodulators and growth factors, makes neurons rather reticent about firing in the
absence of a direct electrical or pharmacological stimulus.
What consequence does this background activity, expressed via the time-averaged rate
(fb), have on any one neuron? Barrett (1975) first brought up the possibility that synaptic
background activity might affect the electrical properties of a motoneurons (see also Rail,
1974). The subject remained dormant until a number of groups took up the issue via
detailed compartmental simulations (Holmes and Woody, 1989; Bernander et al., 1991;
Rapp, Yarom, and Segev, 1992) and analytical investigations (Abbott, 1991).
We will summarize the results of these studies by focusing on the changes in R-m, Tm, L,
and Vrest wrought by varying the background firing rate (fb)·
18.3.1 Input Resistance
The input resistance of the finite cable (looking toward the sealed end boundary at the other
terminal) is specified by Eq. 2.21 as
(18.13)
where L = Ι/λ is the electrotonic length of the cable. In the limit of an infinite high
background activity, that is, for (fb) ->· oo, Rm decreases as (fb)~
l f 2· Basic intuition tells
us that additional synaptic input, independent of whether excitatory or inhibitory, increases
the membrane conductance and thereby drives down the effective membrane resistance /?eff
(Fig. 18.4A).
The same plot also shows Rm for the compartmental model of the pyramidal cell with
the standard complement of voltage-dependent somatic membrane conductances ("active"
neuron) and for the same model but in the absence of these active conductances ("passive"
model). (The geometry of the single cylinder was adjusted to coincide with the passive
pyramidal cell model at (fb) = 0.) All three models share the same features: as (fb) is
turned up from 0 to 2 Hz, the input resistance drops by a factor of 10, from 193 to 20 ΜΩ,
in the passive case, and by a factor of 4, from 50 to 12 ΜΩ, in the active case. The deviation


===== Page 12 =====
18.3 Effect of Synaptic Background Activity 
· 413
Fig. 18.4 EFFECT OF SYNAPTIC BACKGROUND ACTIVITY ON R-m,rm,L, AND Vrest 
Illustration of
the effect of varying the synaptic background activity {//,) on four variables characterizing spatio-
temporal integration in three systems; a finite, passive cylinder (3060 μηι long and 5.8 μτη thick; with
sealed-end boundary condition; bold line labeled "single cable"), the complete model of the layer 5
pyramidal cell with active conductances ("active" neuron) and the same model but with all active
somatic conductances removed ("passive" neuron). All cases show the same effect: as (fb) increases,
the membrane becomes more and more leaky, and /?¡n as well as rm decrease and the electrotonic
length of the passive cable or the electrotonic distance between a point in the layer 1 portion of the
distal apical tree and the soma in the pyramidal cell becomes ever larger. (f¡,) is very close to zero in
brain slices, while (fb) > 1 Hz corresponds to the situation in the living brain. The behavior of the
cable is given by the equations in the text. #¡n, rm, and Vrest are all measured at the soma. Inhibitory
and excitatory synapses are assumed to have identical rates (fb). Note the logarithmic scale on the
upper two panels. Reprinted by permission from Bernander (1993).
of the compartmental model from the cylinder at high values of (fb) is largely explained
by the inhomogeneous synaptic distribution along the pyramidal cell (inhibitory synapses
cluster in a neighborhood of the soma while excitation is more distal). Further differences
result from the voltage-dependent components.
The dependency of /?¡n and other electrical parameters on {fb) becomes more complex in
the presence of voltage-dependent NMDA input. As discussed in Sec. 17.1.2 and Fig. 17.3,
incorporating NMDA conductances into the membrane can have the paradoxical effect of
reducing the slope conductance. For the situation discussed here, this implies that under


===== Page 13 =====
414
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
certain conditions the input resistance can actually increase as the background firing rate is
increased (Bernander, 1993).
18.3.2 Time Constant
Equation 18.11 characterizes the dependency of the passive time constant on (fb). We
expect that as (ft,) —> oo, rm goes to zero as I/ (//,). The fractional decrease in the somatic
time constant is similarly large in the compartmental model: from 100 to 12.8 msec for the
passive case and from 33.7 to 5.9 msec in the active case (Fig. 18.4B). This decrease in
τη as (fb) increases implies that the pyramidal cell becomes much more sensitive to the
degree of temporal dispersion in any synaptic input. To demonstrate this, Bernander and
colleagues (1991) computed nth> the average number of excitatory non-NMDA synapses,
distributed throughout the dendritic tree, necessary to trigger a spike. These synapses were
either all activated simultaneously or spread out over a 25 msec extended time window
(with each synapse activated only once).
It is apparent from Fig. 18.5 that for the desynchronized case «th increases significantly
as (fb) increases. Under slice conditions, 115 synchronized synapses are necessary to bring
the cell above threshold, whereas 145 are needed if the input is desynchronized. This small
difference between synchronized inputs and inputs arriving smeared out in time is due to
the long integration period of the cell (rm = 100 msec). For a 1 Hz background activity,
113 synchronized or 202 desynchronized inputs are needed to fire the cell. At (fb) = 7 Hz,
when 35,000 synaptic events are bombarding the cell every second, 3.5 times as many
Fig. 18.5 TEMPORAL INTEGRATION 
The ability of the standard layer 5 pyramidal cell to distinguish
coincident arriving synaptic input from a desynchronized one increases as the spontaneous background
activity (fb) increases and τη decreases (Fig. 18.4B). The minimal number of excitatory voltage-
independent synaptic inputs η u, (withgpeak = 0.5 nS) needed to trigger a spike at the soma as a function
of(fb). The synapses are spread over the dendritic tree in accordance with the known distributions and
are either all activated simultaneously or activated once over a 25-msec-wide window, independently
of each other. For (fb) *» 0 (a situation prevalent for most in vitro studies), the difference between
synchronized and desynchronized inputs is minor but becomes substantial when the overall network
activity is high. The average background activity can therefore be seen as the signal controlling
the temporal tuning properties of the cell. Each simulation is run numerous times using a different
distribution of synapses. Reprinted by permission from Bernander et ah, (1991).


===== Page 14 =====
18.3 Effect of Synaptic Background Activity
415
desynchronized inputs are needed to trigger the cell than if the inputs arrive together. As
(fb) increases, the cell becomes more and more selective to differences in the arrival times
of synaptic inputs.
18.3.3 Electroanatomy
According to Eq. 18.10, the electrotonic length of a finite cable should increase as (fb)l/2. As
the membrane becomes more and more leaky, distant points are, electrically speaking, less
and less coupled to the soma. Because the dendritic tree contains no active conductances,
the electrotonic distance from the soma to a point in the apical bush (about 1 mm away
from the soma) is the same in the active and the passive model. Given the square root
dependency of L on (fb), this distance, computed as the sum of all branch segments on the
path between the location and the soma increases by a factor of 2.5 as {/&) increases from
0 to 2 Hz.
A graphic demonstration of the effect of varying (fb) on the electroanatomy of the cell
is given in Fig. 18.6 using the graphical morphoelectronic transform (MET) (see Sec. 3.5.4)
of Zador (1993) and Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev (1995). Each dendritic compartment
is "stretched" or "shrunk" such that its length in the graph is proportional to its electrotonic
Fig. 18.6 VARIABLE ELECTROANATOMY OF PYRAMIDAL CELL Graphic illustration of the change
of the electrotonic dimensions of the pyramidal cell with synaptic background activity with the aid of a
morphoelectronic transform. The extent of the individual dendrites is proportional to their electrotonic
length; the distance of each compartment from the soma is proportional to the electrotonic distance of
that point from the soma. In the absence of any background activity—approximating the conditions
prevalent in cultured or in slice neurons—the pyramidal cell is very compact. As (fb) is increased
to 2 Hz, distal sites on long and thin dendrites are more and more decoupled from the soma. The
scale bar corresponds to the distance over which the sustained voltage decays by e°·5 in an infinite
cable. The arrows point to the location of the apical and basal synapses used in Fig. 18.1. Reprinted
by permission from Bernander et al., (1991).


===== Page 15 =====
416
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
length L j . L increases from 1.2 to 2.6 for the most distal compartment in layer 1 and from
0.2 to 0.7 for a synapse at the tip of a basal dendrite. That basal dendrites stretch more than
apical ones is due to their higher synaptic innervation and the corresponding lower effective
values of Rm.
Yet another way to visualize the change in electrotonic properties is to plot the somatic
EPSPs evoked by a fast non-NMDA excitatory synapse located either in the distal apical
tree, along a basal dendrite, or at the soma (Fig. 18.7). While the amplitude of the somatic
and basal EPSPs decrease by a factor of 2 or 3 as (/¿} changes from 0 to 5 Hz, the effect
on the distal apical synaptic input is much more dramatic. For (fh) = 5 Hz, almost no
deviation from the somatic resting potential is seen.
18.3.4 Resting Potential
Of the four variables considered here, only £eff depends on the balance of excitatory and
inhibitory input (Eq. 18.8). For large values of {/¿}, Vsoma depolarizes by close to 10 mV
(Fig. 18.4D). This is a consequence of the fact that 80% of the synapses are excitatory and
the assumption that the synaptic background activity is the same for excitatory as well as
for inhibitory afferents. The somatic potential does not increase indefinitely with {/¿}, but
saturates due to the interaction between the net excitatory and inhibitory synaptic currents
and the voltage-dependent potassium currents /A and /M, driving the potential to —95 mV
(for more details, see Bernander, 1993).
It is known that the resting potential differs significantly between neurons recorded in
vivo and in vitro. Numerous slice studies of pyramidal cells report resting potentials in the
range of —84 to —67 mV (with a mean of —74 mV; Thomson, Girdlestone, and West,
Fig. 18.7 SYNAPTIC INPUT IN THE PRESENCE OF BACKGROUND ACTIVITY Somatic EPSP in
response to activation of a single non-NMDA synapse at one of three locations in the pyramidal
cell (from top to bottom: soma, basal, and apical tree; see Fig. 18.6) at three different levels of
synaptic background activity. The largest EPSPs are obtained under slice conditions ((fh) = 0). For
25,000 synaptic events per second ((fh) = 5 Hz), the peak somatic, basal, and apical EPSPs are
reduced by factors of 1.7, 2.8, and 14.9 relative to their peak values at (ft,} = 0. The middle set of
EPSPs corresponds to the panel of Fig. 18. IB. Notice the much shorter rise and decay times at higher
background frequencies. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Bernander (1993).


===== Page 16 =====
18.3 Effect of Synaptic Background Activity 
· 417
1988; Mason and Larkman, 1990; Spain, Schwindt, and Crill, 1990; Hirsch and Gilbert,
1991; Mason, Nicoll, and Stratford, 1991), while in vivo Vrest is usually in the range of
—81 to —57 mV (with a mean of —64.5 mV; Bindman and Prince, 1983; Bindman, Meyer,
and Prince, 1988; Holmes and Woody, 1989; Pockberger, 1991). Whether this difference is
caused primarily by the difference in synaptic background activity remains open.
18.3.5 Functional Implications
The principal effects of modulating the synaptic background activity on the spatio-temporal
properties of individual neurons are clear-cut: as {ft,} increases from no activity to physio-
logical values in the 5-10 Hz range, input resistance, and space and time constants decrease.
Functionally, the cell becomes more and more extended and sensitive to temporal synchrony.
This conclusion is not dependent on the numerical details and occurs in simple, analytical
cable models (Abbott, 1991; Bernander, 1993) as well as in detailed compartment models
of Purkinje (Rapp, Yarom, and Segev, 1992) and pyramidal cells (Bernander et al., 1991).
This phenomenon is contingent upon two key assumptions: (1) that the effective membrane
resistance in the absence of synaptic background activity is high and (2) that on the order
of several thousand (or more) spontaneous synaptic events occur every second. If these
conditions are not met, background activity will have either no or only a negligible effect
on the spatio-temporal properties of the cell. Note well that these effects would not be
observed if synaptic inputs were treated as current inputs.
While it is undoubtedly important to understand the effect of (fb) at the level of an
individual cell, a more functionally relevant question is to what extent the spontaneous
firing activity is under the control of other brain systems. In particular, to what extent and
how fast can neuromodulators up or down regulate (fb) for entire groups of neurons? If
they can, the phenomena discussed here could have a number of interesting implications
for neuronal information processing strategies.
For instance, in the dark few cells in the visual cortex will be active and the membrane
time constant fm will be long, enabling the cell to integrate the input over a long time.
Conversely, for bright, high contrast visual stimuli, the overall network activity may be
much higher, leading to a small value of rm and short integration times. This adaptive
gain-control mechanism is somewhat akin to that used by the network of coupled rods in
the retina (Detwiler, Hodgkin, and McNaughton, 1980). As exemplified in Fig. 18.6, larger
values of (fb) decouple distal sites from the soma. Because the apical tufts in layers 1 and 2
constitute the dominant target zones for cortico-cortical feedback connections (Friedman,
1983; Rockland, 1994; Salin and Bullier, 1995), a large degree of afferent activity would
decouple this feedback by increasing its distance from the soma, thereby making the cell
more responsive to direct sensory input arriving on the proximal parts of the apical trunk.
It is obvious that the properties of individual neurons influence the behavior of the
embedding neuronal network, such as whether or not it converges to a fixpoint and its
convergence time. We have here an instance of the converse, where a collective property of
the network—its average activity—modulates the properties of individual members of the
network. Particularly intriguing is the fact that the temporal resolution of neurons increases
as the mean network activity increases. This illustrates the strong two-way interdependency
of the many structural levels of neurobiological hardware, in stark contrast to computer
hardware. An intriguing but open question is the issue of stability: under what conditions
can a network that modulates the electrical properties of its elements arrive at a stable
equilibrium point, that is, how can homeostasis be achieved?


===== Page 17 =====
418 
· 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
18.4 Relating Synaptic Input to Output Spiking
So far, we have always evaluated the effect of synaptic input to the somatic membrane
potential, since it is here—or in the axonal hillock close to the cell body—that the output
of the cell—spikes—is generated. But, ultimately, we wish to understand the relationship
between synaptic input and the firing activity of the cell.
This is a difficult problem due to the nonstationary nonlinearities at the soma. If EPSPs
arrive while the somatic potential hovers just below the spiking threshold, it might be
enough to push the potential above threshold, while the arrival of EPSP following an action
potential might have a negligible effect on the output frequency. Furthermore, it also makes
a difference whether the synapse is activated only once or repeatedly. We will sidestep
these problems by adopting the stance we did in the previous sections, that is, we assume
that the synaptic inputs are independent of each other and that each individual rate can
be replaced by a suitable average (Eq. 18.5) which we assume for simplicity's sake to be
directly proportional to the presynaptic firing frequency.
As opposed to conventional cable theory, we will not compute the somatic potential
evoked by synaptic input but the current /syn,j, flowing longitudinally down the dendrite
into the soma. It is this current that will be seen by the spiking mechanism at the cell body and
axon hillock and that will ultimately cause the cell to generate axon potentials. Knowledge
of /syn.s.
m conjunction with the /-/ curve, allows us to go directly from synaptic input to
firing output. We here follow the exposition of Bernander, Douglas, and Koch (1994).
18.4.1 Somatic Current from Distal Synaptic Input
We follow Abbott (1991) in computing the current flowing out of one terminal of a single
cable when one or more synapses are activated at the other terminal at X = L. (The cable
has the electrotonic length L — Ι/λ and diameter d.) We can think of the X — 0 terminal
as being connected to an RC compartment representing the soma. Activating the synapses
causes ionic current to flow into the cable and along the transversal intracellular resistivity
toward the low-impedance cell body.
Because we are averaging over a fraction of a second or longer we can neglect the
capacitive term in our modified cable equation (Eq. 18.12), and—following Eq. 2.2—
express the current /8γη,5 flowing into the soma by the derivative of the voltage along the
cable divided by the longitudinal resistance,
(18.14)
The excitatory synapses increase the membrane conductance at X = LbygJ (fe) (with{/e)
the presynaptic firing rate of the excitatory synapses and gj the time-averaged conductance
per area; Eq. 18.6) in series with the synaptic reversal potential Ee. In order to compute the
current, we need to know the voltage. As in Eq. 2.18, the voltage in this finite cable can be
expressed as
(18.15)
Solving this requires two boundary conditions. The voltage at the synaptic terminal is given
by the usual synaptic equation (Eq. 4.12) as
(18.16)


===== Page 18 =====
18.4 Relating Synaptic Input to Output Spiking
419
As argued in the preceding chapter, the spike mechanism at the soma acts as a sort of voltage
clamp, preventing the membrane potential from making long-term excursions beyond Fth-
For the sake of convenience, Abbott (1991) clamps the potential at the X = 0 terminal
to 0. This also specifies the input resistance R-m at the synaptic terminal as the resistance
associated with a killed-end terminal (Eq. 2.24),
(18.17)
Remembering that the derivative of sinh(L — X) is cosh(L - Χ)/λ and that sinh
2(x:) -
cosh (x) = — 1, we arrive at the following expression for the current flowing into the
voltage-clamped terminal at X = 0,
(18.18)
If the input is small relative to the local input resistance, the current is linearly related to
the input frequency. As (fe) increases, the local postsynaptic potential starts to saturate,
limiting the amount of current that enters through the synapse. Finally, the driving potential
Ee — V(L) is close to zero and no amount of presynaptic firing activity will push any
additional current through the synapse and toward the other terminal (Fig. 18.8). The
limiting current (in the sense that it cannot be exceeded without amplification) at the X = 0
terminal becomes
(18.19)
Two important remarks. The saturation of the net current delivered by the synaptic input to
the soma has very little to do with current losses along the cable. If no current leaks across
the membrane by postulating Geff —> 0,1^ s only increases by a factor of sinh(L)/L.
Fig. 18.8 LONGITUDINAL CURRENT IN A SINGLE CABLE 
Excitatory synaptic input is applied to
one end of the same finite cable (of electrotonic length L = 1.138 used in Fig. 18.4), and the other
terminal, conceptually corresponding to the soma, is clamped to the resting potential. The longitudinal
current /syn,s flowing from the synapses into the X = 0 terminal clamped to 0 (Eq. 18.18), is computed
as a function of the averaged presynaptic firing rate of the excitatory input {fe}. The saturating
characteristic has little to do with current leaking out across the membrane. Indeed, preventing any
current from leaking across the membrane only increases the maximal current 7S
S^ s by 23%. The
culprit is local saturation of the membrane potential at the synaptic terminal. No amount of synaptic
input can generate more current /syni¡ (unless the membrane contains amplifying currents, as discussed
in the following chapter).


===== Page 19 =====
420 
· 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
Also, /syn,i does not correspond to the current that is computed with the aid of the transfer
resistances (see the closing comments to Sec. 3.5.3).
18.4.2 Relating /out to /ta
The key idea is to assume that the spike generation process at the cell body and axonal hillock
can be treated as a stationary nonlinearity whose exact form is given by the discharge curve,
that is, by the plot of the output frequency /out against the amplitude of the injected current
step (see Figs. 17.10A and 18.10A). It does not matter to this spike triggering mechanism
whether the current it sees is injected from a microelectrode or is delivered from a synapse
via the dendritic tree. All that is relevant is that a particular current 7 can be associated
to a particular output spiking frequency along the /-/ 
curve. We incorporate the spike
frequency adaptation into our consideration by directly making use of the fully adapted
/-/ curve.
Knowing the relationships between the steady-state input frequency (/¡n) and the somatic
current 7syn>J (as in Eq. 18.18) on the one hand, and the adapted /-/ 
curve on the other
allows us to derive an unique function relating (/¡n) to /out,
(18.20)
(see Fig. 18.9).
Bernander Douglas, and Koch (1994) use this procedure to derive the input-output
relationship for the layer 5 pyramidal cell. /synjS is estimated on the basis of two different
Fig. 18.9 COMPLETE MEASURE OF SYNAPTIC EFFICIENCY Schematic illustrating the procedure
linking the time-averaged presynaptic input frequency (/¡n) to the adapted output frequency /out
of the cell via Eq. 18.20. It requires knowledge of the relationship between the presynaptic firing
frequency (/¡n) and the current flowing from the synapse into the soma /syilií (lower right) and the
discharge curve /-/ (lower left; here a linear function, although this is not necessary). The former
function accounts for properties of the synapses and the dendritic tree, the latter for the somatic
spike-generating properties. The resulting function /Out((/m)) accounts for the synaptic conductance
input, synaptic saturation, and active, voltage-dependent membrane conductances. The intermediate
variable is current, and not—as in the standard cable equation—voltage. Reprinted by permission
from Bernander (1993).


===== Page 20 =====
18.4 Relating Synaptic Input to Output Spiking 
· 421
methods. Knowledge of /syn,s requires that the somatic membrane potential Vm (t) be known.
In the derivation of Eq. 18.18 it was assumed that V(0) was clamped to 0. When the cell
spikes, this is patently wrong. Since the considerations of this section are predicated on
using a time-averaged input frequency, why not use the time-averaged membrane potential
(Vm) of Eq. 17.12? As we discussed in Sec. 17.5.2, this quantity changes only little for
large swings in spiking activity. Indeed, the cumulative action of the voltage-dependent
somatic currents is to clamp, albeit imperfectly, (Vm) to around —50 mV, corresponding
to moderate values of /out in the 50-Hz range. Bernander and colleagues (1994) compute
the clamp current required to hold the somatic potential to —50 mV for a fixed synaptic
input and subtract the clamp current needed to hold VSoma to —50 mV in the absence of
any synaptic input. This method was also used experimentally to measure /syn,s in response
to a constant synaptic input in a motoneurons (Powers, lobinsón, and Konodi, 1992). In
the second method, /syn,i is computed directly (without voltage clamping the soma) as the
current flowing between the first segment of the apical tree and the soma. Both methods
give identical results.
As can be seen in Fig. 18.10B and C, when 500 excitatory non-NMDA synapses are
either placed directly onto the cell body or spread throughout the basal dendrites (almost
exclusively restricted to layer 5), /syn-i is linear in (/¡n) over the range of interest. Saturation
only becomes evident as the same 500 synapses are moved to layer 4 or to the more distal
parts of the apical tree in superficial layers. When all inputs are confined to the superficial
layers 1, 2, and 3, 7syn>i is at most 0.65 nA. The saturation effect is even more extreme
when synaptic input is restricted to the top two layers 1 and 2. Even if all 500 synapses are
activated at an unphysiological 500 Hz, at most 0.25 nA of current reaches the soma (and
this across an apical dendrite that has an unusually thick trunk of about 4.4 μ,ηι). This strong
saturation is due to the fact that the distal input is associated with high input impedances,
driving the local potential quickly to the synaptic reversal potential. No amount of further
synaptic input can increase the synaptic current. Saturation would not occur if synaptic
input were treated as a pure current. As in the case of the single cable, the minuscule current
contributed from distal sites is not due to leakage through the membrane as the current
spreads to the soma. Indeed, eliminating leakage by setting Rm —>· σο causes the maximal
current to increase by only 2% above base level.
In the last panel in Fig. 18.10, these somatic currents are translated on the basis of the
adapted discharge curve (Fig. 18.10A) into an output firing rate. Because of the current
threshold, synaptic input that delivers less than /th — 0.29 nA current to the soma will be
cut off. For instance, by itself, input to layers 1 and 2 will not lead to any maintained spike
discharge, no matter how big the synapses and how vigorous their presynaptic activity,
while the addition of synapses to layer 3 leads to a very weak discharge. And yet, these
dendrites make up 26% of the surface area of the tree. Above threshold, the adapted /-/
curve is reasonably linear (Eq. 17.10), with a slope of 50 spikes per second per nanoampere
of current, leading to linear input-output relationships for synaptic input to the soma or the
basal dendrites (contributing 62% of the total membrane area of the neuron). As a sanity
check, Bernander and colleagues explicitly computed the adapted firing rate as a function
of the input and superimposed this onto Fig. 18.10D, with little difference.
18.4.3 Functional Considerations
The standard measures of the synaptic efficiency of cable theory are voltage or charge
attenuation (see Chap. 3). The advantage of using the total current /syn,s flowing from one
or more synapses into the soma (Powers, Tobinson, and Konodi, 1992; Bernander, Douglas,


===== Page 21 =====
422 
. 
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
Fig. 18.10 RELATING SYNAPTIC INPUT TO THE FIRING FREQUENCY Characterizing the input-
output behavior of the layer 5 pyramidal cell using the procedure illustrated in Fig. 18.9. (A) For
ease of comparison, its adapted /-/ 
discharge curve. (B), and (C) The input, 500 excitatory non-
NMDA synapses, is placed onto the soma or the portion of the dendrites running through a specific
cortical layer. The postsynaptic conductance increase is related linearly to the presynaptic firing rate
(/in). These synapses cause the current /Syn,s to flow into the soma. The different curves correspond
to synaptic placement (from top to bottom) onto the soma, layer 5, layer 4, layers 1 to 3, layers 1
and 2, and layer 1 only. Similar to Eq. 18.18, dendritic saturation causes the distal input to saturate.
(D) /Syn,i((/in» is passed through the cell's discharge curve to predict the relationship between (/¡n>
and /out (dashed curves). Computing this function by direct simulation (solid curves) leads to very sim-
ilar results. Because 7SyniJ for synaptic input from layers 1 and 2 is less than /a, (about 0.295 nA), these
synapses—assuming a passive dendritic membrane—cannot contribute by themselves to the main-
tained discharge. Experimentally, it is known that synaptic input to the apical tuft can trigger spikes in
the cell body far away (Cauller and Connors, 1992, 1994). This argues for the existence of dendritic
voltage-dependent currents that counteract saturation and amplify /syn,s (see the following chapter).
and Koch, 1994) is that this measure includes the effects of synaptic nonlinearities and
interactions among different inputs. Furthermore, as we will show in the following chapter,
4yn,s can also be derived in the presence of voltage-dependent dendritic conductances,
when all other measures break down. If two synaptic sites are well separated such that the
voltage in one does not readily influence the voltage at the other location (for instance, input


===== Page 22 =====
18.5 Shunting Inhibition Acts Linearly 
· 423
into the basal dendrites coupled with input to the apical tuft), the total current at the soma
will be the sum of the individual /syn,i components.
Computing the current flowing into the soma is relatively straightforward as long as Vsoma
is fixed (see the derivation of Eq. 18.18). However, this is not the case if /synjS is above /th,
leading to spike generation. Under these conditions, Vsoma(i) moves on a stable limit cycle,
making it difficult to characterize synaptic input using a single voltage measure, such as the
peak somatic EPSP. Yet the method advocated here works despite these complexities (as
witnessed by the close match in Fig. 18.10D between the predicted input-output curves and
the actual ones) by making use of the time-averaged somatic potential {Vm} (Eq. 17.12). Its
key assumption is that the system is in equilibrium, that is, the input can be characterized
by an averaged input rate and the postsynaptic firing rate has adapted (typically within
100 msec). In a more sophisticated model, adaptation could be incorporated by making the
/-/ curve time dependent. Likewise, short-term synaptic facilitation and depression could
also be dealt with.
As applied to the pyramidal cell, the main conclusion is that in the absence of voltage-
dependent dendritic conductances distal synaptic input by itself can only deliver a very
limited amount of current to the soma. In conjunction with other synaptic input, such as
to the basal dendrites, distal input could increase the maintained rate by about 12 spikes
per second.
In the neocortex, much of the synaptic input into layer 1 originates in higher cortical
processing stages (Friedman, 1983; Rockland, 1994; Salin and Bullier, 1995). In the
absence of amplifying dendritic conductances, cortico-cortical feedback could only weakly
modulate the firing of the pyramidal cell. Yet Cauller and Connors (1992, 1994) have
provided experimental evidence that synaptic input onto the layer 1 portion of layer 5
pyramidal cells in the somatosensory cortex can evoke action potentials. This, together with
the evidence reviewed in the following chapter, argues that voltage-dependent conductances
in the dendritic tree serve to amplify distal inputs.
18.5 Shunting Inhibition Acts Linearly
Inhibitory synaptic input with a reversal potential close or equal to the local resting
potential, shunting inhibition, first mentioned toward the end of Chap. 1 and treated in
considerable detail in Sec. 5.1.4, acts nonlinearly, akin to a division (Blomfield, 1974). This
type of nonlinear operation has been proposed to be the crucial biophysical mechanism
underlying retinal direction selectivity (Torre and Poggio, 1978; Koch, Poggio, and Torre,
1982). More recently, both Carandini and Heeger (1994) and Nelson (1994) have made
shunting inhibition, activated by a recurrent feedback loop, the centerpiece of a gain
normalization circuit in the visual cortex (Fig. 1.11) and in electric fish. However, none
of these studies considered the effect that the spiking mechanism has on the divisive
action of shunting inhibition. When this is done, a surprising conclusion emerges (Holt
and Koch, 1997).
For the sake of clarity, let us first consider shunting inhibition to the leaky integrate-
and-fire model of Eq. 14.7. Using our standard synaptic averaging technique, shunting
inhibition can be mimicked by decreasing the leak resistance appropriately, with the new
value given by
(18.21)


===== Page 23 =====
424
SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
where R is the value of the resistance in the absence of any input. The result can be inspected
in Fig. 18.11A. Increasing g¡ shifts the curve toward the right, with the slopes remaining
constant, contrary to what one would expect based on models that only treat the subthreshold
domain (as in Fig. 1.10 and throughout Chap. 5). Adding a refractory period and adaptation
does not change this conclusion. The same is also true if one considers the much more
realistic scenario of GABA^ inhibitory receptors, with a reversal potential of —70 mV,
which are distributed at and around the soma. As in the previous section, the total amount
of inhibition is postulated to be proportional to the presynaptic firing frequency (Eq. 18.5).
Holt and Koch (1997) compute the average /out-/in curve by varying the input frequency of
the excitatory voltage-independent synaptic input distributed throughout the tree. Changing
the amount of inhibition leads to a clear shift in the curves with little effect on the slopes
(Fig. 18.11B).
Fig. 18.11 SHUNTING INHIBITION AND SPIKING 
Shunting inhibition has a subtractive rather than a
divisive effect on firing rates. This is demonstrated in two different single-cell models. (A) Discharge
curves for a leaky integrate-and-fire unit with different values for the leak conductance gieak — gt+1/R
(for R = 62.5ΜΩ). g¡ is the amplitude of the inhibitory conductance change whose reversal potential
is equal to the unit's resting potential (here zero). Varying gieak in steps of 10 nS from 10 to 70 nS
(from left to right) shifts the curve, rather than changing the slope of the discharge curve. (B) The
same observation is made in the pyramidal cell model, with GABAA inhibition around the soma and
excitatory voltage-independent input distributed throughout the cell. The fully adapted postsynaptic
firing rate is plotted as a function of the average input frequency to the excitatory synapses for four
different settings of presynaptic firing rates to the GAB A/t synapses (0.5,2,4, and 6 Hz, left to right).
Reprinted by permission from Holt and Koch (1997).


===== Page 24 =====
18.5 Shunting Inhibition Acts Linearly
425
This effect is most easily understood in the integrate-and-fire model. In the absence of
any spiking threshold, the membrane potential in response to a synaptic input current of the
shunting type
rises until
(18.22)
(18.23)
(Fig. 18.12). Under these conditions, the steady-state leak current is proportional to the input
current and the divisive effect is observed (Eq. 1.35). However, in the integrator model, V
never rises above the spiking threshold Vth. No matter how large the input current, the leak
current can never be larger than Vthgieak· The effect of the leak conductance can be replaced
by a current whose amplitude is equal to the time-average value of the current through the
leak conductance: {/ieak} = gleak (V) · This trick reduces the leaky integrate-and-fire unit to
a perfect integrator. The cell will still fire at exactly the same rate because the same charge
/(Λχη — I\eak)dt is deposited on the capacitor in the same time interval, although for the
leaky integrator the deposition rate is not constant.
Fig. 18.12 WHY SHUNTING INHIBITION HAS A SUBTRACTIVE EFFECT 
(A) Time-dependent
current across the leak conductance /ieak (in nA and equal to V(f)gieak) in response to a constant
0.5-nA current injected into a leaky integrate-and-fire unit with (solid line) and without (dashed line)
a voltage threshold V^,. The sharp drop in /i^ occurs when the cell fires, since the voltage is reset.
(B) Same for 1-nA current. Note that /ieak in the presence of a voltage threshold has a maximum
value well below /ieak in the absence of a voltage threshold. (C) Time-averaged leak current (/ieak) (in
nanoamperes) as a function of input current, computed from Eqs. 18.24 and 18.25. Below threshold,
the spikeless model and the integrate-and-fire model have the same (/ieak), but above threshold (/ieak)
is reduced considerably. For /syn just greater than threshold, the cell spends most of its time with
V K Vth, so (/leak) is high. For high 7syn, the voltage increases approximately linearly with time and
V has a sawtooth waveform, as shown in B. This means that (/ieak) = (max /ieak)/2 = Vth£ieak/2.
Reprinted by permission from Holt and Koch (1997).


===== Page 25 =====
426 · SYNAPTIC INPUT TO A PASSIVE TREE
For a constant input that is just above threshold, {V} will be close to Vth and (/ieak) will
be large. For larger synaptic input currents, the time-averaged membrane potential becomes
smaller and smaller (since V has to charge up from the reset point) and, therefore, the time-
averaged leak current decreases for increasing inputs (compare Fig. 18.12A and B). It can
be shown that
(18.24)
if 7syn < Vthgieak- Otherwise
(18.25)
For even quite moderate levels of 7syn just above V^gieak» the lower expression is approxi-
mately equal to gieak Vth/2, independent of 7syn (Fig. 18.12C), and the leak conductance can
be replaced—to a good first approximation—by a constant offset current. The discharge
curve for the resulting perfect integrate-and-fire neuron is
(18.26)
The same mechanism explains the result for the compartmental models. Here, the voltage
does rise above the firing threshold but because the spike repolarization currents are large,
any current from synapses flowing into the soma is ignored during the brief spike. The
time-averaged somatic membrane potential (Fig. 17.10B) always remains close to Vih-
Two caveats. These results hold because inhibition is at or very close to the soma. For
more distal inhibition, as for instance in retinal ganglion cells, the local potential at the
inhibitory synapse it not limited by Vth and shunting inhibition will work in a more divisive
mode. Yet for such distal sites, its effect on the spike triggering zone far away will be
small. The results discussed here assume that the synaptic input changes slowly. It is at
present unclear what the effect of very high, but transient input frequencies to the inhibitory
synapses will be.
18.6 Recapitulation
The past few pages treated synaptic input arriving at the passive dendritic tree of a spiking
cell. Only the cell body is assumed to contain voltage-dependent membrane conductances.
We first discussed unitary EPSPs and EPSCs, concluding that the former can be used to
predict quite well the voltage threshold Vth of the cell. We then investigated the exact
relationship between the temporal jitter in a normally distributed set of synapses σ·1Ώ and
the jitter in the output spike aout. Surprisingly, we discovered that aout α σίη, with the
constant of proportionality being much less than unity. Once again (e.g., Chap. 14) for
strong synaptic input (that is, in the above threshold domain), the passive membrane time
constant plays only a minor role in determining the temporal behavior of the cell. This has
important implications, in particular for the faithful conservation of timing relationships
across many layers of neurons (Abeles, 1990; Marsalek, Koch, and Maunsell, 1997).
For the remainder of the chapter we assume that synaptic input is not correlated at a fine
time scale and that, indeed, we can define an average input frequency {/}. This allows us
to treat massive synaptic input in three separate cases.


===== Page 26 =====
18.6 Recapitulation · 427
Neurons receive between 103 and 105 synapses onto tneir dendritic tree from other
neurons that fire spontaneously between 1 to 10 or more spikes per second in the behaving
animal. This massive synaptic background activity has several effects on the spatio-temporal
behavior of the cell. As this background firing rate goes up, the electrotonic dimensions
of the cell increase (that is, distal synaptic input becomes more decoupled) and the input
resistance and time constant decrease by one or more orders of magnitude. This implies,
among other things, that the cell becomes more sensitive to temporal coincidences as the
overall network activity increases. Given the rapid changes in firing activity in large parts
of the brain, as assessed by EEG and other macroscopic techniques recording large-scale
brain activity, this implies that the collective behavior of the network can directly influence
the spatio-temporal integrative properties of individual neurons.
We also described a method that characterizes the efficiency of massive synaptic input,
involving the current 7synjJ that is delivered by synaptic input to the soma. Deriving 7syn)i
for synaptic input to a particular spatial region in the tree firing at a frequency {/;„) has the
major advantage that the resultant function can be combined with the /-/ 
curve measured
at the soma to yield a complete relationship between the sustained presynaptic input firing
frequency {/¡η) and the adapted output firing rate /out.
When this method is applied to study synaptic input into the distal part of the apical tree of
a pyramidal cell, it is seen that the current from these sites (1) saturates already at very small
presynaptic firing rates and (2) influences the maintained firing rate only marginally. This
saturation is only to a very minor extent caused by current leaking across the membrane
between the synaptic site and the soma. As we will see in the next chapter, introducing
voltage-dependent currents into the dendrite can both prevent saturation and amplify these
small currents, effectively turning the apical tree into a better "wire."
Finally, we reexamined the effect of shunting inhibition. While it acts in a divisive manner
in subthreshold cable models, it behaves in a linear, subtractive manner when spiking is
accounted for. This is due to the fact that the average somatic membrane potential does
not exceed the voltage threshold, limiting the maximal inhibitory current. Thus, at least for
models where inhibition acts in a maintained manner at or close to the cell body, shunting
inhibition does not implement a divisive normalization operation as postulated by many.
However, at the next level of organization, the small recurrently connected network,
linear inhibition can act again in a divisive manner (Douglas et al., 1995). We conclude
with the observation that a biophysical mechanism that implements one type of operation
in the subthreshold domain might implement a quite different one in the suprathreshold
domain. The morale is that it is dangerous in neurobiology to study any one mechanism
at only a single, isolated level of complexity. Phenomena at multiple levels, such as ionic
channel, synapse, dendrite, neuron, small network, and so on, interact in highly nonlinear
and nonintuitive ways. This is, of course, a characteristic of any evolved systems and makes
them so interesting.


===== Page 27 =====
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS
IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
So far, we worked under the convenient fiction that active, voltage-dependent membrane
conductances are confined to the spike initiation zone at or close to the cell body and that the
dendritic tree is essentially passive. Under the influence of one-dimensional passive cable
theory, as refined by Rail and his school (Chaps. 2 and 3), the passive model of dendritic
integration of synaptic inputs has become dominant and is taught in all the textbooks.
Paradoxically, from the earliest days of intracellular recordings from the fat dendrites of
spinal cord motoneurons with the aid of glass microelectrodes, active dendritic responses
had been witnessed (Brock, Coombs, and Eccles, 1952; Eccles, Libet, and Young, 1958).
Today, there exists overwhelming evidence for a host of voltage-dependent sodium and
calcium-conductances in the dendritic tree. In the following section we summarize the
experimental evidence and discuss current biophysical modeling efforts focusing on the
question of the existence and genesis of fast all-or-none electrical events in the dendrites.
We then turn toward possible functional roles of active dendritic processing.
One word of advice. It has been argued that linear cable theory as applied to dendrites
and taught in the first chapters of this book is irrelevant in the face of all this evidence for
active processing and can be relegated to the dustbin. However, this would be a mistake.
Under many physiological conditions these nonlinearities will not be relevant. Even if they
are, the resistive and capacitive cable properties of the dendrites profoundly influence the
initiation and propagation of dendritic action potentials and other active phenomena. Thus,
for a complete understanding of the events in active dendritic trees we need to be thoroughly
versed in cable theory.
19.1 Experimental Evidence for Voltage-Dependent
Dendritic Membrane Conductances
The issue of dendritic all-or-none electrical events must be seen as separate from the
broader question of the existence and nature of active, that is, voltage-dependent, membrane
conductances in the dendritic tree.
428
19


