===== Page 1 =====
BEYOND HODGKIN AND HUXLEY:
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-
DEPENDENT POTASSIUM
CURRENTS
The cornerstone of modern biophysics is the comprehensive analysis by Hodgkin and
Huxley (1952a,b,c,d) of the generation and propagation of action potentials in the squid
giant axon. The basis of their model is a fast sodium current /Na and a delayed potassium
current /K (which here we also refer to as /DR)- The last 40 years of research have shown
that impulse conduction along axons can be successfully analyzed in terms of one or both
of these currents (see Sec. 6.6). Nonetheless, their equations do not capture—nor were they
intended to capture—a number of important biophysical phenomena, such as adaptation
of the firing frequency to long-lasting stimuli or bursting, that is, the generation of two
to five spikes within 5-20 msec. Moreover, the transmission of electrical signals within
and between neurons involves more than the mere circulation of stereotyped pulses. These
impulses must be set up and generated by subthreshold processes.
The differences between the firing behavior of most neurons and the squid giant axon
reflect the roles of other voltage-dependent ionic conductances than the two described
by Hodgkin and Huxley. Over the last two decades, more than several dozen membrane
conductances have been characterized (Hagiwara, 1983; Llinas, 1988; Hille, 1992). They
differ in principal carrier, voltage, and time dependence, dependence on the presence of
intracellular calcium and on their susceptibility to modulation by synaptic inputs and
second messengers. Our knowledge of these conductances and the role they play in
impulse formation has accelerated rapidly in recent years as a result of various technical
innovations such as single-cell isolation, patch clamping, and molecular techniques. We
will here describe the most important of these conductances and briefly characterize each
one. In order to understand more completely the functional role of these conductances
in determining the response of the cell to input, empirical equations that approximate
their behavior under physiological conditions must be developed and compared against
the physiological preparations. In a remarkable testimony to the power and the generality
212
9


===== Page 2 =====
9.1 Calcium Currents 
• 
213
of the Hodgkin-Huxley approach, the majority of such phenomenological models has used
their methodology of describing individual ionic conductances in terms of activating and
inactivating particles with first-order kinetics (see Chap. 6). Theirs is also our method of
choice for quantifying the membrane conductance that we use throughout this book.
Because of the large number of ionic conductances that have been described throughout
the nervous systems of different animals, we would certainly exhaust the patience of the
reader by listing and describing them all (as Llinas, 1988, has done). Instead, we focus on
a few key conductances, in particular those that appear to be common to many neurons in
most animals, from slugs and flies to mammals.
9.1 Calcium Currents
In Chaps. 6 and 8, we characterized two currents, an inward one carried by sodium ions and
an outward one mediated by a potassium current. The missing member in the triumvirate of
ions crucial for understanding the dynamics of the membrane potential is calcium. Ionized
calcium is the most common signal transduction element in all of biology. Ca2+ is required
for the survival of cells; yet an excess of calcium ions can lead to cell death (Johnson,
Koike, and Franklin, 1992). Ca2+ plays a crucial role in triggering synaptic release upon
the invasion of an action potential at a presynaptic site, it is the key determinant for axonal
growth and muscle contraction, and it constitutes the crucial signal that initiates synaptic
plasticity. Indeed, Ca2+ can be thought of as coupling the membrane potential to cellular
output such as secretion, contraction, growth, and plasticity; that is, linking computation—
as expressed by means of rapid and highly localized changes in Vm (t)—to action. Whenever
a neuron decides to do something, Ca2+ is the key.
Scores of mechanisms exist to precisely adjust the concentration of free intracellular
calcium [Ca2+],. As we will discuss in more detail in Chap. 11, the influx of Ca2+ into
the intracellular cytoplasm is primarily regulated by voltage-dependent calcium channels
and by the NMDA synaptic receptor complex (see Sec. 4.6) in the membrane as well as
by release from intracellular storage sites in the endoplasmic reticulum. These organelles
are spread like a vast three-dimensional spider web throughout neurons and are thought
to warehouse Ca2+ ions. Because the release from these intracellular storage sites usually
occurs on a slow time scale, we will not discuss it here, referring the reader to Clapham
(1995) for further references.
What are some of the important functional properties shared by all calcium conductances?
Most importantly, the associated calcium current is always activated by depolarization, is
always inward, and has some degree of inactivation that occurs on a much slower time
scale than does inactivation of the sodium current. What is strikingly different among
the different calcium currents is their sensitivity to depolarization. Some currents activate
in response to a depolarization of a few millivolts, while others require 20 mV or even
more. Some show rapid and some very slow voltage-dependent inactivation. At least
three distinct flavors of voltage-dependent calcium currents have been reasonably well
characterized, although as the molecular structure of calcium channels becomes better
understood, we will probably be able to distinguish many more subtypes (Yang et al., 1993;
McCleskey, 1994; Catterall, 1995,1996). Finally, calcium currents are no aberrations found
only in a few exceptional neurons. All nerve cells show evidence of calcium currents, many
simultaneously expressing two or more types (Tsien et al., 1988). While calcium currents


===== Page 3 =====
214 
• 
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
appear to be largely absent in axons, they can be found throughout the dendritic tree, the
cell body, and at presynaptic sites.
9.1.1 Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz Current Equation
Up to now, we have used Ohm's law to describe the relationship between sustained
current flow and applied membrane potential. However, given the extreme imbalance
between the typical extracellular calcium concentration, in the low millimolar range, and
the intracellular concentration, ranging between 10 and 100 nM, it can be difficult to
measure a reversal potential. Indeed, one would hardly expect calcium channels to generate
much outward current beyond the calcium equilibrium potential. Even though the effective
driving potential might be very large at very depolarizing values, only a few calcium ions
are avilable to move into the extracellular space, making the outward current very close
to zero.
The standard theoretical account for the current flowing under these conditions, based
on the electrodiffusion model, was introduced into the literature by Goldman (1943) and
Hodgkin and Katz (1949) (see also Sees. 4.5 and 11.3). It makes no assumption about pores,
rather hypothesizing that ions move independently through the membrane along a constant
electrical field (that is, a linear drop in membrane potential). Using this phenomenological
model, the ionic current flowing across the membrane can be derived (see Jack, Noble, and
Tsien, 1975 or Hille, 1992) to be
(9.1)
where v = 2VmF/RT is the normalized membrane potential, with F = 96, 480 C/mol
being Faraday's constant, R the gas constant, and T the absolute temperature, /ta is the
permeability of the membrane to calcium and is defined as the constant of proportionality
between the molar flux density of calcium across a unit area of membrane S and the
concentration difference across the membrane
(9-2)
where the membrane permeability has units of cm/sec. (This is essentially Pick's first law
of diffusion; see Eq. 11.14.) Equation 9.1 is known as the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz (GHK)
current equation.
If the ionic milieu on both sides of the membrane is the same, the GHK current equation
is linear in the membrane potential, with a reversal potential of zero. As the external
concentration increases relative to the intracellular one, the I—V curve becomes shallower
and shallower for positive potentials, since it becomes increasingly more difficult for the
Ca2+ ions to move against their concentration gradient.
For large, positive values of v, the current is linear in v, as for very negative values (e.g.,
Vm < —15 mV in the case of Fig. 9.1). The ratio of the slopes in the two domains is simply
the ratio of the concentration values across the membrane.
Matching Eq. 9.1 against a real calcium current requires further considerations since,
for instance, calcium channels are mildly permeable to potassium. (The ratio of the two
permeabilities is 1/1000; see Lee and Tsien, 1982, and Fig. 9.1.)
Whether or not the calcium current should be described by Ohm's law or by the
GHK current equation has yet to be carefully evaluated from an experimental point of
view. The various numerical models that match simulations against experimental records


===== Page 4 =====
9.1 Calcium Currents 
• 
215
Fig. 9.1 THEORETICAL /—V RELATIONSHIP FOR A CALCIUM CURRENT 
Due to the 40,000-fold
concentration difference between extracellular Ca2+ (around 2 mM) and intracellular Ca2+ (around
50 nM), the phenomenological constant field equation of Goldman, Hodgkin, and Katz (Eq. 9.1)
predicts a strongly rectifying I-V relationship for calcium. If one takes account of the fact that
calcium channels are also weakly selective for potassium ions, the reversal potential shifts to somewhat
lower values and the curve becomes less steep, although still rectifying. A linear relationship, based
upon approximating the slope of the I-V curve for values Vm < —20 mV is superimposed. Under
physiological conditions, the membrane potential almost always resides in this range. Reprinted in
modified form by permission from Hille (1992).
have used either GHK or variants thereof (Llinas, Steinberg and Walton, 1981a,b; Lytton
and Sejnowski, 1991; Huguenard and McCormick, 1992; DeSchutter and Bower, 1994a;
Borg-Graham, 1997) or Ohm's law (Hudspeth and Lewis, 1988b; Traub and Miles, 1991;
McCormick, Huguenard, and Strowbridge, 1992; Yamada, Koch, and Adams, 1998). In
defense of the linear model it should be noted that under physiological conditions the cell
spends almost all of its time at membrane potentials < — 15 mV, a region in which the I-V
relationship can be approximated very well by a linear one (Fig. 9.1). Cells only briefly
transgress to more positive potentials.
With this background, let us now review three of the most important calcium currents.
These are not the only types of calcium currents that have been dissected out of the
physiological responses of neurons. (Other currents include the P and the R calcium
currents; Mintz, Adams, and Bean, 1992; Randall and Tsien, 1995.). Indeed, it remains
unclear how many distinct types of ionic channels permeable to calcium ions exist in the
nervous systems. This number could, potentially, be much larger than we assume today.
9.1.2 High-Threshold Calcium Current
This current, labeled L for long lasting, was for many years the only known calcium current.
Different from the fast sodium current of the squid axon, /ca(L) is only activated at the very
depolarized levels expected during action potentials. Its halfway activation point lies around
10-0 mV (Fig. 9.2), implying that around Vrest. ^Ca(L) is totally deactivated. The L current
does show inactivation that is not, however, dependent on the membrane potential but
depends, instead, on the intracellular calcium concentration just below the membrane. It is
halfway inactivated at quite low values of [Ca +],- (tens of micromolars). Because activation


===== Page 5 =====
216
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
of /ca(L) does not follow the onset of depolarization instantaneously but appears with a
delay, the activation particle m is usually taken to the second, third, or even higher power
(Hagiwara and Byerly, 1981; Johnston and Wu, 1995). Recalling the GHK equation 9.1,
we can express the current as
(9.3)
with k an integer > 2, and /ca the GHK expression for the current as a function of the
voltage (see also Kay and Wong, 1987; Hille, 1992).
Because of the existence of specific pharmacological L channel blockers, it is known
that such L channels live in proximal dendrites and at the cell body of cortical pyramidal
and thalamic cells (Galvan et al., 1986; Llinas, 1988; Fisher, Gray and Johnston, 1990;
Westenbroek, Ahlijanian and Catterall, 1990).
9.1.3 Low-Threshold Transient Calcium Current
The low-threshold transient or T calcium current is activated at lower voltages than the
L current. Typically, its half-activation point is at —40 mV. At normal resting levels, this
current is turned off. It does inactivate slowly but strongly as a function of voltage, as
evident in Fig. 9.3A. Under physiological conditions, the T current can be triggered by
hyperpolarizing the membrane potential—thereby completely removing inactivation—and
subsequently allowing synaptic input (or a depolarizing current injection) to activate it.
/Ca(T) can generate an all-or-nothing electrical event (usually called an LTspike; see below)
similar to a classical action potential, but much broader, on top of which two or more sodium
spikes are riding (e.g., Fig. 6.1H).
In thalamic relay cells, this current has been modeled (McCormick, Huguenard,
and Strowbridge, 1992; McCormick and Huguenard, 1992; Huguenard and McCormick,
1992) as
(9.4)
Fig. 9.2 ACTIVATION AND INACTIVATION RANGES FOR CALCIUM CURRENTS Steady-state acti-
vation (leftmost plot) and inactivation (middle plot) variables as a function of the membrane potential
for the three calcium currents discussed in the text. Inactivation of the L calcium current does not
depend on voltage but on the intracellular calcium concentration. The rightmost plot shows their
I-V relationships. It is likely that intermediate forms of calcium current exist without specific
pharmacological blockers to uniquely identify them. Reprinted by permission from Johnston and
Wu (1995).


===== Page 6 =====
9.1 Calcium Currents 
• 
217
Fig. 9.3 ACTIVATION AND INACTIVATION OF THE TRANSIENT CALCIUM CURRENT Properties of
the transient low-threshold calcium current found in rat thalamic relay cells as modeled by Huguenard
and McCormick (1992) using a standard Hodgkin-Huxley-like formalism (Eq. 9.4). Data for six
thalamic cells are shown. (A) Steady-state activation and inactivation as a function of Vm. (B) IT is
activated by stepping the potential for 30 msec to various potentials, followed by repolarization to
—80 mV (1—experimental data; 2—model). (C) Time constant of activation and (D) of inactivation
and recovery. Reprinted by permission from Huguenard and McCormick (1992).
The steady-state activation moo and inactivation h^ as well as their associated time
constants rm and i), are illustrated in Fig. 9.3 as a function of the membrane potential
for the thalamus current. (For an alternate formulation see Wang, Rinzel, and Rogawski,
1991.) Different from 7Na in the squid axon, /ca(T) does not possess a window current.
The window current refers to current flowing at steady-state, determined by the amount
of overlap between activation and inactivation at any particular membrane potential. For
the T current, the window current /3ca(T)w^0'zoo^Ca> is always zero or close to zero for
any sustained voltages; hence its name (Fig. 9.3A). Physiological data point toward the T
current as playing a prominent role in distal dendrites (Christie et al., 1995).
A significant difference between low- and high-threshold calcium currents is that the
latter require depolarization beyond 0 m V, something only expected during action potentials,
while the former are activated at much more modest levels of depolarization.
9.1.4 Low-Threshold Spike in Thalamic Neurons
The role that the T current might play in information transmission was first elucidated in
two classical papers by Jahnsen and Llinas (1984a,b). Thalamic relay cells occupy a unique
position in the central nervous system. With the exception of olfaction, all sensory systems
access cortex by projecting through the thalamus (for a review see Sherman and Koch, 1986,
1998). Furthermore, about one-half of all synaptic contacts onto thalamic cells originate
in the lower layers of the cortex. The thalamus is also the recipient of diffusely projecting


===== Page 7 =====
218
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
input from the brainstem. The various systems have more than ample opportunity to control
what is transmitted through the thalamus (Crick, 1984a).
Intracellular recordings from thalamic cells in slice as well as in the intact animal (Jahnsen
and Llinas, 1984a,b; Coulter, Huguenard, and Prince, 1989; Hernandez-Cruz and Pape,
1989; Guido et al., 1995; Guido and Weyand, 1995) have revealed two functional, quite
distinct modes of operation which are characterized by whether or not the transient calcium
current is activated (Fig. 9.4).
If the membrane potential at the soma is around —75 mV or below—held there by modu-
latory input from the brain stem that is known to hyperpolarize thalamic cells tonically—the
inactivation of /ca(T) is removed and any sufficiently large depolarizing synaptic input will
activate the low-threshold calcium current (Fig. 9.4A). Similar to the fast Hodgkin-Huxley-
like action potential, this further depolarizes the membrane, activating additional /ca(T), and
so on. The result is an all-or-none action potential, the LT spike, which is relatively broad,
around 50 msec. This is due to a two order of magnitude difference between fast activation
and slow inactivation (Fig. 9.3D). As can be seen in Fig. 9.4A, this broad depolarization
triggers a series of very fast conventional sodium spikes riding on top of the LT spike. The
cell is said to burst; consequently, this manner of operating is known as the burst mode.
Subsequent to the LT spike, the membrane is profoundly refractory for a period of 100 msec
or longer before it can generate the next calcium spike. During the intervening period, any
synaptic input will have little effect on the cell. If, conversely, the membrane is at rest or
slightly depolarized, /ca(T) is inactivated and any input will cause either only a subthreshold
depolarization (Fig. 9.4B) or a series of conventional action potentials (Fig. 9.4C). Stronger
depolarization is encoded in a higher firing frequency: the cell operates in its relay mode.
Steriade and his colleagues (Steriade and McCarley, 1990; Steriade, McCormick, and
Sejnowski, 1993) have provided much evidence that the relatively minor dc shifts in Vm
Fig. 9.4 BURSTING IN THALAMIC NEURONS 
The majority of thalamic cells can be in one of two
functionally quite distinct states. (A) If the membrane potential is tonically hyperpolarized to —75 mV
or beyond—due to modulatory activity from the brainstem or inhibitory synaptic input—a transient
low-threshold calcium current is de-inactivated. A depolarizing current step (indicated in the lower
trace) triggers a slow all-or-none electrical event due to inward calcium current, the so-called LT spike.
Riding on top of the LT action potential are a number of conventional, fast sodium spikes. The LT
spike concludes with a profound hyperpolarization that prevents excitatory synaptic input during this
time from generating output spikes. (B) In an intermediate state, the cell responds to the same input
in a linear fashion, with a slowly rising and decaying depolarization. (C) If the membrane is tonically
depolarized to —60 mV or above, the same input causes the cell to fire a series of conventional fast
sodium action potentials. This constitutes the so-called relay mode. Reprinted in modified form by
permission from Jahnsen and Llinas (1984a).


===== Page 8 =====
9.1 Calcium Currents 
• 
219
which bring about the switch from one mode into the other are controlled by modulatory
input from a small number of discrete sites in the brainstem. It is known that thalamic cells
in anesthetized as well as in awake behaving cats can respond to visual stimuli using burst
as well as isolated spikes, preferentially generating bursts during the early phase of fixation
(Guido and Weyand, 1995; Guido et al., 1995). We will return in Sec. 16.3 to the possible
significance of bursting for information processing.
9.1.5 N-Type Calcium Current
This is a current that has properties intermediate between the L and the T calcium currents,
hence its name N for neither L nor T. It is activated at potentials intermediate between
the low- and high-threshold currents (Fig. 9.2). It does show slower, voltage-dependent
inactivation dynamics than the T current and has a specific pharmacological channel blocker.
The N current is modeled as
(9.5)
(see Sutor and Zieglgansberger, 1987; Lytton and Sejnowski, 1991).
Westenbroek and colleagues (1992) stained the entire rat brain with antibodies to a
part of the N channel. As expected, most gray matter through the central nervous system
was stained, in particular proximal and distal dendrites and presynaptic terminals. Thus,
N channels appear to complement the locations of L channels, which are restricted to the
cell bodies and the proximal dendrites of pyramidal cells (Westenbroek, Ahlijanian, and
Catterall, 1990).
9.1.6 Calcium as a Measure of the Spiking Activity of the Neuron
No matter through which type of calcium channel Ca2+ ions enter the neuron, they
will now diffuse throughout the available space and interact with enzymes and proteins
in the membrane and the cytoplasm. We defer until Chap. 11 an in-depth account of
the mathematics of diffusion and binding. Nonetheless, let us here briefly allude to a
computationally interesting role of intracellular calcium.
Around the intracellular mouth of calcium channels, Ca2+ exit the 5 A pore at rates
exceeding one million per second. These ions diffuse throughout the neuron, binding at
available sites in the cytoplasm and the intracellular organelles (this binding can induce
release of Ca2+ ions from these organelles). While the majority of Ca2+ ions is bound,
a small amount remains unbound and slowly accumulates inside the cytoplasm. Each
action potential admits further calcium ions which further increases [Ca2+],. This buildup
is illustrated in numerical simulations of the spherical cell body of bullfrog sympathetic
ganglion cells (Fig. 9.5; see Gamble and Koch, 1987, and Sec. 9.4 below). The Ca2+ ions
rushing in through calcium channels for the few milliseconds that these channels are open
during an action potential, increase [Ca +],- in the core of the cell by between 3 and 4 nM.
To a first order, this increase is relatively independent of the spiking frequency (here varying
between 10 and 50 Hz). While 3 nM might appear as a tiny increase, it is averaged over the
entire cell body and will be much larger in local regions. The increase needs to be judged
against the low resting level of [Ca2+],-, between 10 and 50 nM.
Experimental calcium measurements in cell bodies of the sea snail Aplysia (Gorman and
Thomas, 1980), of bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells (Smith, MacDermott, and Weight,
1983; Hernandez-Cruz, Sala, and Adams, 1990) and of cortical pyramidal cells (Fig. 9.6;
Helmchen, Imoto, and Sakmann, 1996) have confirmed this hypothetical buildup, which


===== Page 9 =====
220
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
Fig. 9.5 INTRACELLULAR CALCIUM ACCUMULATION FOLLOWING SPIKING ACTIVITY 
Increase
in intracellular free calcium in simulated bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells in response to repetitive
fast synaptic input at different input frequencies. For a more detailed description of this model see
Sec. 9.4. The increase of [Ca2+],- in the central 19-jU.m-radius core of the 20-jiim-radius cell body
is relatively independent of the spiking frequency (each synaptic input triggers one spike). In other
words, the calcium concentration provides an index for the spiking activity of the cell in recent times.
(The time constant of this integrated measure depends on the cellular geometry; the larger the volume,
the longer the effective time constant; see Sec. 11.7.2.) This "activity" measure can be read out by
any calcium-dependent enzyme or protein. Reprinted by permission from Gamble and Koch (1987).
Fig. 9.6 CALCIUM BUILDUP PROPORTIONAL TO
NEURONAL ACTIVITY 
Following each action
potential in a layer 5 pyramidal neuron, calcium
rushes into the cell and accumulates, here recorded
using a calcium-dependent fluorescent dye in the
proximal apical dendrite (Helmchen, Imoto, and
Sakmann, 1996). This increase in calcium reaches
an equilibrium with a time constant of 200 msec.
The final level (in nM) is linearly related to the
firing frequency of the cell (evoked by current
injections), with a slope of 15 nM/Hz (solid line).
Reprinted in modified form by permission from
Helmchen, Imoto, and Sakmann (1996).
reaches a plateau between 0.1 and 1 sec, depending on the geometry of the cell. It gradually
subsides due to extrusion processes that remove the excess calcium from the cytoplasm.
The integrated measure of past neuronal activity can be read out by any enzyme or protein
that is sensitive to calcium, such as a calcium-dependent potassium channel (see below), or
any of the myriad cellular processes that are so exquisitely sensitive to calcium concentration
(see Chaps. 11 and 20). This allows the neuron or a local circuit to up or downregulate its own
activity (a sort of gain control operation). Indeed, experimental evidence has accumulated
in favor of this calcium set-point hypothesis, in which the concentration of free, intracellular
calcium determines the amplitude of various ionic currents (Johnson, Koike, and Franklin,
1992; Turrigiano, Abbott, and Marder, 1994). An elegant modeling study has shown us how


===== Page 10 =====
9.2 Potassium Currents 
• 
221
a simple neuronal system, here modeled by the Morris-Lecar equations (Sec. 7.2), can be
modified to adjust its maximal conductances G as a function of integrated calcium activity
until the system expresses stable spiking patterns (LeMasson, Marder, and Abbott, 1993).
9.2 Potassium Currents
A variety at least as great as among the calcium channels, if not greater, is displayed
by ionic channels permeable to potassium ions. Under physiological conditions, current
flow through these channels is outward, that is, upward in the normal convention. Given the
physiological reversal potential of K+ in the neighborhood of —100 mV, potassium currents
can be thought of as stabilizing the membrane potential, since activating a potassium current
pulls the membrane potential to hyperpolarizing levels. As we saw already in the case of /DR,
the delayed rectified potassium current in the squid axon (Sec. 6.2.1), potassium currents
serve to keep the action potential brief. In the absence of such a potassium current, which
rapidly repolarizes the membrane, the action potential would be much longer and would
follow the time course of inactivation of the sodium channel.1 As we will see, potassium
currents serve to delay the generation of an action potential following synaptic or current
input as well as to reduce the firing frequency in the face of a constant input.
Like the majority of ionic currents, potassium currents—with the noticeable exception of
the anomalous or inward rectifier current (Hagiwara, 1983; Doupnik, Davidson, and Lester,
1995)—require depolarization to activate. Around Vresl, they—as well as all sodium and
calcium currents—are very small, minimizing the possibly wasteful antagonistic inward
and outward current flow and, thereby, metabolic cost. In a sense, biology might have
discovered a principle that designers of portable computers only implemented within the
last few years: when not in use, reduce the clock rate of the microprocessors as much as
possible in order to conserve precious battery power.
9.2.1 Transient Potassium Currents and Delays
Next to /DR, arguably the most important potassium current is a transient, inactivating
potassium current, known as 7A. First characterized by Connor and Stevens (1971b), it lives
in a rather narrow voltage range between —70 and —40 mV, activating within 5-10 msec.
Different from the delayed rectifier, /A inactivates on a slower time scale, typically on
the order of 100 msec. Based on their voltage-clamp data, Connor and Stevens (1971c)
described 7A on the basis of Ohm's law,
(9.6)
The fourth power yields the observed sigmoidal activation curves, while the single inacti-
vation particle reflects the exponential decay of the current. The time constants of activation
and inactivation depend only weakly on the membrane potential.
The functional relevance of /A (Connor and Stevens, 197 Ic) can be understood by
reference to Fig. 9.7. As we learned in Chaps. 6 and 7, the squid axonal membrane shows
an abrupt onset of spiking: in the standard model, the minimum spiking frequency is
53 Hz. We can understand why either by looking at the exact equations or by considering
phase space analysis. In terms of biophysics, the Hodgkin-Huxley equations are unable to
1. An exception to this are the nodes of Ranvier of myelinated fibers, in which a vigorous leak current serves to partially
repolarize the membrane; Sec. 6.6.


===== Page 11 =====
222 
• 
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
generate spikes at very low frequencies, since too slow a rate of depolarization would lead
to inactivation of the sodium current. In Chap. 7 we used phase space analysis to argue
that onset of oscillations with an infinitely long period requires a saddle-node bifurcation
that can be obtained with the help of an inactivation variable that depends steeply on the
membrane potential (witness the w = 0 nullcline in Fig. 7.9).
/A exactly fulfills this condition: it is active in a narrow subthreshold range. In cortical
pyramidal cells—such as the one modeled in Fig 9.7—this current will try to hyperpolarize
the membrane potential subsequent to a current step (hence the bump in Fig. 9.7A; Segal
and Barker, 1984; Schwindt et al., 1988; Zona et al., 1988). In this voltage range, /A slowly
inactivates, thereby contributing less and less outward current: Vm slowly drifts upward until
the spiking threshold is reached and a spike is triggered. A similar mechanism generates
delays of up to 3-4 sec in molluscan neurons (Getting, 1983). It has also been hypothetized
that a class of cells in the cat lateral geniculate nucleus, lagged cells, which show a much
delayed response to a visual stimulus compared to nonlagged geniculate cells, implement
this delay via a transient A current (Saul and Humphrey, 1990; McCormick, 1991).
/A can exert another profound effect on the firing behavior of cells. As is apparent upon
inspection of the /-/ curve of apatch of squid axon membrane (Fig. 6.10A), the bandwidth
Fig. 9.7 DELAYED SPIKING DUE TO
TRANSIENT POTASSIUM CURRENT 
The
A current implements a delay element.
(A) Somatic membrane potential in the
standard pyramidal cell model in response
to a 0.32-nA current step injected at
100 msec. Vm depolarizes and activates
the transient potassium /A current. At
these potentials /A slowly inactivates, as
evident in (B), showing the normalized
A conductance. (An m h instead of the
m4h formalism of Eq. 9.6 was used.)
This gradual inactivation of a potassium
current allows the membrane potential to
creep upward until, 1 sec after the current
injection, an action potential is generated.
Without /A the membrane potential would
either remain subthreshold or generate a
spike within a few tens of milliseconds.
(C) Relationship between the injected cur-
rent and the delay between current onset
and spike initiation.


===== Page 12 =====
9.2 Potassium Currents 
• 
223
of firing is very limited because of the high onset firing frequency. The remedy for this is
the introduction of /A, allowing the membrane to generate action potentials across a much
larger firing frequency range than before.
The A current is just one member of a larger class of transient inactivating potassium
currents that share similar pharmacological and functional properties (Rudy, 1988). Other
members of this club include /D (D for delay) described in hippocampal cells (Storm,
1988) and /AS, found in thalamic neurons (McCormick, 1991). Both currents have very
long activation times, causing a delay in the onset of spiking in response to a current
injection of up to 10 sec.
We conclude that I\ and its siblings subserve at least two functions: (1) to allow cells to
fire at very low frequencies, thereby increasing the bandwidth of the firing frequency code
significantly, and (2) to implement a delay element that does not require ultraslow intrinsic
time constants.
9.2.2 Calcium-Dependent Potassium Currents
The amplitude of several potassium currents is influenced by [Ca2+],, the intracellular
concentration of Ca2+ ions. These currents are collectively referred to as /K(Ca) to emphasize
that they are modulated by calcium but that the current itself is carried by K+ ions. The
function of these currents is to shape the membrane potential following individual action
potentials (Fig. 9.8), to read out the previous spiking history of the cell, shaping adaptation
accordingly, and to instantiate, in conjunction with a calcium current, a resonance-like
behavior (Hudspeth and Lewis, 1988b; Sec. 10.4.3).
We here discuss two potassium currents: /c and /AHP (Latorre et al., 1989).
/c is a fairly large, outward current whose activity depends on [Ca2+],- as well as on Vm.
/c quickly activates upon the entry of calcium through calcium channels during an action
potential. Similar to the delayed rectifier, it rapidly repolarizes the membrane potential,
shutting off in the process in readiness for the next spike. It is not easy to study the dynamics
Fig. 9.8 CALCIUM AND THE ACTION POTENTIAL 
Effect of blocking calcium channels on
computer-simulated and observed action potentials in type B bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells
(Yamada, Koch, and Adams, 1998). In both cases, the standard action potential (induced by a brief
current pulse) repolarizes more quickly and is followed by a longer afterhyperpolarization than the
action potential (dotted lines) in the absence of calcium currents (achieved in the experiment by adding
cadmium to the bathing solution and in the model by reducing Gca to 5% of its normal value). The
effect of blocking Ca2+ on the peak amplitude of the spike is minimal: the spike itself is mediated
by Na+ and not by Ca2+ ions. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Yamada, Koch, and
Adams (1998).


===== Page 13 =====
224 • 
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
of this, or any other calcium-dependent potassium current, since its time course is highly
sensitive to the calcium concentration in the immediate neighborhood of the underlying
channel. Because Ca2+ will decay very differently in thin dendrites than in a large cell
body, /c will also have a different time course, even if the dynamics of the membrane
potential are the same in both cases.
The microscopic gating of the ionic channels underlying this current has been studied in
some detail, giving rise to complex kinetic gating schemes with two or more calcium ions
necessary for the channel to open (McManus and Magleby, 1988). A much simpler gating
scheme for the underlying conductance gc that reproduces much of the time and voltage
dependency involves calcium ions binding to a single activation particle, which effects the
transition from closed to open channel in a voltage-dependent manner (Adams et al., 1986;
Yamada, Koch, and Adams, 1998):
(9.7)
If /DR and /c were the only currents activated by a single action potential, the spike
afterhyperpolarization (AHP) would promptly return to rest with a time course dictated
by the membrane time constant. Yet neurons throughout the nervous system (Connors,
Gutnick, and Prince, 1982; Pennefather et al., 1985; Lancaster and Adams, 1986) show a
second component of the AHP, reflecting a much smaller and slower calcium-dependent
potassium conductance. The associated current, termed /AHP> is small and depends only on
the concentration of intracellular calcium just below the membrane. The secret to its success
is that it is sustained: when calcium rushes in during an action potential, /AHP turns on and
effectively subtracts from the depolarizing current from an electrode or from synaptic input.
In hippocampal pyramidal cells, the amplitude of the hyperpolarization following spiking
activity increases with increasing number of action potentials, showing that /AHP increments
with each spike (Madison and Nicoll, 1984). Blocking this current prevents firing frequency
adaptation from occurring. The current is described as
(9-8)
Experimentally, /AHP can be distinguished from /c by the use of naturally occurring toxins
that are added to the solution bathing the neurons: while /c is blocked in many cells by
charybdotoxin, a peptide from scorpion venom, /AHP can be blocked by injecting a toxin
from bee venom, apamin. This reveals the tight coevolution of predators and the nervous
systems of the animals they hunt.
9.3 Firing Frequency Adaptation
Throughout neocortex, hippocampus, and thalamus, cells receive a clearly denned input
from a single site in the pontine brainstem, the locus coeruleus. Each of the small number
of coeruleus neurons (about 2 x 1600 in rat and 2 x 13,000 in humans) projects in a
very diffuse manner throughout the brain. A single neuron might enervate frontal cortex,
thalamus as well as occipital cortex (Foote and Morrison, 1987). Excitation in these cells
has been related to increased vigilance and arousal in both rats and monkeys (Foote, Aston-
Jones and Bloom, 1980).
Upon stimulation, the terminals of these neurons release the neurotransmitter nora-
drenaline (also termed norepinephrine) onto their postsynaptic targets (see Table 4.1). This
leads to a quite pronounced and long-lasting change in the excitability of these cells, an effect


===== Page 14 =====
9.3 Firing Frequency Adaptation 
• 
225
Fig. 9.9 SLOW MODULATION OF FIRING FREQUENCY Change in firing frequency adaptation in
CA1 pyramidal cells from a hippocampal slice during application of noradrenaline. A brief just-
threshold current ramp is applied first, followed by a 650-msec-long, suprathreshold current pulse.
The principal action of noradrenaline, mediated by a second messenger, is to reduce firing frequency
adaptation by blocking the slow calcium-dependent potassium conductance /AHP- A side effect is a
slight increase in the firing threshold of the cell (that is, the brief current ramp does not trigger an
action potential in the presence of noradrenaline). This modulation in the firing properties can persist
for seconds or even minutes. Hippocampal pyramidal cells receive a well-defined noradrenergic input
from brainstem neurons. Reprinted by permission from Madison and Nicoll (1986).
that has been studied in isolation in pyramidal cells in the neocortical and the hippocampal
slice preparation (Madison and Nicoll, 1986; Nicoll, 1988; Schwindt et al., 1988).
Application of noradrenaline to pyramidal cells causes two changes. One is a small
(about 2-3 mV) hyperpolarization, leading to a measurable increase in the spiking threshold
(Fig. 9.9). A much more dramatic effect can be observed when the cell is sufficiently
excited to fire trains of spikes. Normally, these cells adapt, that is, their firing rate in
response to a constant current step slows down (as in "Control" in Fig. 9.9). In the
presence of noradrenaline, spike discharge accommodation is almost completely blocked.
Its action is specific in that neither the shape of the action potential itself nor the fast
afterhyperpolarization phase is affected. Indeed, experiments have shown (Madison and
Nicoll, 1986) that noradrenaline specifically blocks /AHP for many tens of seconds. This
effect is mediated by a metabotropic receptor (Sec. 4.4 and Table 4.2). In this case,
noradrenaline binds to fi\ adrenergic receptors, releasing a second messenger inside the
cell which directly or indirectly phosphorylates the channel proteins underlying /AHP- An
added complication is that the small hyperpolarizing action of noradrenaline—caused by
an increase in a potassium conductance— is mediated by a adrenergic receptors. Any
neuroactive substance in the brain will often initiate a series of changes in the electrical
behavior of its postsynaptic targets via multiple actuators (here receptors).
Noradrenaline is not alone in being able to control spike rate adaptation in cortical
cells. Acetylcholine, mediated by a dense cholinergic input to the hippocampus from
cells in the medial septal nucleus, has a similar effect, although its action is even more
complex than that of noradrenaline (it appears to modify at least four distinct potassium
currents; Cole and Nicoll, 1984; McCormick and Prince, 1986; Nicoll, 1988; Schwindt et
al., 1988). The pyramidal cells that receive such a cholinergic input can have their spike
rate accommodation switched off for tens of seconds in the absence of any direct change
of the membrane potential.
The lesson is that multiple, diffusely projecting systems in the brain can independently
control the excitability of neurons via slow modulation of membrane conductances. Their
mode of action is somewhat similar to a broadcast that is sent out to all processors in a


===== Page 15 =====
226 
• 
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
massively parallel computer. In other words, all processors will receive the same signal.
Because a single neuron in the locus coeruleus projects widely throughout the brain, this
blockage of spike rate adaptation is not very precise in terms of space nor in terms of
time (since it typically requires a fraction of a second to set in and may last for many,
many seconds). From a computational point of view, these diffuse systems that target
specific conductances should be thought of as modifying the basic electrical properties
of the processing circuits on a relatively global scale, possibly for controlling the level of
arousal or vigilance and for providing a single slow global feedback signal during learning.
9.4 Other Currents
Besides the handful of voltage-dependent membrane currents discussed so far, there exist
a plethora of other currents that are responsible, in isolation or in concert with others, for
shaping various phases of cellular excitability (Llinas, 1988). They include /M, a slowly
changing voltage-dependent potassium current found in pyramidal cells, which contributes
to the accommodation of action potential discharge (Halliwell and Adams, 1982; Brown,
1988), as well as an entire family of inward rectifier potassium currents, which are activated
upon hyperpolarization of the membrane potential (Hagiwara, 1983; Spain, Schwindt, and
Grill, 1987).
A smaller and less well understood family of channels is primarily permeable to chloride
ions, by far the most abundant anions in biological systems (Hille, 1992). In general, the
reversal potential for Cl~ is within 10-15 mV of the resting potential of neurons, and
activation of a chloride current will repolarize the cell and prevent it from firing. The voltage
and time dependencies of chloride conductances are only minor and slow. Therefore, they
probably contribute to the leak conductance that is usually assumed to be independent of
the applied membrane potential. There also exists a calcium-activated chloride conductance
with only a weak voltage dependency, which could play a similar role to calcium-dependent
potassium conductances (Mayer, 1985).
A possible important current is the sustained or persistent sodium current /Na,p- It has
been clearly documented in cortical pyramidal cells (Stafstrom et al., 1985; French et al.,
1990) due to the sensitivity to TTX that it shares with its fast sibling, 7Na. This current
turns on within a few milliseconds upon depolarization, but either does not inactivate at all
or only very slowly, thereby providing a steady inward current. Because 7Naip is activated
near the resting potential, it tends to amplify small EPSPs. The firing frequency of the cell
will be quite sensitive to the total amount of this current, since too much /Na,p will prevent
repolarization following action potentials.
9.5 An Integrated View
For the most part, this chapter has described individual currents and their possible functional
roles. Before we go on to other matters, we would like to give the reader a holistic view of
how these different currents interrelate and how they function within an entire system. As
example, we will discuss the simulacrum of type B bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells of
Adams et al., (1986) and Yamada, Koch, and Adams (1998). These neurons make only a
lowly contribution to the overall scheme of things, enabling the animal to control its glands
for slime production. From an electrophysiological point of view, though, these cells are


===== Page 16 =====
9.5 An Integrated View
227
Fig. 9.10 MODELING A BULLFROG SYMPATHETIC GANGLION CELL 
(A) Electrical circuit used
in the Yamada, Koch, and Adams (1998) simulacrum of type B bullfrog sympathetic ganglion
cells. Given their spherical shape and the complete absence of any dendrites, a single lumped
compartment that includes seven time-, voltage-, and calcium-dependent membrane conductances
is entirely sufficient to model their electrical behavior. (B) Underlying assumptions for modeling
the extracellular accumulation of potassium (in a single extracellular compartment) and the series of
shells surrounding a well-mixed central core to account for Ca2+ diffusion inside the cell. A calcium
buffer is distributed throughout the cell. Not drawn to scale. Reprinted by permission from Yamada,
Koch, and Adams (1998).
ideal since they are easy to cultivate, big (with a mean diameter of 35 fim), and devoid of
any dendritic processes.
The electrical structure of the model, shown schematically in Fig. 9.10, includes the
seven time-, voltage-, and calcium-dependent conductances found in these cells, in addition
to a passive RC contribution: the fast sodium 7Na and the delayed rectifier potassium
/DR currents underlying spike production, an L type calcium current /ca, the two forms
of calcium-dependent potassium currents discussed above, /c and JAHP, the transient
potassium current /A, and a fifth potassium current, the small and slowly activating voltage-
dependent M current. The description of these currents is derived from voltage-clamp data
and is based on the conventional Hodgkin-Huxley rate formalism and the use of Ohm's
law. (for the numerical values of all parameters, consult the appendix in Yamada, Koch,
and Adams, 1998). Because of the spherical geometry of these cells, they are electrically
compact and can be modeled using a single compartment.
Sympathetic ganglion cells are not compact from the point of view of the spatio-temporal
distribution of the Ca2+ ions entering the cell via calcium channels. As treated in detail in


===== Page 17 =====
228
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
Chap. 11, the diffusion equation is solved in spherical coordinates, using a series of thin
shells surrounding a well-stirred, central core. Ca2+ ions can bind to a stationary buffer
distributed throughout the cytoplasm using a second-order reaction (see Sec. 11.4.1). In the
outermost compartment just below the membrane, calcium ions are extruded from the cell
via a first-order calcium pump. Finally, in order to account for the accumulation of potassium
ions in the pericellular space just outside the neuronal membrane—leading to a significant
reduction of the potassium battery EK following spike activity—the cell is assumed to
be surrounded by a single compartment, whose concentration of K+ ions is determined
by a simple uptake mechanism. We leave the mathematics of solving two coupled sets of
nonlinear equations for Vm(t) and [Ca2+](x, t) to Appendix C.
Figures 9.11 and 9.12 illustrate the basic performance of the model in response to a short
current pulse that triggers an action potential. The spike itself (Fig. 9.8) is similar to the
squid axon spike (Fig. 6.6) with the noticable exception of the second, long-lasting phase
of the afterhyperpolarization, mediated by /AHP- Moreover, in these cells /c, rather than
/DR, is largely responsible for repolarizing the potential following the excursion of Vm to
0 mV and beyond (as can be ascertained by comparing the peak amplitudes of /c and /DR).
Fig. 9.11 RESPONSE or THE SYMPATHETIC GANGLION CELL MODEL: MAJOR CURRENTS 
Re-
sponse of the bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cell model (see Fig. 9.10) at rest to a 2-msec-long current
pulse of 1.75-nA amplitude (indicated by black bars). This panorama depicts the major currents
involved in spike initiation and repolarization seen in (A) (identical to the spike in Fig. 9.8). Notice
the fast and slow components of the afterhyperpolarization. The two inward currents /Na and /ca are
plotted in (B). Only 9% of the incoming charge is carried by Ca2+ ions, emphasizing the fact that the
primary function of calcium ions is to shape neuronal excitability, rather than to be directly involved in
spike production. (C) Fast calcium-dependent potassium current /c that contributes substantially more
to spike repolarization than the delayed rectifier current /DR, shown in (D). Reprinted by permission
from Yamada, Koch, and Adams (1998).


===== Page 18 =====
9.5 An Integrated View
229
The amplitude of /AHP is minute compared to /c; yet, because it is maintained, it has a
crucial role to play in determining spike accommodation (Adams et al., 1986). Changes in
the driving potential can be quite significant, as seen in the transient 50 mV reduction in
ECS (Fig. 9.12B) caused by the very brief elevation of [Ca2+], just below the membrane to
micromolar values.
The effect of blocking either /M or /AHP or both on the average firing frequency is the sub-
ject of Fig. 9.13. Blocking /AHP leaves the current threshold for spike initiation unchanged
but does increase the gain of the /-/ 
curve by about a factor of 2. Exactly the same result
is observed in a quite different system, vestibular neurons in the brainstem (du Lac, 1996;
Fig. 21.3) where pharmacological elimination of the slow calcium-dependent potassium
current increases the gain of the /-/ 
curve by a factor varying between 1.38 and 2.28.
Blocking but /M in the bullfrog leaves the slope of the discharge curve relatively
unchanged while reducing I& to 5% of its original value. Removing both conductances
Fig. 9.12 RESPONSE OF THE SYMPATHETIC GANGLION CELL MODEL: MINOR CURRENTS AND
CALCIUM CONCENTRATION Response of the bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cell to the same
stimulus as in Fig. 9.11. (A) Three smaller potassium currents /M, /AHP, and /A- The latter does
not appear to play any significant role in these cells. /M is active at rest. The primary effect of
blockage of /M is a reduction in current threshold /th, while blockage of /AHP leads to a partial loss
of spike firing adaptation. Blockage of both currents occurs in vivo during stimulation of cholinergic
input to the ganglia. The changes in the Nernst potentials for E^a and EK are shown in (B). The
primary rapid and the secondary slow components in the change in £ca reflect the rapid increase in
free calcium concentration in the outermost shell just below the membrane plotted in (C). Activation
of /ca leads to a rapid influx of Ca2+ ions that quickly bind to the buffer. The slow decay results from
calcium loss via the pump as well as diffusion toward the core of the cell. [Ca2+],; for the tenth shell
below the membrane (dotted line) is also illustrated in (C). The calcium concentration in the central
core is shown in (D). Reprinted by permission from Yamada, Koch, and Adams (1998).


===== Page 19 =====
230
CALCIUM AND CALCIUM-DEPENDENT POTASSIUM CURRENTS
Fig. 9.13 CHANGING THE GAIN OF THE DISCHARGE CURVE 
Effect of blocking either /M or /AHP
or both on the /-/ curve of the model bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cell. Mean firing rate, averaged
over 200 msec, following current steps of variable amplitude. Removing /M primarily affects /th but
leaves the slope intact, while eliminating /AHP increases the gain of the discharge curve by a factor of
2. Blocking the two simultaneously leads to the summation of both effects. The control of the gain of
a neuron via control of the amount of the slow calcium-dependent potassium current present might
be a crucial biophysical operation underlying different computations. Reprinted by permission from
Yamada, Koch, and Adams (1998).
lowers the current threshold but increases the slope, leading to the dramatic removal of
spike adaptation observed experimentally (Adams et al., 1986).
If ^AHP can be controlled in individual neurons, rather than by a globally acting neuro-
transmitter such as noradrenaline, as introduced above, it offers the possibility of selectively
up or down regulating the gain of a neuron without affecting the spike generation mechanism
itself. Given the importance of receptive field models that incorporate a multiplicative effect
on the gain of individual neurons (leading to so-called gain fields; Zipser and Andersen,
1988; but see Pouget and Sejnowski, 1997), this might be a crucial canonical biophysical
operation.
9.6 Recapitulation
In this chapter, we summarized some of what is known about ionic currents populating the
nervous system other than /Na and 7DR of squid axon fame. In particular, we introduced
calcium currents. Ca2+ ions are crucial for the life and death of neurons; they link rapid
changes in the membrane potential, used for computation, with action, such as neurotrans-
mitter release at a synapse, muscle contraction, or biochemical changes underlying cellular
plasticity. Three broad classes of calcium currents are known: L, T, and N currents, although
it is unclear whether these are just three samples along a continuum of such currents. Because
of the substantial imbalance between the concentration of Ca2+ inside and outside the cell,
electrical rectification needs to be taken account of. Typically, this requires the use of the
Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation to describe calcium currents, rather than the linear Ohm's
law. The accumulation of calcium ions following action potential activity has the useful
function that the intracellular calcium concentration in the cell represents an index of the


===== Page 20 =====
9.6 Recapitulation 
• 
231
recent spiking history of the cell. Various proteins and enzymes, such as calcium-dependent
potassium channels, might be able to read out this variable and use it to normalize excitability
or for gain control.
While calcium ions themselves play almost no role in generating conventional action
potentials, calcium currents can support a slower all-or-none electrical event, the LT spike,
leading to a burst of fast sodium spikes. It may be possible that these and other forms of
bursts represent events of special significance in the nervous system.
We introduced some of the many potassium currents that have been identified, focusing
on the transient inactivating potassium current /A. It serves to linearize the discharge curve
around threshold and implements a delay element between the onset of depolarizing input
and spike initiation. It does so via a voltage-dependent current whose time constant is
considerably faster than the duration of the delay.
Also important are the calcium-dependent potassium currents, collectively referred to as
/K(Ca)- Calcium ions that move into the cell during the depolarizing phase of the spike turn
on these hyperpolarizing outward currents, rendering subsequent spiking that much more
difficult. That this might have profound significance for the nervous system can be observed
in hippocampus, neocortex, and elsewhere. The release of noradrenaline by brainstem fibers
abolishes spike frequency accommodation, greatly increasing the excitability of these cells.
Interestingly, the effect of blocking only /AHP appears to be specific to increasing the slope
of the cell's /-/ curve, that is, increasing its gain.
We keep on drawing analogies between the operations the nervous system carries out
to process information and digital computers. There are, of course, very deep, conceptual
differences between the two. One is the amazing diversity seen in biology. An /A current
in a neocortical pyramidal cell is not the same as the /A current in hippocampal pyramid
cells or in thalamic relay cells. Each has its own unique activation and inactivation range,
kinetics, and pharmacology, optimized by evolution for its particular role in the survival of
the organism. A case in point appears to be calcium channels. So far, molecular biological
techniques have revealed about a dozen different genes coding for two of the five subunits
of the calcium channel, a number that is likely to increase over time. This provides the
nervous system with the wherewithal to generate a very large number of calcium channels
with different functional properties (Hofmann, Biel, and Flockerzi, 1994). This tremendous
diversity could be necessary to allow each organism to optimize its complement of ionic
currents for its particular operations depending on its particular and unique developmental
history. This is, indeed, very far removed from the way we design and build digital integrated
circuits using a very small library of canonical circuit elements.


