===== Page 1 =====
INPUT RESISTANCE,
TIME CONSTANTS,
AND SPIKE INITIATION
This chapter represents somewhat of a tephnical interlude. Having introduced the reader to
both simplified and more complex compartmental single neuron models, we need to revisit
terrain with which we are already somewhat familiar.
In the following pages we reevaluate two important concepts we defined in the first
few chapters: the somatic input resistance and the neuronal time constant. For passive
systems, both are simple enough variables: Rm is the change in somatic membrane po-
tential in response to a small sustained current injection divided by the amplitude of the
current injection, while Tm is the slowest time constant associated with the exponential
charging or discharging of the neuronal membrane in response to a current pulse or step.
However, because neurons express nonstationary and nonlinear membrane conductances,
the measurement and interpretation of these two variables in active structures is not as
straightforward as before. Having obtained a more sophisticated understanding of these
issues, we will turn toward the question of the existence of a current, voltage, or charge
threshold at which a biophysical faithful model of a cell triggers action potentials. We
conclude with recent work that suggests how concepts from the subthreshold domain, like
the input resistance or the average membrane potential, could be extended to the case in
which the cell is discharging a stream of action potentials.
This chapter is mainly for the cognoscendi or for those of us that need to make sense
of experimental data by comparing therp to theoretical models that usually fail to reflect
reality adequately.
17.1 Measuring Input Resistanpes
In Sec. 3.4, we defined KH (/) for passive cable structures as the voltage change at location
i in response to a sinusoidal current injection of frequency / at the same location. Its
381
17


===== Page 2 =====
382
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
dc component is also referred to as input resistance or R¡n. Three difficulties render this
definition of input resistance problematic in real cells: (1) most membranes, in particular
at the soma, show voltage-dependent nonlinearities, (2) the associated ionic membrane
conductances are time dependent and (3) instrumental aspects, such as the effect of the
impedance of the recording electrode on Rm, add uncertainty to the measuring process.
While we will not deal with the last problem (see Smith et al., 1985 for further information),
we do have to address the first two issues.
In order to gain a better understanding of the input resistance, we need to focus on the
steady-state current-voltage relationship illustrated in Fig. 17.1. I^uc(Vm), or sometimes
simply /oo(Vm), is obtained by clamping the membrane potential at the soma to Vm, letting
the system adapt and measuring the clamp current flowing across the somatic membrane.
Using the standard Hodgkin-Huxley formalism, we can express the clamp current as
(17.1)
where the summation index i includes all conductances, whether or not they are voltage-
dependent (for more details, see Chap. 6). Equation 17.1 does not include an additive term
corresponding to the current flowing into or out of the dendrites. Not surprisingly, and
Fig. 17.1 STATIONARY CURRENT-VOLTAGE RELATIONSHIP Stationary I-V relationship for the
layer 5 pyramidal cell model of Fig. 3.7. Operationally, /^atlc (Vm) is measured by clamping the somatic
membrane potential to Vm, letting the system adapt and measuring the clamp current flowing across
the somatic membrane. The currents to the right of their reversal potentials (indicated by arrows) are
outward going, that is, positive. Thus, for Vm > EK> all potassium currents are positive while for
the entire voltage range shown here, /Na is negative. Typical of excitable cells, the I-V relationship
is highly nonlinear, in particular for depolarizing membrane potentials. It intersects the zero current
axis at three points. The resting potential of this system, specified by the leftmost zero crossing is
Vrest = —65 mV. The chord conductance is defined as the ratio of the current at any holding potential
Vm to the voltage difference between Vm and the resting potential Vrest. For points A, B, and C it
is positive, and for D, negative. The slope conductance is defined as the local tangent to the I-V
curve, that is as the slope of the curve. The slope conductance at A and Β is positive and at C and
D negative. For the linear portion of the /-V curve, the chord conductance is almost identical to the
slope conductance (e.g., point A). The inverse of the slope conductance is usually what is meant by
"input resistance."


===== Page 3 =====
17.1 Measuring Input Resistances 
· 383
different from a linear ohmic resistance, the total somatic membrane current is a nonlinear
function of the membrane potential, in particular for depolarizing values. The resting state
of the cell is given by the leftward (Fig. 17.1) stable zero crossing at —65 mV.
We can better understand Ioo(Vm) in Fig. 17.1 by recalling that for any current that can
be expressed as the product of a driving potential and a conductance, values of Vm to the
left of the associated reversal potential correspond to an inward, that is, negative current.
Conversely, holding the potential to a more depolarized value than the reversal potential
causes an outward (positive) current to flow.
For example, the long slope to the left of Vrest is due to the passive leak conductance
and the anomalous rectifier current /AR, the hump between —65 and —48 mV is caused by
activation of the delayed-rectifier K+ current, and the sharp negative peak around —45 mV
in Fig. 17.1 by /Na- The large outward current at more positive values of Vm is almost
exclusively carried by the noninactivating /DR, overshadowing the inactivating 7Na. This
I-V curve gives us the opportunity to define two quite different conductances.
17.1.1 Membrane Chord Conductance
The steady-state membrane chord conductance is defined as the ratio of the total current
flowing at any particular potential Vm to the applied membrane potential relative to the
resting potential,
(17.2)
The chord conductance derives its name from its construction: conceptually, it can be
obtained by pulling a chord or string between the points, (Vrest. 0) and (Vm, /oo(Vm))·
Physically, the chord conductance tells us about the sign and the absolute value of the total
membrane current flowing at any one potential. If the I-V relationship has several stable
resting points, the chord conductance can be defined around each resting point.
17.1.2 Membrane Slope Conductance
The steady-state membrane slope conductance is defined as the local slope of the I-V
relationship at the operating point Vm,
(for a single compartmental model). Analytically, the slope conductance corresponds to the
linear term in the Taylor series approximation of /^f"0 around Vm. The slope conductance of
the entire membrane consists of the sum of the individual membrane conductances g¡ (Vm)
plus a derivative term to account for the membrane nonlinearities.
When using a current pulse to measure G¡¿atic (Fig. 17.2), one must be careful to wait
long enough until all the slow membrane currents have reached equilibrium.
The Inverse of the Slope Conductance Is the Input Resistance
Because the slope conductance characterizes the response of the membrane current to
small changes in the membrane potential relative to Vm, its inverse is usually what is meant
by input resistance R-m (which is the convention we will follow). Figure 17.2 illustrates this
procedure graphically. Injecting a small current into the soma of the pyramidal cell model
causes the membrane potential to peak before it settles down to its final value. Dividing
(17.3)


===== Page 4 =====
384 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
Fig. 17.2 MEASURING THE INPUT RESISTANCE Somatic membrane potential in response to a
current step of 1-pA amplitude in the pyramidal cell model. At Vrest = —65 m V, the steady-state slope
conductance G?¿atlc = 1/0.0165 = 60.6 nS, corresponding to an input resistance Rm of 16.5 ΜΩ.
The initial overshoot is due to activation and subsequent inactivation of the transient A current.
Blocking /A causes this hump to disappear and increases /?„, to 38 ΜΩ. Reprinted by permission
from Bernander( 1993).
this steady-state change in potential by the injected current gives the input resistance as
16.5 ΜΩ. The hump disappears if the transient A current is blocked. Now the potential
rises smoothly to its final value.
For a linear I—V relationship the second term in Eq. 17.3 disappears and the slope
conductance is equal to the chord conductance and corresponds to 1/ΛΓ;,· (e.g., point A in
Fig. 17.1). In other words, for linear systems these difficulties with the definition of the
input resistance do not arise.
In principle, G^
atic can be measured under either voltage clamp or current clamp. For
instance, to compute the slope conductance at rest, we can inject a small current δ I into the
cell and measure the steady-state voltage change SV (as in Fig. 17.2) or, conversely, we
can clamp the potential from Vrest to a slightly displaced value Vrest ± δ V and measure the
change in clamp current 57. For small enough values of 57 and δΥ, both methods converge
to the same result.
Negative Slope Conductance
Because the magnitude of the second term in Eq. 17.3 can often be much larger than
the first term but of opposite sign, the slope conductance can be negative, zero, or positive.
To understand the significance of this, let us look at the example in Fig. 17.3. At rest, the
slope conductance at the soma is 57 nS. In the presence of excitatory NMDA synaptic
input to the dendritic tree, the soma depolarizes by about 3 mV. Injecting a hyperpolarizing
current to bring the membrane potential back to its resting potential now yields a reduced
slope conductance of 50.3 nS. Quadrupling the amount of NMDA input drops the slope
conductance to 20 nS.
This result appears paradoxical: adding membrane conductance, that is, opening ionic
channels, causes a decrease in the local input conductance. It can be explained in a qualitative
manner by appealing to Eq. 17.3. (We here gloss over the fact that the NMDA synapses in
Fig. 17.3 are distributed throughout the cell, while Eq. 17.3 applies to a single compartment.)


===== Page 5 =====
17.2 Time Constants for Active Systems
385
Fig. 17.3 NEGATIVE SLOPE CONDUCTANCE Activating NMDA synapses can lead to a paradoxical
decrease in the slope conductance d¡oo(Vm)/dVm. At rest, the slope conductance is 57 nS (as
determined by the amplitude of the current step divided by the amplitude of the hyperpolarizing
potential after it has converged at around 500 msec). At t = 700 msec, synaptic input of the NMDA
type that is distributed throughout the dendritic tree is activated, depolarizing the soma by 3 mV
(dashed line). Because this shift in the potential activates or inactivates some of the voltage-dependent
somatic conductances, confounding the measurement of d!co(Vm)/dVm, the potential is brought back
with the help of a hyperpolarizing clamp current (solid line). Repeating the current pulse experiment
reveals a slope conductance of 50.3 nS, even though the total membrane conductance has increased
with activation of the NMDA synapses.
The first term corresponds to the total amount of NMDA conductance added. This positive
term is overwhelmed by the [dg¡(Vm)/dVm](Vm 
— E¡) term. Due to the negative slope
region of the NMDA receptor (see Fig. 4.8A) and the reversal potential E¡ = 0, this term
is negative and dominates the total conductance in this voltage regime. We shall promptly
discuss the relevance of the slope conductance to the spiking threshold.
In our discussion of input conductance, we neglected any temporal aspects of the I—
V relationship. Both chord as well as slope conductances can also be defined for the
instantaneous I—V relationship or for any other point in time. (For more details see the
discussion in Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975.)
17.2 Time Constants for Active Systems
The membrane time constant tm is a widely used measure of the dynamics of neurons. For
a single RC compartment or an infinite, homogeneous cable, rm is simply RC. But—as
discussed at length in Sec. 3.6.1—complexities arise when one considers extended passive
structures. In general, for a passive compartmental model of a cell, a finite number of distinct
equalizing time constants τ; can be defined (Eq. 3.49).
These can be evaluated directly, without solving the cable equation, by efficient matrix
inversion techniques (see Appendix C; Perkel, Mulloney, and Budelli, 1981). Usually, it is
difficult to infer more than the first two or three (at best) of these time constants from the
voltage record (e.g., Fig. 3.12). The amplitude and distribution of these time constants are
related in interesting ways to the neuronal geometry and its possible symmetries. (For a


===== Page 6 =====
386
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
detailed discussion see Rail and Segev, 1985; Rail et al., 1992; Holmes, Segev, and Rail,
1992; Major, Evans, and Jack, 1993a,b; Major, 1993.)
A more problematic issue is the fact that real neurons show a passive response only under
very limited conditions. Usually, one or more voltage-dependent membrane conductances
are activated around Vrest· For instance, a mixed Na+/K+ current /AR becomes activated
upon hyperpolarization, counter to the action of most other conductances which activate
upon depolarization. The action of this anomalous or inward rectifier (Chap. 9) is to
reduce jR¡n and Tm as the membrane is hyperpolarized (e.g., Spruston and Johnston, 1992).
Figure 17.4 illustrates this in an exemplary way in an intracellular recording from a
superficial pyramidal cell (Major, 1992). Hyperpolarizing the membrane potential from
—62 to —112 mV reduces the slowest decay time constants by a factor of 3 (from 21.5 to
6.9 msec) and the input resistance by a factor of 2 (from 88.7 to 37.1 ΜΩ).
One possibility for obtaining the "true" value of the voltage-independent components
would be to block all contaminating ionic currents by the judicious use of pharmacological
channel blockers. Yet this hardly corresponds to the natural situation of a neuron receiving
synaptic input.
The problem is, of course, that one cannot associate a single time constant with an
active voltage-dependent membrane. Most researchers neglect this observation and fit an
exponential to portions of the voltage tail of the cell's response to small current pulses
(Fig. 17.4; lansek and Redman, 1973; Durand et al., 1983; Rail et al., 1992). This yields
Fig. 17.4 VARIABLE MEMBRANE TIME CONSTANT Experimental record from a layer 2 pyramidal
cell in the visual cortex of a rat brain slice taken by a sharp intracellular electrode. Shown is the
membrane potential in response to a very short current pulse on a semilogarithmic scale at four
different holding potentials. The solid lines correspond to the voltages reconstructed by "peeling" the
experimental waveforms (Sec. 3.6.1). As the membrane is depolarized from —62 to —112 mV, the
slowest decay—corresponding to rm—decreases from 21.5 to 6.9 msec, a reduction by a factor of 3.
This fact makes the exact determination of a passive time constant difficult. Reprinted by permission
from Major (1992).
t (msec)


===== Page 7 =====
17.3 Action Potential Generation and the Question of Threshold 
· 387
estimates of rm of between 14 and 16 msec for the pyramidal cell model at rest, matching the
observed time constant of 23 msec for this cell recorded in the anesthetized cat reasonably
well. In the following chapter we will study how up or down regulating the synaptic input
can change τη by an order of magnitude or more.
17.3 Action Potential Generation and the Question of Threshold
Throughout the previous chapters, we always assumed that the criterion for spike initiation
is that the membrane potential exceeds a particular threshold value. To what extent is this
simple assumption warranted? After all, it could well be possible that the threshold needs
to be breached within a certain time window or that even further conditions, such as a
minimal current, need to be fulfilled. We will now investigate this question in more detail
for a membrane patch model. The more involved question of threshold generation in active
cable structures is picked up in Chap. 19.
But first a preamble dealing with the instantaneous current-voltage relationship and
related matters. Much of this section is based on material from Noble and Stein (1966) and
Koch, Bernander, and Douglas (1995).
17.3.1 Current-Voltage Relationship
In order to understand under what conditions the cell can be thought of as having a voltage
or a current threshold, we need to reconsider the steady-state current-voltage relationship
I^
tic(Vm) (Fig. 17.1) as well as the momentary or instantaneous I—V curve, denoted
by /o(Vm) (Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Fig. 17.5). Numerically, this is obtained by
instantaneously moving the somatic membrane potential from its resting value to a new value
and assuming that all active conductances remain unchanged with the notable exception
of the fast sodium activation particle m. Given the very fast time constant of sodium
activation, m is practically always at equilibrium with respect to the voltage, while all
other conductances have not had time to change from their values at Vrest.
In the subthreshold domain, both the steady-state and the instantaneous curves have very
similar shapes. For the pyramidal cell model of Fig. 3.7, both currents possess the same
intersection with the zero current axis at VKst, are outward (positive) for more depolarized
potentials, and become negative around —48 mV. However, the steady-state current quickly
becomes positive again, attaining very large values. This large outward current is almost
exclusively carried by the noninactivating delayed rectifying potassium current, /DR, which
overshadows the inactivating /Na- Conversely, the instantaneous current remains negative
until it reverses close to the sodium reversal potential of 50 mV. This current is dominated
by /Na, though with increasing depolarization the driving potential of the potassium currents
and the anomalous rectifier current increase while the driving potential of Ι^Ά decreases.
17.3.2 Stability of the Membrane Voltage
If the transient activation and inactivation of currents throughout the dendritic tree are
neglected, the firing behavior of the cell can be defined by the nonlinear and stationary I—V
curve, / = /^,
atlc(Fm) (Fig. 17.5) in parallel with a membrane capacity. If a current /ciamp
is injected into this circuit,
(17.4)


===== Page 8 =====
388 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
A)
Fig. 17.5 STEADY-STATE AND INSTANTANEOUS CURRENT-VOLTAGE CURVES 
(A) Somatic mem-
brane potential Vm was voltage clamped and the steady-state current /^*
nc(Vm) (same as in Fig. 17.1)
at the soma of the pyramidal cell was recorded. The instantaneous I—V curve /o(V m) is obtained by
instantaneously displacing the membrane potential from VKSt to Vm and measuring the initial current.
All somatic membrane conductances retain the values they had at Vrest, with the sole exception of the
fast sodium activation process—due to its very fast time constant (50 μ&κ) we assume that it reaches
its steady-state value at Vm. Note the very large amplitudes of /o (due to /Na activation) and /^
atic
(due to /DR activation), /o crosses over close to the reversal potential for /Na. (B) Detail of A in the
vicinity of the resting potential and spike threshold. Both curves reverse at VKst. The slope of /^f"
0
corresponds to the input (slope) conductance rest. Both curves cross zero at around —48 mV. The
amplitude of /oo(Vm) at the local peak around —54 mV represents the current threshold !& for spike
initiation, while the location of the middle zero crossing of IQ corresponds to the voltage threshold
Vth for spike initiation (indicated by the thin stippled area). Reprinted by permission from Koch,
Bernander, and Douglas (1995).
determines the dynamics of the somatic membrane potential. Different from the phase
space models treated in Chap. 7, this system has a single independent variable Vm and the
associated phase space consists of a line. Its equilibrium points are defined by /ciamp =
I^
tlc(Vm). In the absence of an externally injected current, these are given by the zero
crossings of Fig. 17.1. However, not all of these points are stable. In a manner analogous
to Sec. 7.1.2, we analyze their stability by considering small variations of the membrane
potential 8V around these singular points Vm. This leads to
(17.5)


===== Page 9 =====
17.3 Action Potential Generation and the Question of Threshold 
· 389
In other words, in regions where the slope conductance dI^ÍK/dV is positive, the dynamics
follow an equation of the type 8V — — aáV (with a > 0) and the system will settle
down to the equilibrium point (that is, 8V —> 0). Under steady-state conditions, /^,atlc
shows three zero crossings, one at Vrestj one around —48.5 mV, and one at —43 mV.
The slope at the leftmost zero crossing is positive, implying that Vm at Vrest is stable to
small perturbations. Displacing the system by δ V > 0 away from Vrest causes a positive,
outward ionic current to flow, a current that will drive the membrane potential back to Vrest.
Conversely, a hyperpolarizing deflection will lead to an inward current that will tend to
repolarize the soma.
By the same logic, the second equilibrium point at —48.5 mV is not stable. If the
membrane is displaced by &Vm < 0 away from this point, a positive, outward current
will flow, causing the membrane potential to decrease and to move further from this zero
crossing until the system comes to rest at Vrest. If δ Vm > 0, an inward current will flow,
which further depolarizes the system. Since the smallest voltage perturbation will carry Vm
away from this zero crossing, this point is unstable.
The rightmost zero crossing at —43 mV is never attained under physiological conditions,
since for these values of Vm, /^
atic lies in a realm of phase space not accessible to the system
under normal conditions.
17.3.3 Voltage Threshold
To understand the origin of the voltage threshold, we make use of very simple considerations
discussed more fully in Noble and Stein (1966) and Jack, Noble, and Tsien (1975). We
assume that the somatic membrane receives a rapid and powerful current input caused, for
instance, by numerous highly synchronized excitatory synaptic inputs (as in Fig. 17.6A)
and we neglect the extended cable structure of the neuron.
This has the effect of charging up the membrane capacitance very rapidly, thereby
displacing the voltage to a new value without, at first, affecting any other parameters of the
system. In the limit of an infinitely fast input, the system moves along the instantaneous
I—V curve /Q. If the input is small enough and displaces the potential to between Vrest and
—48 mV, /o will be outward, driving the membrane potential toward less depolarized values
and ultimately back to Vrest- This voltage trajectory corresponds to a subthreshold EPSP.
If, however, the input pulse takes Vm instantaneously beyond the zero crossing at
—48 mV, /o becomes negative, driving the membrane to more depolarized values. In
a positive feedback loop, this will further increase the inward current. The net effect
is that the membrane depolarizes very rapidly: the membrane generates an action po-
tential (Fig. 17.6B). Because during this time the other membrane currents will have
started to change, /o can no longer be used to determine the subsequent fate of the
potential. Nonetheless, the zero crossing of the instantaneous I—V curve determines the
voltage value at which the membrane is able to generate sufficient current to drive the
action potential without further applied current. We therefore identify this zero crossing
of the instantaneous I—V curve with the voltage threshold for spike initiation Vth (about
-48 mV).
Our argument predicts that any somatic current—whether delivered via an electrode
or via synaptic input—that is sufficiently fast and powerful to depolarize the somatic
membrane beyond V^ will initiate an action potential. We confirmed this by plotting in
Fig. 17.6A the somatic potential Vm(t) in response to rapid, synchronized synaptic input
to the dendritic tree that is sufficient to fire the cell at a brisk rate of 21 Hz. Figure 17.6B
shows a single spike in response to a brief but strong current pulse injected directly into


===== Page 10 =====
390 · INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
Fig. 17.6 DIFFERENT PATHS TO SPIKE INITIATION Generation of a somatic spike in the pyramidal
cell model can occur in different ways, depending on the dynamics of the input. (A) Somatic voltage
trace in response to random synaptic input to the dendritic tree. 100 fast (ip^ = 0.5 msec) AMPA
synapses fired synchronously according to a Poisson process at a rate of 75 Hz. The current /soma
delivered by this synchronized synaptic input to the cell body is plotted at the bottom. This current
was measured by clamping the soma to VKSt and measuring the clamp current. Even though /&
is frequently transiently exceeded by a large amount, the somatic membrane potential is usually
not sufficiently depolarized to exceed Vy, and initiate a spike. The variability in the amplitude
of the EPSCs derives from the fact that following each synchronized synaptic event, a new set
of 100 excitatory synapses is randomly chosen. A single action potential in response to (B) a
0.2-msec 10-nA current pulse (indicated in the lower trace) and (C) a sustained current step. For
^ciamp = 0.29 nA the potential levels out at —56.5 mV, while for 0.31 nA a spike occurs with a delay
of 1 sec. The first two plots demonstrate conditions under which action potentials are generated if a
voltage threshold Vth is exceeded, while the last plot corresponds to a paradigm where spike initiation
occurs if a current threshold 7t|, is exceeded. Reprinted by permission from Koch, Bernander, and
Douglas (1995).


===== Page 11 =====
17.3 Action Potential Generation and the Question of Threshold
391
the soma. Careful inspection of both voltage trajectories indicates that each and every time
Vm (t) reaches Vth = ~~48 mV, an action potential is initiated (see dotted lines and the arrow
in Fig. 17.6A, B).
Figure 17.6A reveals that many somatic EPSPs fail to trigger spikes. This fact can
be exploited to operationalize the voltage threshold by histogramming the peak values of
subthreshold somatic EPSPs. If spike initiation truly occurs at Vth, such a histogram should
show peak EPSP amplitudes up to Vth, followed by an abrupt absence of any local maxima
in Vm until, at high values, the peak voltages of the action potential itself appear. This is
exactly the distribution seen in Fig. 17.7, with a complete lacuna of any local peaks in the
somatic membrane potential between —48.5 and +20 mV.
This histogram was obtained using rapid synaptic input. Slow1 synaptic input will not
lead to such a crisp threshold. Experimentally, using rapid and powerful synaptic input that
hovers around threshold should optimize the conditions for detecting a voltage threshold
using this technique.
17.3.4 Current Threshold
Figure 17.6C illustrates a different path along which spikes can be initiated. If a small,
sustained current /damp of 0.29 nA current is injected into the soma, the somatic membrane
potential responds with a slight overshoot, due to the activation and subsequent inactivation
of the transient A current, before settling to a steady-state somatic potential (at —56.5 mV).
Increasing /damp by 20 pA is sufficient to initiate an action potential 1 sec after the onset of
the current input. The extended delay between input and spike is primarily caused by /A,
as shown by Connor and Stevens (1971a,b,c). As a consequence, the cell can spike at very
low frequencies (Fig. 9.7).
Fig. 17.7 OPERATIONALIZED DEFINITION OF A VOLTAGE THRESHOLD 
The pyramidal cell model
was bombarded for 20 sec with fast excitatory synaptic input (of the type shown in Fig. 17.6A, with
the cell firing at 21 Hz) and the amplitude of the local maxima of the somatic membrane potential
histogrammed. The three peaks correspond to the noisy synaptic background around Vrest = —65 mV
(leftmost peak), synchronized EPSPs that failed to elicit action potentials (central peak), and action
potentials (rightmost peak). The maximum value of the central hump is —48.6 mV, providing a
convenient way in which the voltage threshold Vth can be measured. Reprinted by permission from
Koch, Bernander, and Douglas (1995).
1. Fast and slow is always relative to the dynamics of the large sodium current determining spike initiation.


===== Page 12 =====
392 
. 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
From an operational point of view, if the current delivered to the somatic membrane varies
very slowly, the membrane can be thought of as having a current threshold /a, = 0.295 nA.
To explain this, we turn to the steady-state I—V plot in Fig. 17.5. Injecting a sustained and
depolarizing current step of amplitude /ciamp into the soma corresponds to shifting the I^tic
curve downward by an equal amount. If /damp is small, the principal effect of this is to
move the location of the zero crossings of I^tK. In particular, the leftmost zero crossing—
and therefore the new somatic resting potential— shifts to the right and the middle zero
crossing shifts to the left. At a critical value of /damp* labeled /m, the two zero crossings
merge. At this point the system still has an equilibrium point. If the current is increased
any further, this portion of the /¿£atlc curve drops below zero and loses its equilibrium. The
inward current generated by the system forces the membrane to depolarize, driving Vm
toward E^a and initiating an action potential. In fact, for sustained current injections the
membrane has no stable equilibrium point, displaying instead a stable limit cycle: as long as
the suprathreshold current persists, the membrane generates a series of spikes. From these
considerations we predict that the current threshold corresponds to the local maximum of
the /oo curve, here equal to 0.295 nA, very close to the value obtained by integrating the
appropriate equations (Fig. 17.6C).
Note that the steady-state somatic membrane potential at which threshold current is
reached (about —54.2 mV) is different from Vth because of the nonlinear and nonstationary
somatic membrane. In a linear and stationary system, such as in integrate-and-fire models
(Eq. 14.9) a linear relationship holds between the two,
(17.6)
17.3.5 Charge Threshold
Hodgkin and Rushton (1946; see also Noble and Stein, 1966) proposed that the threshold
condition for the excitation of a cable is that a constant amount of charge gth be applied.
Is this true for our cell?
When a significant amount of current—either from synaptic input or from a micro-
electrode—is very rapidly delivered to the cell body, the voltage change will primarily
be determined by the capacitive current, since the membrane currents take time to change.
Under these conditions, the cell should also show a charge threshold. In order to understand
this, let us follow a train of thought laid out by Noble and Stein (1966). Because we
are considering rapid events, the steady-state I-V in Eq. 17.4 must be replaced by the
instantaneous I-V curve:
(17.7)
(as before, we here neglect the dendritic tree). By rearranging and integrating with respect
to voltage, we obtain an expression for how long the current step has to be applied (from
Vrest = 0) until the voltage threshold has been reached,
(17.8)
The integration can be carried out for any I-V relationship that does not depend on time,
such as /o or /<*, (Fig. 17.5). If for short times, the injected current /damp is much bigger
than the subthreshold ionic currents /o (on the order of 1 nA or larger; see Figs. 17.5A and
17.6), /o can be neglected. The total charge delivered by a step current of amplitude /damp
and duration T^ is


===== Page 13 =====
17.3 Action Potential Generation and the Question of Threshold
393
(17-9)
Put differently, for short, intense stimuli, a constant charge 2th must be supplied to the
capacitance in order to reach threshold (Noble and Stein, 1966).
We numerically evaluate this for a reduced one-compartment model of the pyramidal
cell (Koch, Bernander, and Douglas, 1995) as well as for the full model by injecting 7clamp
current into the soma and recording the duration of the pulse rpuise necessary to generate an
action potential. This threshold charge is plotted in Fig. 17.8 as a function of the amplitude
of the injected current step. For the one-compartment model Q starts out high but decreases
rapidly and saturates at Q^ = 7.65 pC.
If a 7.65 pC charge is placed onto a 0.508 nF capacitance (its value in the one-
compartment model), the potential changes by 15.1 mV, very close to W We conclude
that in a single-compartment active model, a charge and a voltage threshold both imply the
same thing: for rapid input the cell spikes whenever the input current dumps gth charge
onto the capacitance, bringing the membrane potential to Vti,. The existence of a charge
threshold immediately implies an inverse relationship between the amplitude of the applied
current and TU,. It is known that both the Hodgkin-Huxley equations for a clamped axon and
the actual space-clamped giant squid axon membrane give rise to such a strength-duration
curve (Hagiwara and Oomura, 1958; Cooley and Dodge, 1966; Noble and Stein, 1966).
This simple story becomes more complicated when we repeat the same experiment in
the 400 compartment model (Fig. 17.8). The amount of charge delivered by the electrode
that is necessary for the cell to spike decreases monotonically with increasing current. It
only flattens out for unphysiologically large amplitudes. Under these conditions, no single
Fig. 17.8 Is THERE A CHARGE THRESHOLD FOR SPIKING? Relationship between the charge gth
injected by a current pulse of constant amplitude /c|amp and duration rpuise necessary for spiking to
occur. For a single-compartment model of the pyramidal cell (where the effect of the entire passive
dendritic tree is mimicked by adjusting the capacitance and the leak resistance at the soma), gth rapidly
reaches an asymptote (solid line). That is, for moderately strong current inputs a spike is initiated
whenever the limiting charge gth is delivered to the capacitance; this charge obeys gth = CVth- In
other words, for a single compartment the existence of the voltage threshold for spiking is equivalent
to a charge threshold. For weaker inputs more charge is required. No such constant threshold condition
is observed for the full pyramidal cell model (dashed line). Due to the presence of the distributed
capacitances in the dendritic tree, action potential initiation does not obey a charge threshold condition.


===== Page 14 =====
394 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
equation governing the evolution of the somatic membrane potential can be written because
of the presence of the many equalization time constants between the soma and the dendritic
compartments. Only if the current injection is very large, with the associated very short
durations <0.05 msec, can one neglect the dendritic capacitance and observe a fixed Qt\,.
We conclude that in any cell with a substantial dendritic tree, the occurrence of an action
potential is not caused by the charge at the spike initiating zone exceeding some fixed
threshold value.
17.3.6 Voltage versus Current Threshold
An advocatus diaboli might argue that the cell always possesses a voltage threshold, with
the value of this threshold increasing from —48 mV for very fast inputs to —54.2 mV for
slow ones. Yet in our eyes a single, but variable threshold is conceptually less elegant than
two fixed but different thresholds (V¡h and7Λ). Furthermore, given the very broad, local
peak of /^,
atic in Fig. 17.5B, Vih is ill defined, in particular in the face of ever existing noise.
As we will see in the following chapter, the number of simultaneously activated somatic
EPSPs needed to trigger a spike is within 10% of the number predicted based on Vth· As
long as the synaptic current delivered to the soma 7soma has a fast rise time compared to
the activation and inactivation time constants of all the somatic currents with the exception
of sodium activation (that is, on the order of 1 msec) and is powerful enough to displace
Vm past Vth, the cell will spike. To what extent synaptic input approximates such behavior
or can be better described by a slowly varying current input under in vivo physiological
conditions depends on many factors beyond the scope of this chapter.
We are not arguing that every neuron must have I-V curves that are qualitatively similar
to the ones in our model of a pyramidal cell. For instance, the steady-state I—V curve for
the Hodgkin-Huxley membrane patch model is a monotonically increasing function of Vm
with no local maxima (Fig. 6.9A). In this case I^
tlc(Vm~) cannot be used to predict /a,. The
instantaneous I-V curve /o of a patch of squid axon around rest (Fig. 6.6) does, on the
other hand, look qualitatively similar to the /o(Vm) curve of the pyramidal cell and so can
be used to estimate in a qualitative manner Vth (see Sec. 6.3.1).
17.4 Action Potential
We would be remiss if, after this extensive discussion of the conditions under which
spikes can be initiated, we would not describe the action potential itself. Its form is highly
stereotypical, with little variation from one spike to the next (Fig. 17.6). The spike amplitude
from threshold at —49 mV to the peak at 30 mV is about 80 mV, and the full width at half
height is 0.9 msec. These numbers compare favorably with experimentally recorded spikes
from slice and in vivo (Bindman and Prince, 1983; Spain Schwindt, and drill, 1990, 1991;
Hirsch and Gilbert, 1991; Pockberger, 1991). The rapid upstroke during the initial part of
the action potential, on the order of several hundred millivolts per millisecond, is caused by
the sodium-mediated inward current charging up the membrane capacitance. The smaller
the capacitance (as, for instance, in small cells) or the larger the density of fast, sodium
channels, the faster the upstroke and, ultimately, the steeper the slope of the discharge
curve. Ultimately, it is the amplitude of the upstroke that limits the speed with which action
potentials can be generated.
Two ionic currents are the primary culprits in generating and shaping the action potential.
The largest is the current supporting the action potential itself 7Na peaking at 70 nA. Due to


===== Page 15 =====
17.5 Repetitive Spiking
395
adaptation, peak /Na for consecutive spikes is reduced to 50 nA. The second largest current
is the delayed-rectifier potassium current, /DR coming in at 23 nA. The gargantuan size of
these two ionic currents, compared to anything the synapses in the dendritic tree can deliver
to the soma, explains the almost complete independence of the shape of the action potential
to the way in which the spike was triggered. The total calcium current flowing is miniscule
compared to /Na- Its primary function is not to drive the action potential itself but to activate
calcium-dependent potassium currents controlling adaptation.
17.5 Repetitive Spiking
Until now, we have only considered the events leading to a single action potential. Yet,
cells usually spike repeatedly. The response of the full pyramidal cell model to a sustained
current injection is shown in Fig. 17.9. Similar to the modified Morris-Lecar equations
(Eqs. 7.16 and 7.17; see also Figs. 7.10 and 7.11) and different from the squid giant axon,
the pyramidal cell model can fire at very low frequencies: injecting 0.31 nA of sustained
current causes the cell to spike about once every second. The current responsible for these
very long interspike intervals is the inactivating potassium current /A (Connor and Stevens,
1971a,b,c; Getting, 1989; for a detailed discussion see Fig. 9.7 and related text). Due to its
hyperpolarizing reversal potential, this potassium current reduces the evoked depolarization
(see the bump in Fig. 17.2). Because 7A inactivates with increasing depolarization, different
from the large, delayed rectifier potassium current, it gradually decreases in size, enabling
Vm to slowly creep upward until threshold is reached.
17.5.1 Discharge Curve
If the input is powerful enough to trigger two or more spikes, the firing frequency adapts
within 50 msec to between one-half and one-third of its initial value. Adaptation can be
J<ig. 17.9 REPETITIVE 1 IRING Generation of several action potentials in the pyramidal cell model
in response to sustained current injections at the cell body. The minimum current step that evokes a
spike, rheobase, is 7th = 0.295 nA. Injecting 0.4 nA evokes repetitive spikes with very long interspike
intervals, caused by the presence of the transient 7A current. At higher spiking frequencies, the firing
adapts due to the calcium-dependent potassium currents. The voltage curves are shifted for viewing
purposes. No noise has been simulated, approximating the situation one would encounter in cultured
cells. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Bernander (1993).


===== Page 16 =====
396 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
visualized as reducing the gain of the /-/ curve (Fig. 17.10A; see also Fig. 14.2C). As
discussed in Sec. 9.2.2, it is caused by one or more calcium-dependent potassium currents,
acting as a sustained negative input that offsets the positive current delivered via the
electrode. At a very low spiking frequency, no adaptation occurs since [Ca
2+],· decays
to its resting levels prior to the next occurrence of a spike.
The curve for the first ISI shows a biphasic shape. Initially, the slope is low from /a, to
around 0.6 nA (primary slope). For larger input currents the slope is much larger (secondary
slope). This portion of the /-/ curve can be fitted rather well by a logarithmic relationship
between / and / (Figs. 6.10 and 17.10A), as first observed for the uniformly polarized
Hodgkin-Huxley equations (Agin, 1964). The firing frequency associated with the second
ISI displays a very similar pattern, except that the primary slope spans a larger current range.
Though the shape of the adapted /-/ curve in Fig. 17.10A appears deceptively linear,
the slope varies by more than a factor of 2. Figure 17.10A shows the linear fit:
/ = 49.5 ·(/-0.22) 
(17.10)
with the constant of proportionality corresponding to about 50 spikes per second per
nanoampere of injected current, in good agreement with experimental in vitro (Mason
and Larkman, 1990) and in vivo (Jagadeesh, Gray, and Ferster, 1992) observations in cat
cortex. The figure also shows a logarithmic fit,
/ = 75-(In 7 + 0.59). 
(17.11)
This fit is somewhat more accurate, except at very low input currents. While the difference
between these two fits may seem negligible, the logarithmic fit will be more useful in the
following.
Note that the discharge curve does not show any strong evidence of saturation in the
firing frequency, a saturation that is a key property of almost all nonlinear neural network
models. It is in any case unclear from where, under physiological conditions, synaptic
currents greater than 2 nA would originate.
17.5.2 Membrane Potential during Spiking Activity
How can the somatic membrane potential be characterized while the system is spiking
repeatedly, that is, moving along its stable attractor? A very useful heuristic measure is the
time-averaged somatic membrane potential
(17.12)
where Τ includes several interspike intervals in response to a sustained current 7. In order to
avoid the confounding effects of adaptation, (V m) should be evaluated only after adaptation
is complete. Plotting (V m) as a function of 7 (solid curve in Fig. 17.10B) results in a curve
with a linear relationship close to the resting potential, whose inverse slope is identical to
the cell's input conductance.
Conceptually—as well as by visual inspection—this curve naturally falls into two
sections. Below the point at which the cell ceases to spike and the curve shows a cusp, that is,
for 7 < 7th, it becomes identical to the inverse of the steady-state 7-V curve (Fig. 17.5B).
The portion of the (Vm) versus 7 curve that lies beyond 7th shows two remarkable features.
Firstly, the dynamic range of (Vm) over the physiological range of input currents is small.


===== Page 17 =====
17.5 Repetitive Spiking · 397
Fig. 17.10 DISCHARGE CURVE AND AVERAGED MEMBRANE POTENTIAL 
Characterization of
the firing behavior of the pyramidal cell model. (A) Discharge curve computed as the inverse of
the first, second, and fully adapted interspike intervals (solid) as a function of the amplitude of the
current step (see also Fig. 14.2C). Linear (dotted) and logarithmic (dashed) fits are shown for the
steady-state curve (Eqs. 17.10 and 17.11). (B) Introducing the averaged somatic membrane potential
(Vm) = (l/T)f0 
Vm (i)dt enables the definition of a dynamic l-V relationship between a sustained
input current and (V m) (solid line). For / < 7th, this curve coincides with the conventionally defined
inverse of the /^j" lc( Vm) curve (Fig. 17.5). The dashed curve is a logarithmic fit, indicating a diodelike
relationship between the average membrane voltage and the current. (C) Relationship between (Vm)
and the output spike frequency. Remarkably, the total dynamic range of (Vm) is only about 12 mV for
physiological firing frequencies. The dashed line indicates the best linear fit (Eq. J7.15). Reprinted
by permission from Koch, Bernander, and Douglas (1995).


===== Page 18 =====
398 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
As the adapted output spike frequency / ranges from 5 to 150 Hz, (Vm) is confined to a
fairly limited range of about 12 mV. Secondly, the upper portion of the curve can be fitted
very well by a logarithmic relationship, except for the "hook" around 7th (dashed curve in
Fig. 17.10B).
This relationship can also be viewed with {Vm) as the independent variable. From this
perspective, the current / can be thought of as a cumulative spike current, and the I-
(Vm) curve as a dynamic I-V relationship /cJnanuc({Vm}) (dynamic because the somatic
membrane potential travels on a stable limit cycle in response to the sustained input) that
reverses at Vrest· /c»namic({ Vm)) is quite distinct from /^,atlc(Vm). In the latter, the membrane
potential is clamped to Vm and the current flowing at this voltage is evaluated, while in the
dynamic case, a sustained current is injected while the membrane is left free to spike. The
dynamic I-V curve is relatively straightforward to measure experimentally.
The logarithmic relationship implies a diodelike behavior, with the current depending
exponentially on the average membrane potential,
(17.13)
(where Vm is expressed in units of millivolts; dashed line in Fig. 17.10B). In analogy
to the steady-state slope conductance G?^'10 (Eq. 17.3), we can define the dynamic input
conductance as
(17.14)
(Fig. 17.1 IB). The cumulative effect of all currents active during spiking resembles a
voltage-gated hyperpolarizing conductance that shunts large input currents, thereby stabiliz-
ing the membrane potential. In the absence of this "spike" current the membrane would de-
polarize to much higher values. For instance, with an input conductance of G^K = 60.6 nS
at Vrest, a 2 nA injected current step should depolarize the membrane to —34 mV in the
absence of any active currents, while the actual potential (Vm) is approximately —48 mV.
We conclude that the dynamic conductance (7.^naimc acts similarly to an imperfect voltage
clamp, providing a stable sink for currents originating in the dendrites, a rather unusual way
to look at the spike generation mechanism (Koch, Bernander, and Douglas, 1995).
Finally, we can combine the logarithmic relationship between injected current and firing
frequency (Eq. 17.11) with the exponential dependence of /spike on (Vm) (Eq. 17.13) to
arrive at a linear relationship between the averaged membrane potential and the firing
frequency,
(17.15)
This relationship is useful for analog electronic circuit implementation of neurons (Ma-
howald and Douglas, 1991; Douglas, Mahowald, and Mead, 1995), since it allows one to
interpret the membrane potential across some transistor as an effective firing frequency
without adding additional circuitry to implement some output nonlinearity. As can be seen
in Fig. 17.IOC, the true spike frequency curve (as ascertained from the simulations) lies
above Eq. 17.15 for small firing frequencies. Before concluding, several remarks pertinent
to the definitions of these dynamics variables are in order.
1. The low-pass nature of the dendritic tree, caused by the distributed capacitance, will
filter out the high-frequency components associated with the rapid up and down swing


===== Page 19 =====
17.5 Repetitive Spiking · 399
Fig. 17.11 DYNAMIC DISCHARGE CURVE 
Time-averaged membrane potential (Vm> permits the
introduction of a dynamic I-V curve as the relationship between the average somatic membrane
potential in the full pyramidal cell model and the total current flowing across the somatic membrane.
(A) The static I-V curve is computed under voltage clamp by measuring the clamp current and
its dynamic counterpart under current clamp (it is the inverse of the curve in Fig. 17.10B). In the
subthreshold regime I < 7,h the two curves coincide (labeled /oo). (B) The sustained and dynamic
somatic input conductances as a function of Vm or (V m) defined as the slopes of the I-V curves in A.
For V < Va,, Gfn
ynamic = G?¿atic. The dynamic input conductance allows the introduction of a time
constant that characterizes how rapidly the adapted firing rate responds to new input. Reprinted by
permission from Koch, Bemander, and Douglas (1995).
of the action potentials as they propagate from the soma into the apical tree. Thus, {Vm)
is qualitatively closer to the membrane potential seen by dendritic sites than Vm (t). Also,
slowly activating or inactivating conductances do not care about rapid fluctuations in
Vm, but are responsive to a low-pass filtered or average potential.
2. /cJnami°((Vm}), in combination with the cell's discharge curve, leads to a linear rela-
tionship between the average membrane potential (Vm) and the firing rate in the fully
adapted case (Eq. 17.15).


===== Page 20 =====
400 
· 
INPUT RESISTANCE, TIME CONSTANTS, AND SPIKE INITIATION
3. The time-averaging technique discussed here represents one way in which the dynamics
of a complex neuron can be reduced to the mean-field dynamics of the standard neural
network unit (Sec. 14.4). It is not advisable to use (V m) when considering fast events
that depend on the exact timing (e.g., fast dendritic spikes discussed in Sec. 19.3).
4. The ratio of the membrane capacitance and (j.^
namic
 can be thought of as a dynamic
time constant tdynamic. It is a measure of how rapidly the averaged membrane potential,
and therefore the firing rate, can vary in response to a change in /S0ma· As can be seen
in Fig. 17.1 IB, if sufficient current is injected for the cell to fire in a sustained manner
at 65 Hz, (Vm) — -50 mV, increasing G^
naimc by about a factor of 4 relative to rest.
This implies that the effective time constant of the cell has decreased to about 4 msec.
Due to the presence of the many membrane conductances generating and modulating
action potentials, the firing rate can respond much faster to a rapid increase in /S0ma than
suggested by the conventional definition of rm. For higher firing rates, Tdynamic can be
close to 2 msec, implying that neurons can respond at the millisecond or faster scale
(Softky, 1994). Whether cells make use of this very high bandwidth is another matter.
Our enthusiasm for such a new measure must be tempered by two considerations. First,
the /o^
nanuc({Vm}) curve is defined for the adapted firing frequency, and adaptation takes
between 20 and 100 msec to occur. A second difficulty is that raynamic is defined for a fictive,
continuous firing rate and for a constant current input. This is a meaningless quantity on
a time scale less than the interspike interval. This sampling problem renders the exact
definition of a time course problematic at very low firing frequencies.
17.6 Recapitulation
This chapter treated the characterization of a nonlinear and nonstationary neuron from the
point of view of the soma on the basis of two measures: the relationship between the current
flowing across the somatic membrane and the voltage and the local slope of such an I—
V curve. The inverse of this last variable is the slope or input resistance. The traditional
/—V curve I^
tic(Vm) is defined under voltage clamp conditions: the voltage is fixed and
the current flowing at this voltage is recorded. The local peak around Vrest defines the
minimal current 7th necessary to initiate spiking. Under the assumption that the activation
and inactivation variables of the voltage-dependent currents change much more slowly than
the activation m(t) of the sodium current, it is possible to define an instantaneous current-
voltage curve /o(Vm). (Conceptually, this can be measured by yanking the membrane
potential from Vrest to Vm and instantaneously recording the resulting membrane current.)
Stability considerations of the sort explored in Chap. 7 dictate that the zero crossing of /o,
if the slope is negative, corresponds to the voltage Vth that needs to be exceeded for a spike
to occur.
We conclude that fast and powerful versus sustained but peri-threshold stimuli define
two different threshold conditions: in the first case Vm must exceed Vth while in the latter
case 7soma must exceed /th. The larger the current delivered to the soma by a synaptic input,
the faster Vth can be reached and the sooner the cell spikes. This process is not limited by τ
but by the amplitude of the upstroke of the action potential (that is, by the amout of sodium
current and the somatic capacitance). For cells with no or little distributed capacitances,
that is, with small dendritic trees, a voltage threshold is equivalent to a charge threshold, in


===== Page 21 =====
17.6 Recapitulation · 401
which a fixed amount of charge needs to be placed onto the somatic capacitance in order to
reach Vth-
Introducing {Vm) as the temporal average of the somatic membrane potential (including
spikes) allows us to extend most of the above concepts into the spiking regime. Biophysi-
cally, {V m) approximates the average membrane potential experienced by a distal dendritic
site, where the high-frequency components of the back-propagating somatic action potential
have been filtered out by the capacitances distributed throughout the cable.
The dynamic current-voltage curve /oonan"C({Vm)) is defined as the inverse of the
relationship between the sustained current injected via a microelectrode and the average
membrane potential (Koch, Bernander, and Douglas, 1995). It can be thought of as a single,
effective spike current that serves to stabilize the membrane potential in the neighborhood
of Vth and that reverses at Vrest. This current can be described rather well by an exponential
relationship: increasing (Vm) by 3.7 mV roughly doubles /. The fact that this current
behaves similarly to a diode in the forward direction makes such a relationship particularly
easy to implement using electronic circuits. A similar exponential relationship also exists
for a patch of squid axon described by the Hodgkin-Huxley equations (not shown).
One caveat. These dynamical measures are based on time-averaged quantities; they
cannot be used under conditions where the detailed time course of spiking is thought to be
relevant for postsynaptic processing.


