===== Page 1 =====
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING,
AND BINDING
In Chap. 9 we introduced calcium ions and alluded to their crucial role in regulating the
day-to-day life of neurons. The dynamics of the free intracellular calcium is controlled by
a number of physical and chemical processes, foremost among them diffusion and binding
to a host of different proteins, which serve as calcium buffers and as calcium sensors or
triggers. Whereas buffers simply bind Ca2+ above some critical concentration, releasing it
back into the cytoplasm when [Ca2+]/ has been reduced below this level, certain proteins—
such as calmodulin—change their conformation when they bind with Ca2+ ions, thereby
activating or modulating enzymes, ionic channels, or other proteins.
The calcium concentration inside the cell not only determines the degree of activation
of calcium-dependent potassium currents but—much more importantly—is relevant for
determining the changes in structure expressed in synaptic plasticity. As discussed in
Chap. 13, it is these changes that are thought to underlie learning. Given the relevance of
second messenger molecules, such as Ca2+, I?3, cyclic AMP and others, for the processes
underlying growth, sensory adaptation, and the establishment and maintenance of synaptic
plasticity, it is crucial that we have some understanding of the role that diffusion and chemical
kinetics play in governing the behavior of these substances.
Today, we have unprecedented access to the spatio-temporal dynamics of intracellular
calcium in individual neurons using fluorescent calcium dyes, such as fura-2 or fluo-3,
in combination with confocal or two-photon microscopy in the visible or in the infrared
spectrum (Tsien, 1988; Tank et al., 1988; Hernandez-Cruz, Sala, and Adams, 1990; Ghosh
and Greenberg, 1995). The data gleaned from these methods of directly visualizing calcium
in the dendritic tree, cell body, and presynaptic terminals are quantitative enough to allow
detailed comparison with numerical models, commencing with the work of Hodgkin and his
colleagues in the squid axon (Blaustein and Hodgkin, 1969; Baker, Hodgkin, and Ridgway,
1971) and continuing with the study of calcium transients in the presynaptic terminal (Llinas,
Steinberg and Walton, 1981a,b; Zucker and Stockbridge, 1983; Stockbridge and Moore,
1984; Simon and Llinas, 1985; Zucker and Fogelson, 1986; Parnas, Hovav, and Parnas,
1989; Yamada and Zucker, 1992) as well as in dendrites, cell bodies and spines (Connor and
Nikolakopoulou, 1982; Gamble and Koch, 1987; Sala and Hernandez-Cruz, 1990; Holmes
248
11


===== Page 2 =====
11.1 Diffusion Equation 
• 
249
and Levy, 1990; Carnevale and Rosenthal, 1992; Zador and Koch, 1994; DeSchutter and
Bower, 1994a,b; DeSchutter and Smolen, 1998; Borg-Graham, 1998; Yamada, Koch, and
Adams, 1998).
In this chapter, we study the physics of diffusion and buffering, dwelling at some length
on the fundamental limitations imposed by physics on how fast substances can diffuse.
We will develop certain analogies between the reaction-diffusion equation and the cable
equation and discuss the potential relevance of these processes for information processing
and computation. While these results apply to any substance diffusing inside cells and
binding to other molecules, we will focus on Ca2+ ions, given their crucial role in the day-to-
day life of neurons and, in fact, in all cells. The control and regulation of calcium in neuronal
structures is a vast subject, which we can only briefly hint at. For more details on calcium
signaling in neurons the reader is urged to consult Hille's monograph (1992), the articles by
Ghosh and Greenberg (1995) and by Clapham (1995), or the insightful Meyer and Stryer
(1991) review. Finally, for the computational methods, consult DeSchutter and Smolen
(1998). We end by discussing some general aspects of information processing using calcium.
Let us commence by deriving the diffusion equation that underlies the distribution of
ions inside and outside cells.
11.1 Diffusion Equation
Historically, the diffusion equation was first derived from a macroscopic, deterministic point
of view by Pick (1855), who postulated a force arising between molecules proportional to
their concentration difference. Although such a phenomenological approach does lead to
the correct equation, we now know that no such force exists. Instead, diffusion is due to the
constant agitation of molecules arising from their thermal energy. The physically correct
probabilistic interpretation of this Brownian motion was advanced by Einstein (1905), who
used the theory of random walk. Because of the simplicity and elegance of his arguments,
we will develop here a heuristic derivation of the diffusion equation using this stochastic
perspective.
11.1.1 Random Walk Model of Diffusion
The starting point of the molecular theory of heat is that molecules and small particles at the
absolute temperature T have, on average, a kinetic energy kT/2 associated with movement
along each dimension. The resulting velocities of these particles in solution do not allow
them to travel very far since they collide within picoseconds with other molecules, changing
their direction of travel as a result. This incessant and random agitation of molecules due
to thermal energy is the basis of diffusion.
Imagine a particle moving along an one-dimensional line. Both space and time are
discretized, such that the particle can only be at locations ±mA;c, where m is an integer.
Each time step A?, the particle can move either with 50% probability to the right or with
50% probability to the left, in both cases by the amount Ax. The particle cannot remain in
place or move by more than AJC. Finally, we assume that the particle has no memory of any
locations it has previously visited.
These rules allow us to define a probability distribution p(x,t) that the particle will be
at position x at time t. The only way the particle could have arrived at position x is if it was
at either one of the two adjacent positions in the previous time step. That is,


===== Page 3 =====
250 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
(11.1)
Subtracting p(x, t — Af) from both sides as well as dividing by Af yields
(11.2)
The left-hand side of this equation is nothing but the first-order approximation of the first
temporal derivative of p, while the term on the right-hand side corresponds to the second-
order approximation of the second spatial derivative of p(x, t — A?). In the limit as Ax
and A? approach zero in such a way that
(11.3)
converges toward a finite constant (with units of cm2/sec), we end up with the partial
differential diffusion equation
(11-4)
It describes how the probability function p(x, t) evolves over time and is also known under
the generic name of Fokker-Planck equation. We will reencounter this class of equations
in Chap. 15.
The simplest interpretation of diffusion can be given if the single particle is replaced by
a cloud of N independently moving particles that all start off at the origin, x = 0. What
is the expected mean position of this cloud of particles and the variance around this mean
position? According to our simple model, Xj(0 for particle i at time t = nAf can only
differ from the previous position by ± AJC,
(11.5)
The average position of the cloud, (x(n A?)), at time n Af is given by summing over all the
individual particles,
(11.6)
Since we assumed earlier that each particle has an equal chance of moving to the left
or to the right (and that no boundaries impede the motion of the particles), the last term
in brackets averages zero for large numbers of particles. This equation then tells us that
the mean position of the cloud at time n Af does not change from its previous position,
(x(nAf)) = (x((n — l)Af))- If the cloud starts off at the origin, we conclude that the
average location of the cloud will never move,
(11.7)
If we incorporate a systematic drift into the motion of the particles, for instance, by applying
an electric field that imposes a preferred direction of motion (assuming that the moving


===== Page 4 =====
11.1 Diffusion Equation 
• 
251
particle is charged), this result will have to be modified. However, in the absence of such a
bias, the cloud will remain centered at the origin.
How much does the cloud spread out over time? As anybody can observe when placing
a drop of ink into a water glass, at first a small part of the water is stained an intense blue.
Later on, the spot of blue becomes less intense and larger, dispersing eventually throughout
the entire glass. One measure of this spreading is the variance of the mean position of the
cloud. This is defined as
(11.8)
(we here used Eq. 11.5). Because the random walk is unbiased, the second term in this
equation will be zero on average, resulting in
(11.9)
We can, of course, recursively apply the same decomposition for (x((n — 1) At)2), ending
up in n steps with (jc(0)2). Since the entire population started out at the origin, this last
term in zero. Setting t = « A? and remembering that (A.x)2/(2AO = D, we conclude
(11.10)
Thus, while the mean position of the cloud does not move, the variance or width of the
cloud increases linearly with time and its standard deviation as the square root of time.
Interpreted in terms of single particles, Eq. 11.7 implies that the mean position of a single
particle does not change while the probability of finding it at larger and larger distances
from the origin increases as the square root of time (Eq. 11.10).
//. 1.2 Diffusion in Two or Three Dimensions
The same concept can be applied to the motion of a particle in more than one dimension. As
long as the motion along the x direction is independent of the motion in the y direction, the
variance of motion in the plane is the sum of the variances of motion in the two independent
directions,
(11.11)
A computer simulation of such a random walk is illustrated in Fig. 11.1. Given the square-
root relationship between time and distance traversed, it is possible for the particle to explore
short distances much more thoroughly than large distances. Thus, the typical pattern evident
in Fig. 11.1: the particle tends to return to the same region many times before eventually
wandering away. When it does move away, it blindly chooses another region to explore,
with no regard for whether or not it had previously visited that area. This reflects the fact
that the particle does not move down any gradient in response to a "diffusive" force as
postulated by Fick (1855), but acts in a probabilistic manner to spread over the available
space; its tracks do not uniformly fill up the available space. For a particle diffusing in three
dimensions, exactly the same principle applies, except that now


===== Page 5 =====
252
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.1 DIFFUSION OF A PARTICLE IN THE PLANE Computer simulation of a single particle
executing a random walk on a rectangular grid. At each point in time, it has a probability of 0.25 of
moving in any one of four directions. In the limit of an infinitesimally fine grid, this approximates
diffusion in a plane. The particle started at the center and after 5000 iterations ended up at the lower
left corner. The radii of the four circles correspond to the variance in the locations of the particle after
500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 iterations. The expected time-averaged location of the particle is always
at the center of the bull's eye.
(11.12)
The random walk approach to diffusion has been very fruitful in mathematical physics. It
is straightforward to derive equations corresponding to particles moving down a gradient
caused, for instance, by an applied electric field, or if the space the particle moves in
has absorbing or reflecting boundaries such as a membrane. For more details on the
mathematics of random walk see the idiosyncratic, but immensely informative, monograph
by Mandelbrot (1977); for a delightful text on the use of random walk techniques to describe
the motion of bacteria and other small organisms see Berg (1983).
11.1.3 Diffusion Coefficient
In the above, we assumed—see Eq. 11.3—that D is purely dictated by the temporal and
spatial discretization steps. However, for real particles in solution—where gravity can be
neglected—D must clearly depend on certain physical attributes of the particles themselves
as well as on properties of the solution. What precisely determines D and how large is it
for real ions, such as Ca2+, and big molecules, such as calmodulin which binds free Ca2+
in neurons?
Einstein (1905), arguing that diffusion is thermal agitation of particles opposed by
friction, derived a general relationship between diffusion and friction. For particles that
can be approximated as spheres much larger than the size of individual water molecules
(which are on the order of 1 A), D is determined by the Einstein-Stokes relation as


===== Page 6 =====
11.2 Solutions to the Diffusion Equation 
• 
253
(11.13)
where r^ is the radius of the diffusing particle and r\ the viscosity of water. The proportion-
ality of D to the absolute temperature T simply reflects the thermal origin of diffusion. For
room temperature (20° C), this equation reduces to D = a/rs, with a = 2.15 ^tm2/msec
and the radius rs specified in units of angstrom (A). (For a very thorough discussion of
this, see Hille, 1992.) The diffusion coefficient is usually specified in cm2/sec; however,
we will adopt units more convenient to neuronal structures and measure D in units of
/im2/msec.
The Einstein-Stokes relationship—based on classical hydrodynamics— is accurate for
large particles, but works less well for small ions. For instance, for the 0.99 A radius calcium
ion, D should be 2.14 /im2/msec but is, in fact, 0.6 /im2/msec (Blaustein and Hodgkin,
1969). This mismatch is partially caused by the formation of a hydration shell around the
ion, that is, water molecules that lie in direct contact with each ion in solution. For larger
and heavier molecules, this is less of a consideration and their radius can be thought of as
being approximately proportional to the cubic root of their molecular weight. Table 11.1
lists the diffusion coefficients of a number of ions and molecules for diffusion in an aqueous
medium characteristic of the intracellular cytoplasm.
11.2 Solutions to the Diffusion Equation
Before we discuss the impulse response or Green's function of the diffusion equation,
let us sketch out its macroscopic phenomenological derivation. The mathematical theory
of diffusion in an isotropic milieu is based on the simplest phenomenological expression
possible—also called Pick's first law of diffusion (Pick, 1855)—that the rate of transfer
S(x, t) of a diffusing substance across a surface of unit area (also called the flux; Eq. 9.2)
is proportional to the concentration gradient measured normal to the surface,
(11.14)

{
  "table_name": "TABLE 11.1",
  "description": "Diffusion Coefficients",
  "columns": ["Ion or molecule", "Diffusion coefficient"],
  "rows": [
    {"Ion or molecule": "H+", "Diffusion coefficient": 9.3},
    {"Ion or molecule": "NO", "Diffusion coefficient": 3.82},
    {"Ion or molecule": "Na+", "Diffusion coefficient": 1.331},
    {"Ion or molecule": "K+", "Diffusion coefficient": 1.961},
    {"Ion or molecule": "Ca2+", "Diffusion coefficient": 0.63},
    {"Ion or molecule": "IP3", "Diffusion coefficient": 0.24},
    {"Ion or molecule": "Calmodulin", "Diffusion coefficient": 0.13},
    {"Ion or molecule": "CaM kinase II", "Diffusion coefficient": 0.034}
  ]
}

Diffusion coefficients in an aqueous environment for different ions and second
messenger molecules in units of 10~5 cm2/sec, that is /!*m2/msec.
'Table 10.1 in Hille (1992).
2 In rat cortex; Meulemans (1994); see also Wise and Houghton (1968).
3 Blaustein and Hodgkin (1969).
4 Allbritton, Meyer, and Stryer (1992).


===== Page 7 =====
254 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
where D is the constant of proportionality and the minus sign arises because diffusion
occurs against a concentration increase. Since the amount of substance diffusing across the
boundary is proportional to the area of the boundary, the diffusion coefficient has dimensions
of jU-m2/msec.
Because this amount corresponds to a particular number of molecules diffusing, we refer
to it using the colloquial, but entirely appropriate, term stuff for lack of a more specific term
and express it in units of gram molecules or moles (mol) while the concentration C is given
in molars (M), that is moles of molecules per liter.' The extracellular concentration of Ca2+
ions is about 2 mM, while its intracellular concentration at rest is around 10 to 20 nM, a
difference of five orders of magnitude.
Consider a cylindrical cable where the concentration C only varies along the x dimension,
reducing the problem of solving the diffusion equation from three dimensions to one. The
justification of this is identical to the one we made for one-dimensional cable theory in
Chap. 2, namely, that the radius of the cylinder is much shorter than its length and that the
equilibrium time for radial diffusion is short compared to longitudinal diffusion.
If the concentration inside a compartment centered at x and with boundaries at x+A x and
x — A* (Fig. 11.2) varies by dC/dt, the change in the amount of stuff in this compartment
is given by
(11.15)
This change should be identical to the net rate of transfer across one boundary minus the
rate of transfer across the other,
(11.16)
Setting these two expressions equal leads to
(11.17)
In the limit of an infinitesimally small interval (Ax —> 0), the expression S(x + Ax, t) —
S(x — Ax, t) converges to 2Ax 8S(x, t)/dx. Applying Eq. 11.14 we arrive once again at
the diffusion equation
Fig. 11.2 DIFFUSION IN A CYLINDER Diffusion of some substance into and out of a cylindrical
compartment with boundaries at x — Ax and x + Ax. S(x, t) corresponds to the rate of transfer across
the cross section of area nd2/4, and C(x, t) corresponds to the concentration. As in one-dimensional
cable theory, under certain conditions the three-dimensional diffusion equation can be reduced to a
one-dimensional one.
1. To remind the reader, one mole of water, that is, 18 grams molecules, corresponds to 6.023 X 1023 HjO molecules. Its
concentration is 1000 grams per liter divided by 18 grams per mole, that is 55 M.


===== Page 8 =====
11.2 Solutions to the Diffusion Equation
255
(11.18)
This is a linear partial differential equation of the parabolic type, with a unique solution if
both an initial and a boundary condition are specified. We wish to point out already here,
although we will not exploit this similarity until Sec. 11.7, that Eq. 11.18 is isomorphic to
the linear cable equation (Eq. 2.7) if rm -» oo (Fig. 11.3).
11.2.1 Steady-State Solution for an Infinite Cable
What is the steady-state behavior of the diffusion equation? If, in analogy with the cable
equation, we "clamp" the concentration at the origin C(x = 0, t) for all times to a fixed
value CQ, Eq. 11.18 reduces to an ordinary differential equation,
(11.19)
Its solution for an infinite cable is C{x) = Co for all values of x. After enough time has
passed, the concentration in the entire cable rises to the concentration at the origin. This
behavior is in marked contrast to the exponential decay of the potential in response to a
current step (Eq. 2.12) and is a consequence of the fact that none of the diffusing substance
"leaks" out across the walls of the cylinder.
11.2.2 Time-Dependent Solution for an Infinite Cable
The simplest time-dependent solution is the one for the concentration change along an
infinite one-dimensional cable if an amout So of calcium ions is injected instantaneously
Fig. 11.3 EQUIVALENT ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT ASSOCIATED WITH THE DIFFUSION EQUATION
Lumped electrical circuit representation associated with the diffusion of a substance in an elongated
fiber. The input here is defined as Ilci/Fd, where d is the diameter of the process, F is Faraday's
constant, and /ca is the calcium current flowing across the membrane. With the membrane capacity
cm set to 1 and ra = l/D, this circuit can be mapped onto the lumped electrical circuit approximating
the cable equation (Fig. 2.3) in the absence of any membrane conductance (that is, rm -> oo). As we
will show in Sec. 11.7, this analogy to the cable equation can be extended to the presence of a fast
buffer and ionic pumps in the membrane. In the limit of infinitely small mesh size, the solution to this
circuit approximates the continuous diffusion equation (Eq. 11.18).


===== Page 9 =====
256 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
into the cylinder at x — 0. We can show by simple differentiation that the resulting spatio-
temporal evolution of C is given by
(11.20)
The associated concentration profile is plotted in Fig. 11.4 for different values of t and
x. In comparing this function with the impulse response function of the infinite, passive
cable (Eq. 2.31 and Fig. 2.6), we notice the absence of an e~' term (caused by the lack
of a finite, membrane leak conductance for the diffusion equation). As a consequence, the
total amount of substance is conserved, / Cj(x, t)dx = S$, at all times t. The absence
of this exponential causes the Green's function for the diffusion equation to decay less
rapidly than the corresponding Green's function for the cable equation. In particular, and
not surprisingly, given our earlier result concerning the variance in the mean position of a
cloud of randomly moving particles, the variance of the impulse response function increases
linearly with time. We expand upon this point in the following section.
11.2.3 Square-Root Relationship of Diffusion
For any fixed time t, Eq. 11.20 can be expressed as a Gaussian, as can be seen upon
inspection of Fig. 11.4A,
(11.21)
with
(11.22)
The variance of the Gaussian increases linearly with t, or the standard deviation increases
with the square root of time. This has important consequences.
Let us consider the concentration in a semi-infinite cylinder, where the concentration at
one end is held fixed: C(x = 0, f) = Co for all times. In the case of the cable equation,
this would be equivalent to clamping the voltage at one end of the cable. We can solve for
C(x, t) directly by using either Fourier or Laplace transforms (Crank, 1975),
(11.23)
where erfc(jt) is the complementary error function defined as
(11.24)
with erfc(O) = 1. The propagation of this concentration increase along the cylinder—
illustrated in Fig. 11.5—involves only the dimensionless parameter x/(a\/2). Due to the
square-root relationship between a and t, it follows that the time required for any location
to reach a given concentration is proportional to the square of the distance. If we ask at what
time t\/2(x) the concentration at x reaches half of the source concentration, that is, Co/2,
we solve for t in Eq. 11.23, with its left-hand side set to Co/2. By consulting tables for the
error function (such as in Crank, 1975), we see that erfc(0.5) ~ 1/2 within a few percent.
In other words, 
or
(11.25)


===== Page 10 =====
11.2 Solutions to the Diffusion Equation 
• 
257
Fig. 11.4 IMPULSE RESPONSE OF THE DIFFUSION EQUATION IN AN INFINITE CABLE 
Concen-
tration Cj (x, t) in an infinite cylinder in response to an instantaneous injection of substance at t = 0
at the origin x — 0 as a function of space (A) or time (B; see Eq. 11.20). This Green's function decays
more slowly than the Green's function of the linear cable equation (Eq. 2.31). As is clear from panel
A, for any fixed time t the impulse response function can be described as a Gaussian, whose variance
increases linearly with time.
Note that the approximation only involves: the numerical factor in front of the square. We
can reformulate this equation by stating thjat for a given duration t from the onset of the
concentration step, the distance x\/2 at whiih the concentration has reached half of its peak
value is given by
(11.26)


===== Page 11 =====
258 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.5 THE SQUARE-ROOT LAW
OF DIFFUSION At t = 0, the cal-
cium concentration at the origin of
a semi-infinite cable is clamped to
CQ. (A) Evolving concentration pro-
file along the cable. (B) As time goes
by, the concentration throughout the
cable slowly rises to Co (different
from the solution of the cable equa-
tion). At any one instance, we can
ask at what location x\/2 along the
cable the concentration first reaches
Co/2 (dashed line). This relationship,
shown in (C), is a square-root one.
It takes four times as long to diffuse
twice the distance (Eq. 11.26). This
imposes a fundamental physical con-
straint on how fast any substance can
diffuse in one or more spatial dimen-
sions.
In three-dimensional space, the right-hand side needs to be multiplied by \/3 (as in
Eq. 11.12). If considering diffusion of ions within the porous and highly restricted ex-
tracellular space, further adjustments are necessary (see Sec. 20.2).
As an example, let us assume that the concentration of calcium at one end of a one-
dimensional cylinder is clamped to 1 \iM. Assuming that no buffer impedes the diffusion of
the calcium ions along the cable (and that £>ca = 0.6 /i,m2/msec), a calcium front—defined
here as the time at which the concentration at any one location first reaches 0.5 fiM—moving
down the cylinder takes about 1 msec to cover the first 0.77 //,m, 10 msec to propagate


===== Page 12 =====
11.3 Electrodiffusibn and the Nernst-Planck Equation 
• 
259
2.5 /J,m away from the origin and has traveled only 7.7 /^m after 100 msec (Fig. 11.5). In
neuronal tissues, these times are considerably further reduced due to the binding of calcium
to intracellular buffers (Sec. 11.4).
The linear diffusion equation, as a member of the family of parabolic differential
equations which also includes the linear cable equation (Sec. 2.3), does not admit to any
solution C(x, t) = C(x — vt) that propagates with fixed velocity v along the cable. This
behavior is in stark contrast to the linear relationship between distance and time for action
potentials propagating down the axon or for the wave of calcium release occurring in eggs
following fertilization, making the cells impervious to the entry of additional sperms.
The square-root behavior imposes a fundamental limitation on the time required for
concentration changes of calcium or any other intracellular messenger to affect distant sites
(in the absence of active transport systems) and is apparent everywhere. For instance, if
we keep the concentration of calcium in the shell just below the membrane of a spherical
cell constant, the center of the sphere will have reached one half the shell concentration
after about 0.04J2/D msec, where d is the diameter of the sphere (in micrometers). For
additional solutions to the diffusion equation under various boundary conditions consult
Crank (1975) and the monograph by Cussler (1984).
11.3 Electrodiffusion and the Nernst-Planck Equation
In the derivation of the cable equation in the second chapter, we had assumed that the
concentration of ions does not vary along the longitudinal direction of the cable. Thus, ions
are only propelled along the cable by the voltage gradient, giving rise to the 32 V/dx2 term.
In the previous section, we discussed the effective motion of ions due to diffusion, down
the concentration gradient.
In general, of course, we need to include the movement of ions caused by concentration
differences as well as by drift along the electric field. Even if a dendrite is initially at
equilibrium with respect to the spatial distribution of sodium, potassium, calcium, and
chloride ions, which are most important for fast signaling, the influx and efflux of ions across
the membrane disturb this equilibrium. This is particularly true for very small volumes,
such as thin dendrites or spines where the influx of even a moderate amount of calcium
significantly increases [Ca2+],-, creating concentration gradients that propel calcium ions
down this gradient (in addition to any existing voltage gradient).
In order to account for these effects, we need to combine Pick's law (Eq. 11.14) with
Ohm's law, something done by Nernst (1888, 1889) as well as Planck (1890). Assuming
that the longitudinal current and ionic concentrations are uniform across the cross section
of the cylindrical dendrite or axon and that the random, diffusional motion superimposes
linearly onto the electrotonic motions of ions driven by a true "force," we can write the
one-dimensional Nernst-Planck electrodiffusion equation (Hille, 1992),
(11.27)
where /,,/tOe, r) is the axial current for the ionic species being considered (here labeled k),
Zk is its valence, D^ its diffusion coefficient, R the gas constant, and F Faraday's constant.
The ZkFDk term in front of the concentration gradient converts "stuff" into a current,
while the constants in front of the potential gradient express implicitly how the electrical
conductance relates to the concentration and the mobility of the ions (see also Eq. 11.13).


===== Page 13 =====
260 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Thus, ions drift down the potential gradient, while simultaneously spreading due to diffu-
sion. Hodgkin has remarked that while diffusion is like a hopping flea, electrodiffusion is
like a flee that is hopping in a breeze.
As an aside, let us note that application of this kinetic equation in the direction perpen-
dicular to the membrane directly yields Eq. 4.3 for the synaptic reversal or Nernst potential
of an ionic current at equilibrium. Since the net current across the membrane must be zero,
we can rearrange Eq. 11.27,
(11.28)
with r the spatial variable across the membrane. Integrating this across the membrane yields
the expression for the Nernst potential associated with each ionic species k.
Let us return to our main argument. Due to reasons of conservation, the change in
concentration of the ions in an infinitesimally small cylindrical segment of length Sx and
diameter d must be balanced by the sum of the transmembrane current im^(x, t) per unit
length (suitably weighted by the surface-to-volume ratio 4/d; Fig. 11.2) and the difference
between the ingoing and outgoing axial currents, or
(11.29)
Taking the spatial derivative of both sides of the electrodiffusion equation and extracting
the expression for the change in concentration from Eq. 11.29 leads to
(11.30)
The terms on the right-hand side of this nonlinear coupled partial equation correspond to the
transmembrane current (given either by Ohm's law with the appropriate reversal potential
or by the GHK current equation), the familiar diffusional term, and a voltage gradient
term. In general, this equation must be solved for each species of ions that is present at
relevant concentrations (assuming that different ionic species move independent of each
other, something that may not always be true).
Since Eq. 11.30 is a single equation in two unknowns C;,(x, t) and Vm(x, t), it needs
to be supplemented by an equation specifying the membrane potential, here expressing the
fact that Vm (t) is determined by the change in the total charge—added over all ionic species
k weighted by their valence—divided by the membrane capacitance Cm in addition to an
offset term, or
(11.31)
where Ck,rest is the resting concentration of the fcth ionic species.
In principle we need to solve Eqs. 11.30 and 11.31 to describe the dynamics of the
membrane potential in extended cable structures properly (supplemented by an additional
constraint at branching points; Qian and Sejnowski, 1989). However, this does not come
cheaply. When linearly coupling two differential equations, the temporal discretization step


===== Page 14 =====
11.3 Electrodiffusion and the Nernst-Planck Equation 
• 
261
Af required for an accurate evolution of the system is, in general, the smaller of the two time
steps associated with the individual equations. In other words, the discretization necessary
to solve Eq. 11.27 has to be much finer in both time and space than the discretization
required for solving the cable equation with constant concentrations, resulting in much
longer running times for the numerical algorithm.
11.3.1 Relationship between the Electrodiffusion
Equation and the Cable Equation
In "large" neuronal processes, the intracellular concentration of various ions changes by
relatively small amounts, implying that the diffusional contributions are negligible and that
the longitudinal currents are purely resistive. It is straightforward to obtain the familiar
cable equation as a special case of Eq. 11.30 by assuming that the axial ionic concentration
gradients can be neglected, dCk(x, t)/dx « 0. In combination with Eq. 11.29, Eq. 11.30
reduces to
(11.32)
This corresponds to the cable equation if we identify the intracellular resistance /?,• with
(11.33)
Qian and Sejnowski (1989) compare numerical simulations of the propagating action
potential in the squid giant axon (with a 0.476 mm diameter) using the electrodiffusion
equation against the cable model solution of Cooley and Dodge (1966). With the diffusion
coefficients for sodium and potassium reported in Table 11.1, they calculate /?,• from
Eq. 11.33, obtaining 33.4 Q-cm for the potassium resistance and 267 Q-cm for the sodium
resistance, for a total value of /?,- = 29.7 £2-cm. This last value is reasonably close to the
internal resistance of 35.4 fi-cm used by Hodgkin and Huxley (1952d). The final solutions
are indistinguishable from those of Cooley and Dodge (1966). Reducing the diameter several
hundredfold to 1 /u.m only leads to a maximum relative concentration change of 1.4%, too
small to have any significant effect. Thus, as in a metal wire, charged carriers2 move under
the influence of Ohm's law and diffusion does not play any (significant) role.
The concentration change due to synaptic input scales as 1/r, implying that for submi-
crometer dimensions, diffusional transport of ions will contribute substantially to the total
current. Chapter 12 deals with one such case, dendritic spines, where a single excitatory or
inhibitory synaptic input can change the concentration of calcium or chloride significantly
on a very rapid time scale. Here the predictions of the electrodiffusion model can deviate
substantially from those of the cable model.
11.3.2 An Approximation to the Electrodiffusion Equation
From a physical point of view, the electrodiffusion equation constitutes a better description
of current flow in a neuronal process than the cable equation. Thus, it behooves us to
routinely use the former, rather than the latter, for simulating events in dendrites. Yet, because
of the additional computational load imposed by solving Eq. 11.30 using a finer spatio-
temporal discretization grid than the one required for solving the cable equation, almost
2. Electrons in one case and Na^, K+, and other ions in the other.


===== Page 15 =====
262
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
nobody has done this. Qian and Sejnowski (1989) offer a remedy for this by describing a
fast approximation for solving the electrodiffusion equation in extended cable structures. It
involves replacing the constant intracellular resistance RI by batteries and resistances for
each ionic species being considered (Fig. 11.6). At each time step, this algorithm
1. Calculates the intracellular concentration of each ionic species in each compartment by
integrating over both the transmembrane and the intraaxial currents between compart-
ments.
2. Computes the new value of the Nernst reversal potential for each ionic species for each
compartment across the membrane (E^a and E& in Fig. 11.6).
3. Replaces the single intracellular resistance Rj of the cable equation with individual
longitudinal resistances,
(11.34)
Fig. 11.6 APPROXIMATING THE ELECTRODIFFUSION EQUATION Solving the electrodiffusion
equation, a better description of the transport of charged ions than the cable equation, is compu-
tationally more demanding than solving the cable equation (due to the higher spatial and temporal
discretization required). Qian and Sejnowski (1989) advocate the usage of an approximation to
Eq. 11.30, illustrated here. The crucial step is to replace (at each time step and for each compartment)
the single axial resistance /?; of the cable equation (Fig. 2.3) with a resistance /?,-_* and battery £,,*
for each ionic species being considered. The transmembrane reversal batteries £i\ja and EK are given
by the Nernst equation (Eq. 4.3). This procedure is illustrated for the thick squid giant axon using a
symmetrical discretization procedure with R, Na = 267 Q-cm and R,^ = 33.4 Q-cm. Given the tiny
changes in intracellular sodium and potassium concentration, Ej,Na ^ £>,K ^ 0- Even for a much
thinner axon of 1 /urn-diameter, the maximal value of these batteries is 0.4 mV. Only for very thin
distal dendrites or spines will qualitative differences to the cable model appear. Reprinted in modified
form by permission from Qian and Sejnowski (1989).


===== Page 16 =====
11.4 Buffering of Calcium 
• 
263
and batteries between compartment j and j + 1,
(11.35)
for each ionic species k.
For most situations that Qian and Sejnowski considered, this algorithm agrees well
with the solutions to the full electrodiffusion equation, only doubling execution times in
comparison to solving the cable equation. When in doubt whether or not diffusion of ions
will affect the solution of the cable equation, we would recommend this algorithm to the
reader (for more details, see Qian and Sejnowski, 1989).
11.4 Buffering of Calcium
In a classical experiment, Hodgkin and Keynes (1957) used radioactive 45Ca to track the
diffusion of calcium in squid axon fibers. From the observed broadening of the radioactive
patches the effective diffusion constant was estimated to be about one-tenth of the diffusion
coefficient Dca in aqueous solution. This is in contrast to the behavior of potassium ions un-
der similar circumstances. This showed that once calcium enters the intracellular cytoplasm
it is not free to diffuse. Indeed, 95% and more of the entering calcium is quickly bound by
a host of systems, ranging from a set of different protein buffers to cellular organelles, such
as mitochondria and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Mitochondria have a considerable
ability to accumulate (and release) Ca2+. The endoplasmic reticulum in neurons—related to
the sarcoplasmic reticulum in skeletal muscle cells, which is responsible for the release and
subsequent reuptake of Ca2+ during muscle contractions—also accumulates calcium, yet at
a relatively slow rate. Since the calcium uptake of these organelles takes place on a time scale
of seconds and longer (Rasgado-Flores and Blaustein, 1987), we focus our discussion on the
dynamics of calcium binding to protein buffers. (For an overview of neuronal calcium home-
ostasis, see Carafoli, 1987; McBurney and Neering, 1987; Blaustein, 1988; Clapham, 1995.)
A large number of Ca2+-binding proteins, such as calmodulin, calbindin, and parval-
bumin, are present at high concentrations in nerve cells. The most important neuronal
calcium buffer, calmodulin, a 15,000 dalton regulatory protein, is present in brain tissue at
a concentration of 30-50 /j,M and acts as an internal calcium sensor (Manalan and Klee,
1984; see Fig. 11.7). It is located in the cell bodies, dendrites, and postsynaptic densities
of most neurons in the central nervous system, but not in axons. Each calmodulin (CaM)
molecule has four Ca2+-binding sites. At resting levels of calcium concentration, none or
only one of these sites is occupied. As the concentration of free calcium rises to micromolar
levels, the four binding sites are occupied successively. The fully bound calcium-calmodulin
complex in turn can bind to a large number of regulatory proteins to alter their function,
such as calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaM kinases), protein phosphatases, and
adenylate cyclases.
These enzymes, some of which have been implicated in the induction of long-term
potentiation (Miller and Kennedy, 1986; Kennedy, 1989, 1992; Ghosh and Greenberg,
1995), can trigger the modification of other synaptic proteins locally at the synapse or can
mediate more general cellular responses by activating molecules involved in the regulation
of gene expression. As the concentration of calcium in the cytoplasm drops, the calcium
ions are progressively released from the buffer and are free to wander about. The resulting


===== Page 17 =====
264 
. 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.7 STRUCTURE OF CALMODULIN Calmodulin is the most important calcium receptor
protein. It is ubiquitous in eukaryotic cells and is found in the brain at concentrations of 30-50 iiM.
The 15,000-dalton protein can bind four Ca2+ ions in a cooperative manner with dissociation constants
in the /j,M range. In the absence of calcium, the protein has some structure. Binding of Ca2+ to all
four sites induces a conformational change, leading to a dumbbell-shaped molecule. Two heads, each
of which contains the two bound calcium ions, are interconnected by a long a chain. In this form,
the calcium-calmodulin complex can interact with a large number of other proteins, giving rise to a
complex regulatory network. Reprinted by permission from Babu et al., (1985).
changes, which were triggered by the initial binding of Ca2+ ions to calmodulin, can outlast,
by far, the calcium transient (Sec. 20.1). Before we come to this, let us first quantify the
dynamics of various types of binding.
11.4,1 Second-Order Buffering
In one of the simplest chemical reactions possible, a single calcium ion binds to a single
buffer molecule B, resulting in a bound buffer-calcium complex B -Ca. If theforward binding
rate with which this reaction proceeds is / (in units of bindings per second per molar) and
the backward rate is b (in units of bindings per second), we have
(11.36)
In terms of associated kinetic equations, we can write
(11.37)
where [B] and [B-Ca] denote the concentrations of the buffer and the buffer-calcium
complex. The last equation expresses the fact that only a fixed amount TB of buffer molecules
exists, where TB corresponds to the total amount of the buffer. / and b tell us something
about the speed with which the buffering reaction occurs. The above type of reaction is
known as a second-order reaction, since two substances participate, each with 1 mol, re-
sulting in a quadratic term in the associated kinetic Eq. (11.37) (Pauling and Pauling, 1975).


===== Page 18 =====
11.4 Buffering of Calcium 
• 
265
Setting the temporal derivative to zero yields the steady-state distribution of the buffer-
calcium complex,
(11.38)
where Kj = b/f is the dissociation constant of the buffer expressed in molars. If the
calcium concentration has reached Kj, exactly half the available buffer is bound to calcium.
The lower Kd, the lower the calcium concentration at which the buffer begins to bind Ca2+
ions. Kd therefore tells us something about the affinity of the buffer. The Kj of most calcium
binding proteins is in the low to mid micromolar range.
If the calcium concentration is much less than Kj, Eq. 11.38 can be approximated by
(11.39)
At these low calcium concentrations [B • Ca] is proportional to [Ca 
]. We will explore
the consequences of this in Sec. 11.7.
For [Ca2+] < K&, the Ca2+ binding ratio, that is the ratio of bound calcium to free
calcium, is given by
(11.40)
This number is usually large, upward of 20 (Allbritton, Meyer, and Stryer, 1992; Neher,
1995; Gabso, Neher, and Spira, 1997), implying that 95% or more of all calcium is bound
to intracellular buffers. Clearly the cell cares a great deal about regulating the amount of
free calcium ions sloshing around the neuron.
11.4.2 Higher Order Buffering
As mentioned above, the ubiquitous calcium buffer protein calmodulin has four calcium
binding sites on each molecule. A general four-site system is defined by more than a dozen
rate constants. In particular, binding calcium to one site can induce a conformational change
of the molecule, affecting the binding of calcium to the remaining sites. Calmodulin appears
to display positive cooperativity, such that binding of calcium to the first two binding sites
increases the affinity for the remaining two sites. Furthermore, the binding constants for the
four sites differ significantly from each other. For the sake of simplicity, we will assume
that all four sites are independent of each other and have identical binding constants. The
Kd of calmodulin is on the order of 10 /u.M (Manalan and Klee, 1984; Klee, 1988), such
that at 40-50 [iM levels of Ca2+, most of the calcium-binding sites will be occupied. For
n binding sites, we can write down a series of n second-order equations of the from
(11.41)
with m = 1, 2, • • •, n. By repetitively applying the associated kinetic equations, we can
express the steady-state concentration of all intermediate species and of the fully bound
buffer-calcium complex as
(11.42)
where TB is the total concentration of the buffer in its various guises.
In the case of calmodulin, the forward rate constant / is about 50 per second and per
micromolar, the backward rate b is about 500 per second, implying a dissociation constant


===== Page 19 =====
266 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Kj = 10 fiM. Therefore, as long as [Ca2+] is less than a few micromolar, the denominator
in Eq. 11.42 is close to 1 and the steady-state concentration of the fully bound calmodulin
complex will be proportional to the fourth power of calcium. Each additional binding step
to another protein or enzyme will potentiate or sharpen the polynomial relationship between
[Ca2+] and the buffer, since n increases by 1 in the above equation.
Computationally, higher order binding processes can be thought of as a squaring (for
n — 2) or an nth-order polynomial operation (Koch and Poggio, 1992). Gamble and Koch
(1987) showed numerically that a fast burst of action potentials (10 spikes at 333 Hz) to a
synapse located on a spine elevates intracellular calcium in the spine head by about a factor
of 5 in comparison to the peak calcium evoked after 10 spikes at 50 Hz (see also Chap. 12).
This difference in levels of free calcium in the low- versus high-frequency input situation is
amplified 1000-fold if the concentration of fully bound calmodulin is considered; in the first
case 1000 times more [CaM • Ca4] is evoked than in the latter case (roughly about a factor
of 54). If a certain level of concentration of some critical substance is required to initiate
some reaction, multiple binding steps will tend to lead to an all-or-none threshold behavior.
11.5 Reaction-Diffusion Equations
Let us now combine the diffusion equation for calcium with the kinetic equations expressing
the binding of calcium to a single buffer via a second-order reaction. We assume that
the buffer itself is stationary and does not diffuse and denote the intracellular calcium
concentration as [Ca2+](.x, t). The equations governing the evolution of the calcium and
the bound buffer concentration, frequently referred to as reaction-diffusion equations, are
of the form
(11.43)
As the reader can see, these coupled partial differential equations are nonlinear, due to the
fact that we assumed cooperative binding between calcium and buffer (expressed in the
[B] • [Ca2+] = (TE - [B • Ca]) x [Ca2+] term), making their analytical solution difficult
(Chap. 14 in Crank, 1975, catalogues the major known solutions). If additional buffers
are included or calcium binds to calmodulin or other proteins with multiple binding sites,
further equations are required.
Coupled reaction-diffusion equations are well known in developmental biology. They
were first invoked by the computer science pioneer Turing (1952) to explain the regular
structures in biological systems and have been used to explain the stripes of the zebra and
of certain fish (Kondo and Asai, 1995) and aspects of embryonic development in frogs and
fruit flies (Kauffman, 1993; Meinhardt, 1994).
A particularly simple and insightful solution to Eq. 11.43 can be obtained if the con-
centration of the buffer-calcium complex is proportional to the concentration of calcium.
This occurs if the binding of calcium to the buffer is very fast compared to the time
scale of diffusion and if the calcium concentration is much less than the Kj of the buffer
(instantaneous buffer model).


===== Page 20 =====
11.5 Reaction-Diffusion Equations 
• 
267
The first condition implies that the buffer is always at equilibrium relative to the
diffusional time scale, while the second condition implies that [B • Ca] = /8[Ca2+]
(Eq. 11.39, where ft is defined in Eq. 11.40). Both assumptions allow us to reduce the
nonlinear reaction-diffusions Eqs. 11.43 to a single linear equation with
(11.44)
and, therefore,
(11.45)
In other words, in the presence of fast buffering dynamics and relatively small amounts
of calcium, the spatio-temporal dynamics of calcium ions are governed by the canonical
diffusion equation, except that the original diffusion coefficient is replaced by a smaller one,
(11.46)
Diffusion is slowed down, since the Ca2+ ions bind to the buffer and are therefore
not available to diffuse. In the case of intracellular cytoplasm containing calmodulin at
TB = 100 /JiM (with Kj in the 5-10 [iM range), the effective diffusion coefficient Z)eff
for calcium is at least 10 times slower than the coefficient measured in aqueous solution, in
agreement with the Hodgkin and Keynes (1957) experiment mentioned. Due to the square-
root relationship between time and distance, this translates into a substantially reduced
ability of calcium to act as a fast intracellular messenger if distances larger than a few
micrometers are involved.
We conclude that a nondiffusible buffer will always slow down the diffusive spread of
calcium.
11.5.1 Experimental Visualization of Calcium
Transients in Diffusion-Buffered Systems
One system where the observed calcium dynamics have been compared with numerical
calculations are bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells. These relatively large, spherical cells
devoid of dendrites (described in Sec. 9.5) are an ideal test bed for applying confocal laser-
scanned microscopy to record the dynamics of intracellular calcium using the fluorescent
Ca2+ indicator fluo-3. In a pioneering application of this technology, Hernandez-Cruz,
Sala, and Adams (1990) measured [Ca2+],- in these cells after application of a voltage-
clamp pulse to briefly activate voltage-dependent calcium channels. Because of tradeoffs
between temporal and spatial resolution of this method, they recorded the free calcium
concentration across a narrow one-dimensional slot that extends across the width of the
cell, thereby achieving a 5 msec temporal resolution (Fig. 11.8).
The influx of calcium across the membrane leads to a wave of calcium (Fig. 11.8A and
E). Although much of this calcium becomes bound to the resident buffers as well as to the
calcium indicator dye, enough remains for the calcium wave to reach the center of the cell
after about 300 msec. [Ca2+], then equilibrates across the cell (Fig. 11.8F, G, and H), slowly
returning to its resting state after 6-8 sec. These basic features were qualitatively reproduced
by a radial reaction-diffusion model (Sala and Hernandez-Cruz, 1990). It is similar to the
model of Yamada, Koch, and Adams (Sec. 9.5) except that it makes no attempt to simulate
the voltage dynamics and that it includes mobile buffers, that is, buffers that—with or


===== Page 21 =====
268
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.8 COMPARING EXPERIMENTAL CALCIUM TRANSIENTS AGAINST A MODEL Experimental
measurements of intracellular calcium dynamics in bullfrog sympathetic ganglion cells (Hernandez-
Cruz, Sala, and Adams, 1990) compared to numerical solutions of the associated one-dimensional
radial reaction-diffusion equations (Sala and Hernandez-Cruz, 1990). The data were obtained by
monitoring the calcium dye fluo-3 along a thin strip across the diameter of these spherical cells with
the aid of confocal microscopy. Measured (A) and simulated (B) radial spread of Ca2+. Time extends
downward and space across. (C) A 100-msec-long voltage-clamp step to +10 mV is used to trigger
an influx of Ca2+ via voltage-dependent calcium channels (Im; see also the vertical bars in A and B).
Calcium concentration profiles as a function of space and time extracted from the data in A (dotted
traces) or the model in B (solid traces). (D) Resting calcium concentration. [Ca2+],- is reduced below
the membrane due to the presence of calcium pumps in the model. Spatial profile 100 msec (E) and
1 sec (F) after the stimulus onset. Temporal dynamics of free calcium 2.5 /xm below the membrane
(G) and at the center (H) of the 40-^tm-diameter cell. Reprinted by permission from Hernandez-Cruz,
Sala, and Adams, (1990).


===== Page 22 =====
11.6 Ionic Pumps 
• 
269
without bound calcium—can diffuse inside the cell (with diffusion coefficients of 0.25 and
0.1 /zm2/msec). This causes the decay of calcium below the shell to occur at two different
time scales (Fig. 11.8G): a fast one, over within 300 msec, which is due to the diffusional
redistribution of Ca2+ throughout the cell, and a much slower phase, lasting for seconds,
which reflects the slow buffering, the diffusion of the buffer, and the extrusion of calcium
across the membrane by the calcium pumps (see the following section).
The qualitative match between observation and model evident in Fig. 11.8 underscores
that the evolution of calcium in these simple structures can be understood in terms of
diffusion and buffering.
11.6 Ionic Pumps
The crucial component of the system controlling the homeostasis of sodium, potassium,
chloride, and calcium are specialized membrane-bound molecules that act as ionic pumps.
Also known as ion transporters, they maintain the ionic gradients across the membrane that
enable neurons to signal and to generate and propagate action potentials. In conjunction with
buffers and other uptake systems, they also provide exquisite regulation of the intracellular
concentration of free Ca2+.
The single most important ion transporter is probably the Na+-K+ pump (Hille, 1992).
It is driven by the energy derived from hydrolysis of ATP. Three Na+ ions are pumped out
of the cell for every two K+ ions moved into the cell. This results in a net accumulation
of charge, that is, in a small but measurable current. The pump is therefore known as
electrogenic and is ubiquitous in the membranes of all cells, neuronal or not. Given the fact
that most cells have stable resting potentials that have to be continuously maintained in the
face of EPSPs and IPSPs, action potentials, and so on, the Na+-K+ pump consumes a lot of
power. Roughly half the metabolic energy used in the retina of a rabbit (Ames et al., 1992)
and in the mammalian brain in general (Ames, 1997) has been attributed to it.
Two major transport systems are responsible for the net outward movement of Ca2+
across the neuronal membrane against the large concentration gradient (Dipolo and Beauge,
1983; Blaustein, 1988; McBurney and Neering, 1987). One system, the Na+-Ca2+ ex-
changer, exploits the energy gained when moving three Na+ ions inward by moving one
calcium ion out of the cell, thereby generating one excess charge for each Ca2+ ion that is
removed. This pump has a maximal rate of Ca2+ removal of 2-3 nmol per square centimeter
of membrane area per second and a Kj in the low micromolar range (that is, the pump is
operating at half its maximum if [Ca2+],- = Kd). DiFrancesco and Noble (1985) have
developed a model of the cardiac Na+-Ca2+ exchanger, which has also been applied to
neurons (Gabbiani, Midtgaard, and Knopfel, 1994).
A second pump system requires energy in the form of one ATP molecule for each
calcium ion pumped out. This ATP-driven calcium pump can be considered to be a pump
with a higher affinity (Kd = 0.2 /uM) yet a lower capacity compared to the Na+-Ca2+
exchanger, with a maximal rate of removal of about 0.2 nmol/cm2/sec. Its Ca2+ dependence
is frequently approximated by a Michaelis-Menten equation (see below; Garrahan and Rega,
1990). While both systems operate continuously, the ATP-driven pump can quickly turn on
following Ca2+ influx subsequent to an action potential, while the lower affinity but much
higher capacity system is primarily responsible for maintaining resting levels of Ca2+ over
longer times.


===== Page 23 =====
270 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
From the point of view of charge entering or leaving the cell, both ionic pumps have to
be treated as ionic currents, the ATP-driven pump acting as an outward current (calcium is
removed from the cytoplasm) and the sodium-calcium exchanger acting as an inward current
(since three positive charges are moved inside for every two charges being removed). In
general, their contributions will be small (but see DeSchutter and Smolen, 1998).
One simple way to model the dynamics of these pumps is via saturable first-order
Michaelis-Menten kinetics,
(11.47)
where Pm is given by the number of calcium ions that can be pumped out per square
micrometer of neuronal membrane divided by Arf_pump. The 4/d factor takes account of
the fact that the molecules acting as the pump are inserted into the membrane area (length
x?rd) that encloses the volume (length x nd2/4) containing the calcium ions (surface-
to-volume ratio). The decrease in calcium concentration due to the action of the pump is
directly proportional to the calcium concentration if [Ca +] <sC Kj.
11.7 Analogy between the Cable Equation
and the Reaction-Diffusion Equation
As witnessed in previous chapters, a great deal of knowledge and intuition has accumulated
about the behavior of the membrane potential in one-dimensional cables and dendritic trees.
Can we transfer any of this to the solutions of the reaction-diffusion equations? In particular,
can we define appropriate space and time constants to characterize the spatio-temporal
dynamics of calcium—or any other substance—in response to synaptic input? Drawing
upon the study by Zador and Koch (1994), we show how the techniques developed for
one-dimensional cable theory can be applied to reaction-diffusion equations.
Our starting point is the distribution of calcium ions in a cylinder following the influx of
a calcium current /ca(*> 0 across the membrane. This current can flow through voltage-
or ligand-activated channels. As in one-dimensional cable theory, we neglect the radial
components of diffusion, assuming that their associated time constants are much, much
faster than the longitudional ones (e.g., Rail, 1969b).
The inflowing calcium ions diffuse to neighboring locations, bind to various buffers, and
can be pumped back out of the cable. The buffer itself can also diffuse with a diffusion
coefficient DB. The expressions governing the resulting change in the concentration of
calcium [Ca2+](x, t) and bound calcium-buffer [B • Ca](x, t) is
(11.48)


===== Page 24 =====
11.7 Analogy between the Cable Equation and the Reaction-Diffusion Equation 
• 
271
In the first equation, the first term on the right-hand side corresponds to the diffusive
contribution to the change in calcium concentration, the second and third terms are caused
by the removal of calcium due to its binding with the buffer, the fourth corresponds to the
reduction in [Ca2+], due to the action of the calcium pump, and the last term converts
the inward (that is, negative) calcium current (carrying 2e charge per ion) into a calcium
concentration (the 4/d factor accounts for the area-to-volume ratio). The second equation
specifies the change in bound calcium-buffer concentration as a function of diffusion and
buffer binding and unbinding. The last equation stipulates that in the absence of any buffer
sources and sinks and assuming that the buffer diffuses at the same pace as the bound
calcium-buffer complex, the total buffer concentration T-& is constant.
Note the nonlinear coupling between the two variables (the [Ca2+] x [B] term), rendering
the solution to these partial differential equations difficult.
11.7.1 Linearization
As we will show now, under certain limiting conditions, Eqs. 11.48 can be reduced to a
single, linear partial differential equation, formally equivalent to the cable equation. This
reduction is based on the instantaneous buffer assumption; that is, the kinetics of buffering
are much faster than diffusion. Since the former occurs on a microsecond to millisecond
time scale (Falke et al., 1994) and the latter requires 10-100 msec, this is a very valid
assumption and implies that
(11.49)
holds everywhere.
From a mathematical point of view, Eqs. 11.48 constitute a singularly perturbed system,
in which one variable evolves much faster than the others. Other instances of such systems
are the Hodgkin-Huxley and the FitzHugh-Nagumo equations (Keener, 1988; Wagner and
Keizer, 1994). The concentration of the bound buffer at any instant can be approximated
by its steady-state distribution (Eq. 11.38),
(11.50)
Assuming furthermore that the calcium concentration is less than the Kj of the binding
process (see Eq. 11.39) and that the pump is not saturated (that is, [Ca2+](;t, t) < Kd-pump)^
Eqs. 11.48 can be reduced (Zador and Koch, 1994; Wagner and Keizer, 1994) to
(11.51)
Equation 11.51 should be very familiar to us, since it is the cable equation in disguise. To
recall, the cable equation in an infinite cylinder in response to an injected current density
Anj(*, t) is (see Eq. 2.7),
(11.52)
If the following identifications are made, these two linear equations are identical:


===== Page 25 =====
272 . 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
(11.53)
That the pump acts like a membrane conductance R~l is straightforward enough to
understand: the more pump molecules are present, the more calcium will "leak" out of the
cell. Equation 11.51 was derived under a low calcium constraint. For higher concentrations,
the pump saturates (Eq. 11.47) and acts like a constant hyperpolarizing current, removing
calcium ions at a constant rate.
Just as the axial resistance determines the spread of the voltage along the longitudinal
axis, so does the diffusion constant determine the rate of calcium flux along the longitudinal
axis (see also Fig. 11.3). The effect of a diffusible buffer is to increase the effective diffusion
constant by an additive term /3D% = T^D^/K^. There are now two sources of calcium
mobility: direct diffusion of Ca2+ ions and diffusion of bound calcium riding "piggyback"
along with the buffer. The net effect of buffering and diffusion of the bound buffer can be
expressed by a revised effective diffusion 
coefficient
(11.54)
(For a generalization, see Wagner and Keizer, 1994.) For the observed large binding ratio
ft, diffusion is dominated by the diffusion of the calcium-buffer complex.
Because calcium is measured using calcium-dependent fluorescent dyes, which them-
selves act as buffers for calcium ions, the perturbation of the Ca2+ signals by the measure-
ment act must be taken into account (Neher, 1995).
As illustrated by Fig. 11.3, the basic diffusion equation includes an effective membrane
capacitance of unity. The effect of a fast buffer is to boost this capacitance by an additive
term given by the binding ratio ft. Similar to a capacitance, the buffer acts to slow down
changes in the calcium concentration. Note that the buffer does not affect the steady-state
distribution of calcium in response to a sustained calcium current injection /ca.
11.7.2 Chemical Dynamics and Space and
Time Constants of the Diffusion Equation
Further exploiting the analogy between the two equations (Zador and Koch, 1994; see also
Kasai and Petersen, 1994), we know that the response of the reaction-diffusion equation to
a stationary calcium current /ca in an infinite cable will be a decaying exponential, allowing
us to define a space constant,
(11.55)
Here r-d stands for "reaction-diffusion." We can also define a time constant associated with
the linearized reaction-diffusion equation (Eq. 11.51) as


===== Page 26 =====
11.7 Analogy between the Cable Equation and the Reaction-Diffusion Equation 
• 
273
(see Table 11.2), with
(11.56)
(11.57)
This similarity allows us to apply the results we derived in Chaps. 2 and 3 directly to write
down equivalent expressions for the linearized reaction-diffusion equation. In particular, we
can introduce the transfer "resistance" Ktj, defined as the ratio of the sustained change in
calcium concentration at location j in response to the sustained calcium current /ca injected
at location i. If locations ;' and j are a distance Xij apart in an infinite cylinder, we have
(see Eq. 3.23),
(11.58)
with the steady-state input resistance defined as (Eq. 3.24; see also Carnevale and Rosenthal,
1992),
(11.59)
The unit of the chemical input resistance is M/A (injecting so many amperes of current
increases the concentration by so many molar). From all of this we can infer a number of
interesting facts.
1. As pointed out above, the buffering scheme will only affect the transient behavior, not
the sustained response, acting like a capacitance. The more buffer that is present, the
larger TB and therefore fi and thus the longer r,._d.
2. The scaling behavior of the sustained response in a cable of diameter d is identical to that
of A and KH for the cable equation (Fig. 11.9). Because the constant in front of the pump
term scales with the ratio of surface area to volume, that is, as 4/d, and D, DB and ft are
independent of d, Xr^d scales as \fd and KH as d~3/2. Thus, injecting a calcium current
into a small volume will give rise to a much larger change in calcium concentration than
injecting the identical current into a larger volume.
(11.60)
3. What does scale differently is the time constant. While rm is independent of the radius of
the neuronal process, T,._</ increases linearly with d (Eq. 11.56 and Fig. 11.9). Calcium

Definition of space and (ime constants as well as the steady-state input resistance for the cable and the linearized reaction-diffusion
equation for an infinite cylinder. j8 = TB/KJ characterizes the buffer and Pm the ionic membrane pump. See Zador and Koch
(1994).


===== Page 27 =====
274 . 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.9 SPACE AND TIME CONSTANTS AS A FUNCTION OF CABLE DIAMETER 
(A) Space and
(B) time constants for the linearized reaction-diffusion equation (Eq. 11.51) (solid line) and the cable
equation (Eq. 2.7) (dashed line) as a function of the diameter of the infinite cable. Notice that the
electrical space constant is much larger than the chemical space constant, with important functional
consequences. While this is also true for the time constants for thin fibers, the time constant of the
reaction-diffusion equation scales with the diameter and can therefore exceed im in large structures.
The parameters are chosen to mimic the binding of calcium to calmodulin. Numerical values are
defined in Table 11.3. Reprinted by permission from Zador and Koch (1994).
dynamics will be slower in thicker cables than in thinner ones. (We are not, of course,
accounting for radial diffusion within the cylinder, since we are only considering the
one-dimensional diffusion equation.)
4. Table 11.3 lists some typical values for the space and time constants and the input
resistance in an infinite cable for both Eqs. 2.7 and 11.51. What is immediately apparent
is the substantial difference between the space constant of the cable equation and that of
the reaction-diffusion equation,
In other words, while voltage can act over substantial distances, the effect of the
concentration of calcium (or other second messengers) is much more local. Reducing
the density of calcium pumps by one, two, or even three orders of magnitude does not
affect this difference dramatically. Ultimately this is due to the fact that the membrane
conductances dominating the resting levels of the membrane potential (mainly K+


===== Page 28 =====
11.7 Analogy between the Cable Equation and the Reaction-Diffusion Equation
275
{
  "table_name": "TABLE 11.3",
  "description": "Numerical Values of X, r, and KU for the Linearized Reaction-Diffusion and Cable Equations",
  "columns": ["Diameter", "Xr_rf", "rr_</", "KU (r — d)", "X", "rm", "KU"],
  "rows": [
    [0.1, 0.49, 1.38, 84.6, 224, 20, 14200],
    [1.0, 1.54, 13.8, 26.8, 707, 20, 450],
    [10.0, 4.88, 137.5, 0.085, 2236, 20, 14.2]
  ]
}

Space and time constants and the sustained input resistance of the reaction-diffusion and the cable equations in an infinite cable
of indicated diameter (in /j,m) for calcium (with D = 0.6 ^,m2/msec) binding to diffusible calmodulin (with TB = 100 p.M,
Kj = 10 \iM, ft = 10, and £>B = 0.13 jitni2/msec) and in the presence of a high-affinity calcium pump (Pm = 0.2 ;im/msec).
This is compared against a standard dendritic cable with R, = 100 £2-cm, Rm = 20,000 Q-cm2 and Cm = 1 pf/cm2. Notice the
dramatic difference between k,-d and A. and the different scaling behavior of rr_<; and rm. The space constants are in units of pm
and the time constants in msec. The chemical input resistance is in units of nM/f A and the electrical input resistance in Mfi.
conductances) are small relative to the interaxial resistance, while relatively more Ca2+
ions pass through the membrane via the pumps than flow longitudinally.
5. The dynamics of the two processes are comparable for small cylinders, but can differ
greatly—due to the dependency of Tr~d on the geometry—for thicker dendrites (Ta-
ble 11.3 and Fig. 11.9). Due to the smaller surface-to-volume ratio, the time constant of
the reaction-diffusion equation can be quite slow, in the hundreds of milliseconds.
How well does the linearized reaction-diffusion equation hold up in practice? This was
evaluated by observing the spread of calcium along the axon of an Aplysia neuron (Gabso,
Neher, and Spira, 1997). Following the injection of calcium from a micropipette into the
axon, calcium was tracked with the help of another fluorescent dye, fura-2, for tens of
seconds as the calcium ions diffused away from the injection site for a few hundreds of
micrometers.
As expressed by Eq. 2.31 and illustrated in Fig. 2.7A, the impulse response function of
the cable equation in an infinite cylinder for any fixed point in time is a Gaussian. This also
holds true for the linearized reaction-diffusion system we are considering,
(11.61)
where the effective diffusion coefficient L>eff is defined in Eq. 11.57. Gabso, Neher, and
Spira (1997) fit a Gaussian through the spatial profile of the calcium signal at different times
(Fig. 11.10A). If the spatio-temporal dynamics of [Ca2+] follow Eq. 11.51, then the square
of the standard deviation of the Gaussian should increase linearly in time, which it does
(Fig. 11.1 OB). The slope of the curve gives the effective diffusion coefficient of calcium
and the calcium bound to any buffers intrinsic to the axon as well as to the fura-2. Note that
in this study, the calcium signal was purposely kept below 0.5 [iM.
While the analogy between the cable equation and the reaction-diffusion equation breaks
down for large values of calcium concentration and for more complex buffering schemes,
the behavior of [Ca2+] will not deviate qualitatively from that described by the linear
Eq. 11.51.
This is demonstrated in Fig. 11.11, which plots the normalized calcium concentration
at two locations in an infinite cable for a series of calcium injections. For small currents,
the system operates in the low calcium limit, and the dynamics of [Ca2+], obtained by
solving the nonlinear coupled partial differential Eqs. 11.48, are fitted well by the linear


===== Page 29 =====
276
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
Fig. 11.10 CALCIUM SPREAD ALONG AN AXON
Experimental determination of the calcium signal
(recorded using the calcium-dependent fluorescent
dye fura-2) following a brief intracellular injection
of calcium at one point into the axon of a cultured
metacerebral Apfysia neuron by Gabso, Neher, and
Spira (1997). (A) Spatial profile of the [Ca2+];
signal for different times. A baseline value was
subtracted from each curve so that they all approach
zero for large distances. Images were acquired ev-
ery 1.8 sec, with the second, third, fifth, and seventh
measurements displayed in the enlarged inset. A
Gaussian was fitted through each curve (smooth
lines in the inset). (B) The square of the standard
deviation of the Gaussian was plotted as a function
of time. If the spatio-temporal calcium dynamics
follows the linearized reaction-diffusion equation
(Eq. 11.51) these points should fall on a straight
line whose slope is the effective diffusion coeffi-
cient Deff of free and bound calcium, here equal
to 0.112 jiinWmsec. Reprinted by permission from
Gabso, Neher, and Spira (1997).
approximation of Eq. 11.51. As the current is made larger, the buffer saturates and becomes
ineffective, since it no longer absorbs any of the inflowing calcium ions. Indeed, following
Eqs. 11.37 and 11.50, at high calcium concentrations the entire buffer concentration is taken
up by the bound calcium-buffer complex. Formally, this corresponds to f) = 0 in Eq. 11.51,
which explains the greatly spedup chemical dynamics (Tr~d decreases by about one order
of magnitude). However, the important point to note is that the behavior of the solutions to
the full equations is bracketed by the solutions to the linear equation with f) = 0 and 10,
without deviating in any significant way from them (for instance, they are all monotonic,
saturating functions).
The morale is that without further significant nonlinearites, our conclusions regarding
the space and time constants associated with the reaction-diffusion equation do not change
dramatically.
11.8 Calcium Nonlinearities
It is known that a number of different cell types exhibit all-or-none calcium events that occur
over and over again (Berridge, 1990; for an excellent review of this topic see Meyer and
Stryer, 1991). Such oscillations in the calcium concentration, whose duration lasts on the
order of seconds or longer, can be observed in response to hormones. They have very sharp
onsets and vary in frequency in a monotonic manner with the concentration of the hormone.
Although these calcium spikes are on the order of three to four orders of magnitude slower
than voltage spikes, they do share a number of features with their faster cousins, in particular
being caused by a highly nonlinear positive feedback mechanism. Indeed, equations similar
to the Hodgkin-Huxley equations have been used to replicate these experimental findings
in a computer model (Meyer and Stryer, 1991; Ogden, 1996).


===== Page 30 =====
11.9 Recapitulation
277
Fig. 11.11 EFFECT OF BUFFER SATURATION ON CALCIUM DIFFUSION 
Effect of saturating the
buffer in an infinite cable. Plotted is the normalized calcium concentration (A) at the origin of the
current input as well as (B) one space constant kr-d away. The dashed curves represent solutions
to the linearized reaction-diffusion equation (Eq. 11.51) for /8 = 10 (lower dashed curve) and for
the fully saturated buffer (corresponding to ft = 0 in Eq. 11.51). The solid curves correspond to the
solution of the nonlinear coupled Eqs. 11.48 for a peak calcium current of 10~4, 10~3, 10~2, and
10~' nA amplitude (from bottom to top). The behavior of the full system is bracketed by the two
linear solutions; no qualitatively new behavior appears. Reprinted by permission from Zador and
Koch (1994).
In some model systems, waves of increased [Ca2+],- have been observed (Cornell-Bell
et al., 1990; Dupont and Goldbeter, 1992; Sanderson, 1996). Applying the excitatory neu-
rotransmitter glutamate to hippocampal astrocytes—non-neuronal supporting cells, which
occur in great numbers throughout the brain—triggers such calcium waves, propagating at
constant speeds of about 20 /urn/sec throughout the cytoplasm of the astrocyte. Frequently,
these waves propagate across adjacent astrocytes. The possible significance of such waves
for neuronal signaling is not known.
While such nonlinear calcium events are quite intriguing, their long time scale makes
it unlikely that they play a significant role in the rapid computations that we are primarily
interested in.
11.9 Recapitulation
Diffusion is a fundamental fact of life for molecules in the intracellular or extracellular
cytoplasm. Through its random action, it acts to move substances throughout the cell.


===== Page 31 =====
278 
• 
DIFFUSION, BUFFERING, AND BINDING
From a computational point of view, the most important fact about diffusion is that it
places strong constraints on how rapid calcium or other second messenger molecules can
affect things far away. The distance over which some concentration increase diffuses is
proportional to the square root of the time that has passed. In the absence of any calcium
nonlinearities and active transport processes, this square-root law fundamentally limits the
ability of the calcium signal to implement the fast type of information processing operations
required for many perceptual, cognitive, or motor tasks. Recognizing a friend's face, shifting
visual attention from one location to a neighboring one, or raising one's hand to catch a ball
can all be accomplished within a few hundred milliseconds.
The calcium that rushes into the cell via ionic channels is tightly regulated. The vast
majority is bound to a host of intracellular buffers, such that only one out of 20 Ca2+ ions
is free to interact with other molecules, severely limiting the effective diffusion coefficient
of calcium.
While calcium ions diffuse along some process, their concentration rapidly decreases.
This is especially true for a substance that diffuses in the three-dimensional extracellular
tissue; its spatial concentration profile decreases sharply with distance from the source (as
e~r ). A relevant case are certain unconventional neuroactive substances, such as nitric
oxide, that can diffuse across the membrane cytoskeleton (Sees. 20.2 and 20.3).
Of course, these constraints do not argue against the use of the local intracellular calcium
concentration for computing and for short-term memory storage (Sobel and Tank, 1994).
When calcium and its protein targets are in close spatial proximity, the rate at which calcium
can bind to this protein limits the speed of the computational operation being implemented
(Sec. 20.1). This allows chemical switching to proceed in the submillisecond domain. Using
concentration changes for implementing rapid operations does impose stringent conditions
on a fast local input and a fast local read-out mechanism.
In general, movements of ions due to the inhomogeneous distribution of the various
relevant ions (Ca2+, Na+, K+ and Cl~) must be incorporated into the cable equation,
leading to the Nernst-Planck electrodiffusion equation. However, as long as the diameter of
the neuronal process is above a fraction of a micrometer, this equation is well approximated
by the cable equation. Only when studying very small processes, such as dendritic spines
or very thin dendrites, does the longitudinal diffusion of the carriers need to be taken into
account.
If the buffering reaction is substantially faster than diffusion and if the calcium con-
centration is small (technically, if [Ca2+],- < Kj of the pump and of the buffer), the
coupled system of reaction-diffusion equations can be reduced to a single linear partial
differential equation, which is formally equivalent to the cable equation. This allows us
to define space and time constants and input resistances in analogy to these parameters in
passive dendrites. One important insight is that A.r_,/ <g; A., implying that from the point
of view of spatial compartmentalization, the presence of reasonable amounts of calcium
pumps and buffers in the dendritic tree will fractionate the tree into a series of small
and relatively independent compartments. In each of these subunits, independent calcium-
initiated chemical computations could be carried out. This is in contrast to the relatively
smaller attenuation experienced by the membrane potential in a dendritic tree. It may well
be possible that the architecture and morphology of the dendritic tree reflects less the need
for electrical computations but more its role in isolating and amplifying chemical signals.
We will study a beautiful instance of this in the following chapter on dendritic spines.
Because of the mathematical equivalence between electrical, chemical, and even bio-
chemical networks (Busse and Hess, 1973; Eigen, 1974; Hjelmfelt and Ross, 1992; Barkai


===== Page 32 =====
11.9 Recapitulation 
• 279
and Leibler, 1997) that derives from their common underlying mathematical structure,
appropriate sets of reaction-diffusion systems can be devised that emulate specific electrical
circuits. In principle, computations can be carried out using either membrane potential as
the crucial variable—controlled by the cable equation—or concentration of calcium or
some other substances—controlled by reaction-diffusion equations (for examples of this,
see Poggio and Koch, 1985). The principal differences are the relevant spatial and temporal
scales, dictated by the different physical parameters, as well as the dynamical range of the
two sets of variables. Given neuronal noise levels, the membrane potential can be considered
to vary by a factor of hundred or less, while the concentration of calcium or other substances
can vary by three or more orders of magnitude during physiological events.


