===== Page 1 =====
BURSTING CELLS
Some neurons throughout the animal kingdom respond to an intracellular current injection
or to an appropriate sensory stimulus with a stereotypical sequence of two to five fast spikes
riding upon a slow depolarizing envelope. The entire event, termed a burst, is over within
10-40 msec and is usually terminated by a profound afterhyperpolarization (ΑΗΡ). Such
bursting cells are not a random feature of a certain fraction of all cells but can be identified
with specific neuronal subpopulations. What are the mechanisms generating this intrinsic
firing pattern and what is its meaning?
Bursting cells can easily be distinguished from a cell firing at a high maintained frequency
by the fact that bursts will persist even at a low firing frequency. As illustrated by the thalamic
relay cell of Fig. 9.4, some cells can switch between a mode in which they predominantly
respond to stimuli via single, isolated spikes and one in which bursts are common. Because
we believe that bursting constitutes a special manner of signaling important information, we
devote a single, albeit small chapter to this topic. In the following, we describe a unique class
of cells that frequently signal with bursts, and we touch upon the possible biophysical mecha-
nisms that give rise to bursting. We finish this excursion by focussing on a functional study of
bursting cells in the electric fish and speculate about the functional relevance of burst firing.
16.1 Intrinsically Bursting Cells
Neocortical cells are frequently classified according to their response to sustained current
injections. While these distinctions are not all or none, there is broad agreement for three
classes: regular spiking, fast spiking, and intrinsically bursting neurons (Connors, Gutnick,
and Prince, 1982; McCormick et al., 1985; Connors and Gutnick, 1990; Agmon and
Connors, 1992; Baranyi, Szente, and Woody, 1993; Nunez, Amzica, and Steriade, 1993;
Gutnick and Crill, 1995; Gray and McCormick, 1996). Additional cell classes have been
identified (e.g., the chattering cells that fire bursts of spikes with interburst intervals ranging
from 15 to 50 msec; Gray and McCormick, 1996), but whether or not they occur widely
has not yet been settled. The cells of interest to us are the intrinsically bursting cells.
In response to a just-threshold current stimulus, an intrinsically bursting (IB) cell
fires a single burst. If the current amplitude increases, some IB cells burst repeatedly
374
16


===== Page 2 =====
16.1 Intrinsically Bursting Cells
375
at a constant frequency of between 5 and 12 Hz (as in Fig. 16.1C), while others re-
spond by repetitive single spikes. It is not uncommon for an IB cell to flip back and
forth between these two firing modes. Even more complex behavior, such as the initi-
ation of a long train of bursts in response to a brief hyperpolarizing current stimulus,
has been reported (Silva, Amitai, and Connors, 1991). The spikes themselves are con-
ventional sodium carried ones. Their amplitude during the burst frequently decreases—
presumably because the sustained depolarization partially inactivates /N-,—while their
duration increases.
Intrinsic bursting cells show a unique laminar distribution and morphology. In studies
using intracellular staining, IB cells correspond to large pyramidal neurons restricted—with
few exceptions—to layer 5, with stereotyped dendritic morphologies and axonal projection
patterns. IB cells have an extended apical bush in layers 1 and 2, while nonbursting cells
in layer 5 lack this feature (Fig. 16.ID; Larkman and Mason, 1990; Gray and McCormick,
1996; Yang, Seamans, and Gorelova, 1996).
Fig. 16.1 INTRINSICALLY BURSTING AND REGULAR SPIKING PYRAMIDAL CELLS Structure-
function relationship among pyramidal cells from rodent cortex. Typical firing patterns seen in
response to an intracellularly injected current step in (A) re guiar spiking, and (C) intrinsically bursting
layer 5 pyramidal cells from mouse cortex (Agmon and Connors, 1992). Drawings of biocytin-filled
layer 5 (B) regular spiking and (D) intrinsically bursting (IB) pyramidal cells from the rat. IB cells
tend to have an extensive apical dendrite (reaching all the way up to layer 1) while regular spiking
cells show a smaller degree of dendritic arborization. The output targets of the two cell types are quite
distinct, with bursting cells projecting outside the cortex proper. Unpublished data from L. J. Cauller,
I. Biilthoff, and B. W. Connors, printed with permission.


===== Page 3 =====
376 
« 
BURSTING CELLS
Neurons whose cell bodies are located in layer 5 constitute the primary output of the
neocortex. Whenever the cortex decides to do something, the message has to be sent
outside the cortical system via layer 5 cells. This includes the one-million-axon (in humans)
pyramidal tract that leaves the motor cortex and adjacent areas and projects into the spinal
cord (Porter and Lemon, 1993).
Some evidence suggests that the cells projecting outside the cortex are of the bursting
type. IB cells project to the pons and to the superior colliculus, while nonbursting layer
5 pyramidal cells project to the contralateral cortex via the corpus callosum (Wang and
McCormick, 1993; Kasper et al., 1994). It is known that many of the identified layer 5
cells in the rat motor cortex that project to the spinal cord have the firing characteristics
of IB cells (Tseng and Prince, 1993). It is obviously important to know whether all cells
projecting to subcortical (and nonthalamic) targets are of the bursting type.
16.2 Mechanisms for Bursting
Bursting cells have been analyzed using biophysically based conductance models as pio-
neered by Traub and his colleagues (Traub and Llinás, 1979;Traub, 1979,1982; Traub etal.,
1991; summarized in the monograph by Traub and Miles, 1991) and from the perspective
of dynamical systems theory (Chap. 7; Rinzel, 1987; Wang and Rinzel, 1996; Rinzel and
Ermentrout, 1997).
There is likely to be aplurality of mechanisms that cause bursts. In Sec. 9.1.4 we discussed
the critical role of a somatic low-threshold calcium current responsible for mediating bursts
in thalamic cells (Fig. 9.4).
Central to the genesis of bursting in cortical cells are fast, sodium-driven action potentials
at the cell body, which not only propagate forward along the axon, but also invade the
dendritic tree (Rhodes and Gray, 1994). Backpropagation is aided by a low density of
dendritic sodium channels that boost the signal. (For a more detailed discussion of this, see
Sees. 19.1 and 19.2.) Dendritic calcium conductances build up local depolarization. In the
meantime, somatic repolarization establishes a pronounced potential difference between
the cell body and the dendritic tree, giving rise to ohmic currents. These will depolarize
the soma and the spike initiating zone in the form of an afterdepolarizing potential (ADP).
It is this ADP that causes the rapid sequence of fast sodium spikes. The entire chain of
events is finished off by a hyperpolarization induced by a combination of voltage- and
calcium-dependent potassium currents.
In this view of bursting, dendritic calcium currents are at the root of the prolonged
depolarization that triggers the fast, somatic sodium spikes. However, it appears that in
some systems one or more sodium currents, in combination with the "right" dendritic tree
morphology, can by themselves initiate bursting (Turner et al., 1994; Franceschetti et al.,
1995; Azouz, Jensen, and Yaari, 1996).
Mainen and Sejnowski (1996) derive what this right morphology should be. They
simulate the dynamics of spiking in a number of reconstructed cortical cells with different
dendritic anatomies and endowed with the same distribution and density of voltage-
dependent sodium, potassium, and calcium currents (Fig. 16.2). Changing only the dendritic
tree geometry, but not the mix of voltage-dependent conductances, gives rise to the entire
spectrum of intrinsic responses observed in the cortex: from nonadapting and adapting cells
to bursting ones. The large dendritic tree associated with layer 5 pyramidal cells prolongs
the sodium spike propagating back into the dendritic arbor sufficiently for bursts to occur,


===== Page 4 =====
16.3 What Is the Significance of Bursting? 
· 377
Fig. 16.2 CELLULAR MORPHOL-
OGY AND INTRINSIC FIRING PAT-
TERNS Different 
reconstructed
neurons are endowed with the same
densities of voltage-dependent con-
ductances in soma and dendritic tree
in a computer model: a fast sodium
current, three potassium currents,
and a high-threshold calcium cur-
rent (Mainen and Sejnowski, 1996).
The distinct firing patterns, evoked
in response to sustained current in-
jection (of 50, 70, 100, and 200 pA
for A to D, respectively), run the
gamut of adapting, nonadapting,
and bursting behavior seen in the
cortex. The four cells are (A) layer 3
aspiny stellate cell from rat cortex,
(B) layer 4 spiny stellate, (C) layer
3 pyramid, and (D) layer 5 pyramid
from cat visual cortex. Reprinted
by permission from Mainen and Se-
jnowski (1996).
while no such behavior is observed in the much more compact population of stellate or
pyramidal cells in superficial layers.
These results go hand in hand with the observed correlation between cellular morphology
and intrinsic firing pattern reported above and emphasizes the often subtle and complex
interplay between membrane-bound conductances and cable structure.
16.3 What Is the Significance of Bursting?
Anytime two spatially overlapping but morphologically distinct cell classes project to
different locations (as the layer 5 bursting and nonbursting cells), one should assume that
they encode and transmit different features (since otherwise the job could be done with the


===== Page 5 =====
378 · 
BURSTING CELLS
help of a single cell class whose axons branch to innervate both areas). Viewed in this light,
the existence of a cell type that responds to sustained current steps in a bursty manner and
projects outside the cortical system demands an explanation in functional terms.
One broad hypothesis, first entertained by Crick (1984a), is that bursting constitutes
a specialized signal, a particular code symbol, distinct from isolated spikes, conveying a
particular type of information.
The relevance of bursts for conveying information reliably has been ascertained for the
electrosensory system of the electric fish (Gabbiani et al., 1996). Although of a quite distinct
evolutionary lineage than the cerebral cortex, it is profitable to review this study briefly.
Given the conservative nature of biology, reinventing and reusing the same mechanism
over and over again, it would not be surprising if its lesson also applied to the cortex
(Heiligenberg, 1991).
Gabbiani et al., (1996) subject the fish Eigenmannia to random amplitude modulations of
an electric field in the water whose carrier frequency is equal to the fish's own electrical organ
discharge frequency that has been pharmacologically disabled (Fig. 16.3A), while recording
from pyramidal cells in the electrosensory lateral line lobe (ELL). Signal detection theory
can be used to determine which particular features of the electric field are represented by the
firing of these cells. Assuming that the ELL pyramidal cells implement a linear summation
and threshold operation, it can be inferred that the cells respond best to up or down strokes
of the electric field.
Slightly more than half of the spikes generated by the pyramidal cells occur in short
bursts (on average three spikes with a mean spike separation of 9 msec; Fig. 16.3A). The
signal-to-noise ratio of this signal detection operation—based only on those spikes that
make up a burst—is substantially higher than the signal-to-noise ratio of the signal based
on isolated spikes (Fig. 16.3B). In other words, spikes taken from a burst signal the presence
of a particular stimulus feature, here an "abrupt" change in the electric field, more reliably
than isolated spikes. Intracellular evidence implicates the apical dendritic tree of the ELL
pyramidal cells as the locus where the burst computation is carried out (Turner et al., 1994).
It is possible that bursty neurons communicate their messages to their target cells with the
aid of two output channels multiplexed onto a single axon, one employing isolated spikes
and the other bursts. Depending on the type and amount of short-term synaptic plasticity
present at the output synapses of bursting cells, they could transmit one or the other channel
(Sec. 13.5.4; Abbott et al., 1997; Lisman, 1997).
This would work in the following fashion. Initially the output synapses of bursting cells
have a very low probability of synaptic release po. A single spike is unlikely to cause a
release of a vesicle but will, very briefly, enhance the probability of release for the next
spike. Such transient but powerful facilitation would lead to isolated spikes being effectively
disregarded while bursts would cause a synaptic release with probability close to 1. The price
the nervous system would pay for the usage of bursts is their limited temporal resolution as
compared to individual spikes (in the Gabbiani et al., 1996, study, the interval between the
first and the last spike is 18 ± 9 msec).
Conversely, a synapse with high initial probability of release and a powerful but short act-
ing short-term depression will disregard the additional spikes contained within a burst. This
hypothesis predicts that synapses made by the axon of a bursting cell have low p0 and show
a very short lasting but powerful facilitation not present at the synapses of nonbursting cells.
Koch and Crick (1994) speculate that bursting could be one of the biophysical correlates
of short-term memory (via elevated, presynaptic calcium concentration during such a burst).
The stimulus feature represented by a population of bursting cells would correspond to the
feature "stored" in short-term memory. Because of the close association between short-


===== Page 6 =====
16.4 Recapitulation
379
Fig. 16.3 RELIABLE ENCODING OF SENSORY
INFORMATION IN BURSTS 
(A) In experi-
ments carried out in the electric fish Eigenman-
nia, Gabbiani and colleagues (1996) stimulate
its electrosensory system using zero-mean ran-
dom amplitude modulations (thick smooth line)
superimposed onto a fixed carrier frequency of
an electric field while recording from pyrami-
dal cells in the electrosensory lateral line lobe
(ELL). A large fraction of all spikes belongs to
bursts (#) that show up as a prominent peak in
the interspike intervals (here bursts are defined
as spikes separated by < 14 msec; see the inset).
(B) On the basis of signal detection theory in-
dividual pyramidal cells can be shown to detect
either up or down strokes of the electric field
amplitude with up to 85% accuracy. The signal-
to-noise ratio of this pattern discrimination op-
eration, which assumes that ELL pyramidal
cells perform a linear threshold computation,
is enhanced (by more than a factor of 2) when
considering only spikes from bursts compared
to isolated spikes. In other words, burst spikes
encode information in a more reliable manner
than isolated action potentials. Reprinted by
permission from Gabbiani et al., (1996).
term memory and awareness, it is possible that bursting cells are preferentially involved
in mediating the neuronal correlate of awareness, in particular considering their strategic
location in the cortical layer projecting to the tectum, pulvinar, and other extracortical targets
(Crick and Koch, 1995).
Quite a different explanation for the utility of a particular subclass of spike patterns has
been advanced in Traub et al., (1996). In some cells, spike doublets, consisting of two fast
spikes separated by a stereotyped 4-5 msec interspike interval, are frequently observed.
Spike doublets are characteristic of GAB Aergic, axo-axonic cortical interneurons (Buhl et
al., 1994). Computer modeling of the underlying cortical networks show that such doublets
mediate the frequently observed temporal synchronization of distant neuronal populations.
Their oscillatory activities are synchronized with a near-zero phase lag, even though they
are separated by propagation delays of 5 msec or more.
16.4 Recapitulation
Bursts, that is, two to five closely spaced, sodium-dependent fast action potentials riding
on top of a much slower depolarization, are a dominant feature of a number of cell classes,


===== Page 7 =====
380 · 
BURSTING CELLS
not only in the cortex but also among thalamic relay neurons and elsewhere. In the cortex,
intrinsically bursting cells have a unique morphology and are confined to layer 5, where
they constitute the dominant output cell class.
The biophysical mechanisms underlying bursting are diverse. A low-threshold calcium
current at the soma is the principal agent for bursting in thalamic cells (Sec. 9.1.4). Bursts
in pyramidal cells can originate when sodium spikes propagate back into the dendritic tree,
causing parts of the arbor to be depolarized. Under the right circumstances, for instance,
when amplified by dendritic sodium and/or calcium currents, this signals returns to the soma
in the form of an afterdepolarization that triggers several fast sodium spikes.
It has been argued that bursting represents a special code, quite distinct from the firing
of an isolated action potential. This hypothesis has some experimental support from the
electrosensory system of the electric fish. Spikes taken from bursts signal the presence of
particular features in the input in a much more reliable manner than isolated spikes.
This implies that spiking cells are not restricted to using an asynchronous binary code
but might employ a two-channel multiplexing strategy, with the decoding being carried out
by rapidly adapting synapses.
A non-exclusive alternative is that bursts serve to synchronize distant neuronal pop-
ulations.


