===== Page 1 =====
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
Any physical or biophysical mechanism instantiating an information processing system that
needs to survive in the real world must obey several constraints: (1) it must operate at high
speeds, (2) it must have a rich repertoire of computational primitives, with the ability to
implement a variety of linear and nonlinear, high-gain, operations, and (3) it must interface
with the physical world—in the sense of being able to represent sensory input patterns
accurately and translate the result of the computations into action, that is motor output
(Keyes, 1985).
The membrane potential is the one physical variable within the nervous system that
fulfills these three requirements: it can vary rapidly over large distances (e.g., an action
potential changes the potential by 100 mV within 1 msec, propagating up to 1 cm or
more down an axon within that time), and the membrane potential controls a vast number
of nonlinear gates—ionic channels—that provide a very rich substrate for implementing
nonlinear operations. These channels transduce visual, tactile, auditory, and olfactory stimuli
into thanges of the membrane potential, and such voltage changes back into the release of
neurotransmitters or the contraction of muscles.
This is not to deny that ionic fluxes, or chemical interactions of various substances with
each other, are not crucial to the working of the brain. They are, and we will study some
of these mechanisms in Chap. 11. Yet the membrane potential is the incisive variable that
serves as primary vehicle for the neuronal operations underlying rapid computations—at
the fraction of a second time scale—in the brain.
We will introduce the reader in a very gentle manner to the electrical properties of nerve
cells by starting off with the very simplest of all neuronal models, consisting of nothing more
than a resistance and a capacitance (a so-called RC circuit). Yet endowed with synaptic input,
this model can already implement a critical nonlinear operation, divisive normalization and
gain control.
1.1 Structure of the Passive Neuronal Membrane
As a starting point, we choose a so-called point representation of a neuron. Here, the
spatial dependency of the neuron is reduced to a single point or compartment. Such an
5
1


===== Page 2 =====
6 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
approximation would be valid, for instance, if we were investigating a small, spherical cell
without a significant dendritic tree.
1.1.1 Resting Potential
The first thing we notice once we managed to penetrate into this cell with a wire from
which we can record (termed an intracellular microelectrode) is the existence of an electrical
potential across this membrane. Such experiments, carried out in the late 1930s by Cole
and Curtis (1936) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, and by Hodgkin and Huxley (1939) on
the other side of the Atlantic, demonstrated that almost always, the membrane potential,
denned as the difference between the intracellular and the extracellular potentials, or
(1-1)
is negative. Here t stands for time. In particular, at rest, all cells, whether neurons, glia or
muscle cells, have a negative resting potential, symbolized throughout the book as Vrest.
Depending on the circumstances, it can be as high as —30 mV or as low as —90 mV. Note
that when we say the cell is at "rest," it is actually in a state of dynamic equilibrium. Ionic
currents are flowing across the membrane, but they balance each other, in such a manner
that the net current flowing across the membrane is zero. Maintaining this equilibrium is a
major power expenditure for the nervous system. Half of the metabolic energy consumed
by a mammalian brain has been estimated to be due to the membrane-bound pumps that
are responsible for the upkeep of the underlying ionic gradients (Ames, 1997).
The origin of Vrest lies in the differential distribution of ions across the membrane, which
we do not further describe here (see Sec. 4.4 and Hille, 1992). Vrest need not necessarily
be fixed. Indeed, we will discuss in Sec. 18.3 conditions under which a network of cortical
cells can dynamically adjust their resting potentials.
1.1.2 Membrane Capacity
What is the nature of the membrane separating the intracellular cytoplasm from the extra-
cellular milieu (Fig. 1.1)? The two basic constitutive elements of biological membranes,
whether from the nervous system or from nonneuronal tissues such as muscle or red blood
cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, are proteins and lipids (Gennis, 1989).
The backbone of the membrane is made of two layers of phospholipid molecules, with
their polar heads facing the intracellular cytoplasm and the extracellular space, thereby
separating the internal and external conducting solutions by a 30-50-A-thin insulating
layer. We know that whenever a thin insulator is keeping charges apart, it will act like a
capacitance. The capacitance C is a measure of how much charge Q needs to be distributed
across the membrane in order for a certain potential Vm to build up. Or, conversely, the
membrane potential Vm allows the capacitance to build up a charge Q on both sides of the
membrane, with
(1.2)
In membrane biophysics, the capacitance is usually specified in terms of the specific
membrane capacitance Cm, in units of microfarads per square centimeter of membrane area
(/iF/cm2). The actual value of C can be obtained by multiplying Cm by the total membrane
area. The thickness and the dielectric constant of the bilipid layer determine the numerical
value of Cm. For the simplest type of capacitance formed by two parallel plates, Cm scales


===== Page 3 =====
1.1 Structure of the Passive Neuronal Membrane 
• 
7
Fig. 1.1 NATURE OF THE PASSIVE NEURONAL MEMBRANE 
(A) Schematic representation of a
small patch of membrane of the types enclosing all cells. The 30-50 A thin bilayer of lipids isolates the
extracellular side from the intracellular one. From an electrical point of view, the resultant separation
of charge across the membrane acts akin to a capacitance. Proteins inserted into the membrane, here
ionic channels, provide a conduit through the membrane. Reprinted by permission from Hille (1992).
(B) Associated lumped electrical circuit for this patch, consisting of a capacitance and a resistance
in series with a battery. The resistance mimics the behavior of voltage-independent ionic channels
inserted throughout the membrane and the battery accounts for the cell's resting potential Vrest.
inversely with the thickness separating the charges (the thinner the distance between the
two plates, the stronger the mutual attraction of the charges across the insulating material).
As discussed in Appendix A, the specific capacitance per unit area of biological membranes
is between 0.7 and 1 /uF/cm2. For the sake of convenience, we adopt the latter, simple to
remember, value. This implies that a spherical cell of 5-/zm radius with a resting potential
of —70 mV stores about —0.22x 10~12 coulomb of charge just below the membrane and
an equal but opposite amount of charge outside.
When the voltage across the capacitance changes, a current will flow. This capacitive
current, which moves on or off the capacitance, is obtained by differentiating Eq. 1.2 with
respect to time (remember that current is the amount of charge flowing per time),
(1.3)
For a fixed current, the existence of the membrane capacitance imposes a constraint on how
rapidly Vm can change in response to this current; the larger the capacitance, the slower the
resultant voltage change.
It is important to realize that there is never any actual movement of charge across the
insulating membrane. When the voltage changes with time, the charge changes and a current
will flow, in accordance with Eq. 1.3, but never directly across the capacitance. The charge
merely redistributes itself across the two sides by way of the rest of the circuit.
Can any current flow directly across the bilipid layers? As detailed in Appendix A, the
extremely high resistivity of the lipids prevents passages of any significant amount of charge
across the membrane. Indeed, the specific resistivity of the membrane is approximately one
billion times higher than that of the intracellular cytoplasm. Thus, from an electrical point
of view, the properties of the membrane can be satisfactorily described by a sole element:
a capacitance.


===== Page 4 =====
8 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
1.1.3 Membrane Resistance
With no other components around, life would indeed be dull. What endows a large collection
of squishy cells with the ability to move and to think are the all-important proteins embedded
within the membrane. Indeed, they frequently penetrate the membrane, allowing ions to pass
from one side to the other (Fig. 1.1). Protein molecules, making up anywhere from 20 to 80%
(dry weight) of the membrane, subserve an enormous range of specific cellular functions,
including ionic channels, enzymes, pumps, and receptors. They act as doors or gates in the
lipid barrier through which particular information or substances can be transferred from
one side to the other. As we shall see later on, a great variety of such "gates" exists, with
different keys to open them. For now, we are interested in those membrane proteins that act
as ionic channels or pores, enabling ions to travel from one side of the membrane to the
other. We will discuss the molecular nature of these channels in more detail in Chap. 8.
For now, we will summarily describe the current flow through these channels by a simple
linear resistance R. Since we also have to account for the resting potential of the cell, the
simplest electrical description of a small piece of membrane includes three elements, C, R,
and Vrest (Fig. 1.1). Such a circuit describes a passive membrane in contrast to quasi-active
and active membranes, which contain, respectively, linear, inductance-like, and nonlinear
voltage-dependent membrane components. For obvious reasons, it is also sometimes known
as an RC circuit. Fortuitously, the membranes of quite a few cells can be mimicked by such
RC circuits, at least under some limited conditions.
The membrane resistance is usually specified in terms of the specific membrane resis-
tance Rm, expressed in terms of resistance times unit area (in units of £2 • cm2). R is
obtained by dividing Rm by the area of the membrane being considered. The inverse of Rm
is known as the passive conductance per unit area of dendritic membrane or, for short, as
the specific leak conductance Gm = !//?„, and is measured in units of Siemens per square
centimeter (S/cm2).
1.2 A Simple RC Circuit
Let us now carry out a virtual electrophysiological experiment. Assume that we have
identified a small spherical neuron of diameter d and have managed to insert a small
electrode into the cell without breaking it up. Under the conditions of our experiments,
we have reasons to believe that its membrane acts passively. We would like to know what
happens if we inject current /;nj(0 through the microelectrode directly into the cell. This
electrode can be thought of as an ideal current source (in contrast to an ideal voltage source,
such as a battery).
How can we describe the dynamics of the membrane potential Vm(t) in response to this
current? The cell membrane can be conceptualized as being made up from many small
RC circuits (Fig. 1.2A). Because the dimensions of the cell are so small, the electrical
potential across the membrane is everywhere the same and we can neglect any spatial
dependencies; physiologists will say the cell is isopotential. This implies that the electrical
behavior of the cell can be adequately described by a single RC compartment with a current
source (Fig. 1.2B). The net resistance R is determined by the specific membrane resistance
Rm divided by the total membrane area nd2 (since the current can flow out through
any one part of the membrane) while the total capacitance C is given by Cm times the
membrane area.


===== Page 5 =====
1.2 A Simple RC Circuit 
• 
9
Fig. 1.2 ELECTRICAL STRUCTURE OF A SMALL PASSIVE NEURON 
(A) Equivalent electrical
model of a spherical cell with passive membrane. An intracellular electrode delivers current to the
cell. By convention, an outward current is positive; thus, the arrow. We assume that the dimensions
of the cell are small enough so that spatial variations in the membrane potential can be neglected.
(B) Under these conditions, the cell can be reduced to a single RC compartment in series with an ideal
current source 7jnj.
It is straightforward to describe the dynamics of this circuit by applying Kirchhoff's
current law, which states that the sum of all currents flowing into or out of any electrical
node must be zero (the current cannot disappear, it has to go somewhere). The current across
the capacitance is given by expression 1.3. The current through the resistance is given by
Ohm's law,
Note that the potential across the resistance is not equal to Vm, but to the difference between
the membrane potential and the fictive battery Vrest> which accounts for the resting potential.
Due to conservation of current, the capacitive and resistive currents must be equal to the
external one, or
A minor, but important detail is the sign of the external current (after all, we could have
replaced +/;nj by — 7jnj in Eq. 1.6). By convention, an outward current, that is positive
charge flowing from inside the neuron to the outside, is represented as a positive current.
An outward going current that is delivered through an intracellular electrode will make the
inside of the cell more positive; the physiologist says that the cell is depolarized. Conversely,
(1.4)
(1.5)
With T = RC, with units of £2-F = sec, we can rewrite this as
(1.6)


===== Page 6 =====
10 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
an inward directed current supplied by the same electrode, plotted by convention in the
negative direction, will make the inside more negative, that is, it will hyperpolarize the
cell. If the current is not applied from an external source but is generated by a membrane
conductance, the situation is different (see Chap. 5).
Due to the existence of the battery Vrest, the electrical diagram in Fig. 1.2B does not,
formally speaking, constitute a passive circuit, since its current-voltage (/—V) relationship
is not restricted to the first and third quadrants of the I-V plane. This implies that
power is needed to maintain this I-V relationship, ultimately supplied by the differential
distributions of ions across the membrane. Because the I-V relationship has a nonzero,
positive derivative for every value of Vm, it is known as an incrementally passive device.
This point is not without interest, since it relates to the stability of circuits built using such
components (Wyatt, 1992). We here do not take a purist point of view, and we will continue
to refer to a membrane whose equivalent circuit diagram is similar to that of Figs. 1. IB and
1.2B as passive.
Equation 1.6 is known as the membrane equation and constitutes a first-order, ordinary
differential equation. With the proper initial conditions, it specifies an unique voltage
trajectory. Let us assume that the membrane potential starts off at Vm(t = 0) = Vrest-
We can replace this into Eq. 1.6 and see that in the absence of any input (7;nj = 0)
this assumption yields dVm/dt = 0, that is, once at Vrest> the system will remain at
Vrest in the absence of any input. This makes perfect sense. So now let us switch on, at
t = 0, a step of current of constant amplitude /Q. We should remember from the theory of
ordinary differential equations that the most general form of the solution of Eq. 1.6 can be
expressed as
(1.7)
where DO and v\ depend on the initial conditions. Replacing this into Eq. 1.6 and canceling
identical variables on both sides leaves us with
(1.8)
We obtain the value of VQ by imposing the initial condition Vm(t — 0) = t>o + i>i = Vrest.
Defining the steady-state potential in response to the current as VOQ = RI0, we have solved
for the dynamics of Vm for this cell,
(1.9)
This equation tells us that the time course of the deviation of the membrane potential from
its resting state, that is, Vm (t) — Vrest, is an exponential function in time, with a time constant
equal to r. Even though the current changed instantaneously from zero to /0, the membrane
potential cannot follow but plays catch up. This is demonstrated graphically in Fig. 1.3.
How slowly Vm changes is determined by the product of the membrane resistance and the
capacitance; the larger the capacitance, the larger the current that goes toward charging up
C. Note that r is independent of the size of the cell,
(1.10)
As we will discuss in considerable detail in later chapters, passive time constants range
from 1 to 2 msec in neurons that are specialized in processing high-fidelity temporal
information to 100 msec or longer for cortical neurons recorded under slice conditions. A


===== Page 7 =====
1.2 A Simple PC Circuit
11
Fig. 1.3 BEHAVIOR OF AN KC
CIRCUIT (A) Evolution of
the membrane potential Vm(t)
in the single RC compartment
of Fig. 1.2B when a current
step of different amplitudes /o
(see Eq. 1.9) is switched on
at / = 0 and turned off at
100 msec. Initially, the mem-
brane potential is at Vrest =
—70 mV. We here assume
R = 100 MS2, C = 100 pF,
T = 10 msec, and four differ-
ent current amplitudes, /o =
-0.1, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 nA. (B)
Normalized impulse response
or Green's function (Eq. 1.17)
associated with the RC circuit
of Fig. 1.2B. The voltage Vm(t)
in response to any current input
7jnj(0 can be obtained by con-
volving this function with the
input.
typical range for r recorded from cortical pyramidal cells in the living animal1 is between
10 and 20 msec.
Remember the origin of the membrane capacitance in the molecular dimensions of the
bilipid membrane. A thicker membrane would lead to a smaller value for Cm and faster
temporal responses.2
The final voltage level in response to the current step is R!Q + Vrest (from Ohm's law).
If /o > 0, the cell will depolarize (that is, V^ > Vrest), whereas for /0 < 0, the converse
occurs. The resistance R is also termed the input resistance of the cell; the larger R, the
larger the voltage change in response to a fixed current. The input resistance at the cell bodies
of neurons, obtained by dividing the steady-state voltage change by the current causing it,
ranges from a few megaohms for the very large motoneurons in the spinal cord to hundreds
of megaohms for cortical spiny stellate cells or cerebellar granule cells.
1. This is called in vivo. Such experiments need to be distinguished from the cases in which a very thin slice is taken from an
animal's brain, placed in a dish, and perfused with a nutrient solution. This would be termed an in vitro experiment.
2. As an aside to the neuromorphic engineers among us designing analog integrated electronic circuits, Cm — 1 jLiF/cm is
about 20 times higher than the specific capacitance obtained by sandwiching a thin layer of silicon dioxide between two layers of
poly silicon using a standard 2.0 or 1.2 /im CMOS process (Mead, 1989).


===== Page 8 =====
12 . 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
What happens if, after the membrane potential reaches its steady-state value VQQ, the
current is switched off at time f0ff ? An analysis similar to the above shows that the membrane
potential returns to Vrest with an exponential time course; that is,
(1.11)
for t > toff. (This can be confirmed by placing this solution into Eq. 1.6; see also Fig. 1.3 A.)
Now that we know the evolution of the membrane potential for a current step, we would
like to know the solution in the general case of some time-dependent current input /jnj(0-
Are we condemned to solve Eq. 1.6 explicitly for every new function /mj(0 that we use?
Fortunately not; because the RC circuit we have been treating here is a shift-invariant, linear
system, we can do much better.
1.3 RC Circuits as Linear Systems
Linearity is an important property of certain systems that allows us—in combination
with shift invariance—to completely characterize their behavior to any input in terms of
the system's impulse response or Green's function (named after a British mathematician
living at the beginning of the nineteenth century). Since the issue of linear and nonlinear
systems runs like a thread through this monograph, we urge the reader who has forgotten
these concepts to quickly skim through Appendix B, which summarizes the most rele-
vant points.
1.3.1 Filtering by RC Circuits
Let us compute the voltage response of the RC circuit of Fig. 1.2B in response to a
current impulse 8(t). We will simplify matters by only considering the deviation of the
membrane potential from its resting state Vrest. Here and throughout the book we use
V(t) = Vm(t) — Vrest when we are dealing with the potential relative to rest and reserve
Vm(0 for the absolute potential. This transforms Eq. 1.6 into
(1.12)
We can transform this equation into Fourier space, where V(f) corresponds to the Fourier
transform of the membrane potential (for a definition, see Appendix B). Remembering that
the dV(t)/dt term metamorphoses into i2n V ( f ) V ( P ) , where i2 = — 1, we have
(1.13)
A simple way to conceptualize this is to think of the input as a sinusoidal current of
frequency /; /jnj(0 = sin(2nft). Since the system is linear, it responds by a sinusoidal
change of potential at the same frequency /, but of different amplitude and shifted in time:
V(t) = A(f) sin(2nft + $(/)). The amplitude of the voltage response at this frequency,
termed A(/), is given by
(1.14)
and its phase by


===== Page 9 =====
1.3 RC Circuits as Linear Systems 
• 
13
(1.15)
In the general case of an arbitrary input current, one can define the complex function A(/)
as the ratio of the Fourier transform of the voltage transform to the Fourier transform of the
injected current,
(1.16)
A(f) is usually referred to as the input impedance of the system. Its value for a sustained
or dc current input, A(f = 0) = R, is known as the input resistance and is a real number.
It is standard engineering practice to refer to the inverse of the input impedance as the input
admittance and to the inverse of the input resistance as the input conductance in units of
Siemens (S).
Does this definition of A make sense? Let us look at two extreme cases. If we subject
the system to a sustained current injection, the change in voltage in response to a sustained
input current / is proportional to R, Ohm's law. Conversely, what happens if we use a
sinusoidal that has a very high frequency /? The amplitude of the voltage change becomes
less and less since at high frequencies the capacitance essentially acts like a short circuit.
In the limit of / -» oo, the impedance goes to zero.
For intermediate values of /, the amplitude smoothly interpolates between R and 0.
In other words, our circuit acts like a low-pass filter, preferentially responding to slower
changing inputs and severely attenuating faster ones: |A(/)| is a strictly monotonically
decreasing function of the frequency /.
Experimentally, the impedance can be obtained by injecting a sinusoidal current of
frequency / and measuring the induced voltage at the same frequency. The ratio of the
voltage to the current corresponds to | A (/) |. The use of impedances to describe the electrical
behavior of neurons and, in particular, of muscle cells has a long tradition going back to the
1930s (Cole and Curtis, 1936; Falk and Fatt, 1964; Cole, 1972).
The result of such a procedure, carried out in a regular firing cell in a slice taken from
the visual cortex of the guinea pig, is shown in Fig. 1.4. Carandini and his colleagues
(1996) injected either sinusoidal currents or a noise stimulus into these cells and recorded
the resultant somatic membrane potential (in the presence of spikes). Given their very fast
time scale, somatic action potentials do not contribute appreciably to the total power of the
voltage signal. Indeed, when stimulating with a sine wave at frequency /, the power of
the voltage response at all higher frequencies was only 3.8% (median) of the power of the
fundamental /. This implies that when judged by the membrane potential and not by the
firing rate, and only considering input and output at the soma, at least some cortical cells
can be quite well approximated by a linear filter (Carandini et al., 1996).
This is surprising, given the presence of numerous voltage-dependent conductances at
the soma and in the dendritic tree. It is, however, not uncommon in neurobiology to find
that despite of—or, possibly because of—a host of concatenated nonlinearities, the overall
system behaves quite linearly (see Sec. 21.1.3). Sometimes one has the distinct impression
that evolution wanted to come up with some overall linear mechanism, despite all the
existing nonlinearities.
We will study later how adding a simple, absolute voltage threshold to the RC compart-
ment that gives rise to an output spike accounts surprisingly well for the spiking behavior


===== Page 10 =====
14 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
Fig. 1.4 CORTICAL CELLS BEHAVE LIKE AN
KC CIRCUIT When either noise or sinusoidal
currents are injected into the cell body of regu-
larly firing cells in guinea pig visual cortex, the
membrane potential can be adequately mod-
eled as resulting from convolving the current
input by a low-pass filter of the sort described
in Eqs. 1.14 and 1.15 (dashed lines; here with
R = 58.3 Mft and r = 9.3 msec; Vres, =
-70.7 mV; Carandini et al., 1996). (A) The
amplitude of the filter and (B) its phase. The
noise current curve reveals a shallow peak at
around 8 Hz. We conclude that from the point
of view of somatic input-output, these cells can
be reasonably well described by a single RC
compartment. The responses were obtained by
computing the first harmonic of the membrane
potential response and dividing by the current.
The power of the first harmonic was between 9
and 141 times the power of the higher harmon-
ics. Reprinted by permission from Carandini et
al., (1996).
of such cells. This simplest model of a spiking neuron, known as a leaky integrate-and-fire
unit, is so important that it deserves its own detailed treatment in Chap. 14.
We can recover the Green's function h(t)of the RC compartment by applying the inverse
Fourier transform to Eq. 1.13, which results in
(1-17)
for t > 0 and 0 for negative times (the units of the Green's function are ohms per second
(£2/sec)). Conceptually, the extent of this filter, that is, the temporal duration over which this
filter is significantly different from zero, indicates to what extent the distant past influences
the present behavior of the system. For a decaying exponential as in an RC circuit, an event
that happened three time constants ago (at t = —3r) will have roughly 1/20 the effect of
something that just occurred (Fig. 1.3B). This is expected in a circuit that implements a
low-pass operation. Input is integrated in time, with long ago events having exponentially
less impact than more recent ones.
1.4 Synaptic Input
So far, we have not considered how the output of one neuron provides input to the next
one. Fast communication among two neurons occurs at specialized contact zones, termed
synapses. Synapses are the elementary structural and functional units for the construction of


===== Page 11 =====
1.4 Synaptic Input 
• 
15
neuronal circuits. Conventional point-to-point synaptic interactions come in two different
flavors: electrical synapses—also referred to as gap junctions—and the much more common
chemical synapses. At about 1 billion chemical synapses per cubic millimeter of cortical
grey matter, there are lots of synapses in the nervous system (on the order of 10'5 for a human
brain). In order to give the reader an appreciation of this, Fig. 1.5 is a photomicrograph of a
small patch of the monkey retina at the electron-microscopic level, with a large number of
synapses visible. Synapses are very complex pieces of machinery that can keep track of their
history of usage over considerable time scales. In this chapter, we introduce fast, voltage
independent chemical synapses from the point of view of the postsynaptic cell, deferring a
more detailed account of synaptic biophysics, as well as voltage dependent synapses and
electrical synapses, to Chap. 4, and an account of their adapting and plastic properties to
Chap. 13.
Upon activation of a fast, chemical synapse, one can observe a rapid and transient change
in the postsynaptic potential. Here, postsynaptic simply means that we are observing this
signal on the "far" or "output" side of the synapse; the "input" part of a synapse is referred to
as the presynaptic terminal. When the synapse is an excitatory one, the membrane potential
rapidly depolarizes, returning more slowly to its resting state: an excitatory postsynaptic
potential (EPSP) has occurred. Conversely, at an inhibitory synapse, the membrane will
typically be transiently hyperpolarized, resulting in an inhibitory postsynaptic potential
(IPSP). These EPSPs and IPSPs are caused by so-called excitatory and inhibitory postsy-
naptic currents (EPSCs and IPSCs), triggered by the spiking activity in the presynaptic cell.
Figure 1.6 illustrates some of the properties of a population of depolarizing synapses
between the axons of granule cells, also called mossy fibers, and a CA3 hippocampal
Fig. 1.5 SYNAPSES AMONG RETINAL NEU-
RONS Electron microscopic photograph of a
few square micrometers of tissue in the central
portion of the retina in the monkey. Here a
midget bipolar cell (MB) makes two ribbon
synapses onto a midget ganglion cell (MG). It
is surrounded by nine processes belonging to
amacrine cells (Aj to Ag). Some of these feed
back onto the bipolar cell (e.g., AS), some feed
forward onto the ganglion cell (e.g., AI ), some
do both, and some also contact each other (e.g.,
\2 ->• AS). Since neither the bipolar cell nor
the amacrine cell processes have been shown
to generate action potentials, these synapses
are all of the analog variety, in distinction to
synapses in the more central part of the ner-
vous system that typically transform an action
potential into a graded, postsynaptic signal.
Reprinted by permission from Calkins and
Sterling (1996).


===== Page 12 =====
16
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
Fig. 1.6 A FAST EXCITATORY SYNAPTIC INPUT Excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) caused
by the simultaneous activation of synapses (arrow) made by the mossy fibers onto CAS pyramidal
cells in the rodent hippocampus (Brown and Johnston, 1983). This classical experiment showed how
a central synapse can be successfully voltage clamped. (A) The voltage-clamp setup stabilizes—via
electronic feedback control—the membrane potential at a fixed value. Here four experiments are
shown, carried out at the holding potentials indicated at the left. The current that is drawn to keep
the membrane potential constant, termed the clamp current, corresponds to the negative EPSC. It
is maximal at negative potentials and reverses sign around zero. The synaptic current rises within
1 msec to its peak value, decaying to baseline over 20-30 msec. The experiments were carried out in
the presence of pharmacological agents that blocked synaptic inhibition. (B) When the peak EPSC
is plotted against the holding potential, an approximately linear relationship emerges; the regression
line yields an .x-axis intercept of —1.9 mV and a slope of 20.6 nS. Thus, once the synaptic reversal
potential is accounted for, Ohm's law appears to be reasonably well obeyed. We conclude that synaptic
input is caused by a transient increase in the conductance of the membrane to certain ions. Reprinted
by permission from Brown and Johnston (1983).
pyramidal cell.3 The figure is taken from an experiment by Brown and Johnston (1983),
which demonstrated for the first time how a synapse within the central nervous system could
be voltage clamped. The voltage-clamp technique was previously used on the very large
synapse made between the axonal terminals of motoneurons and the muscle, the so-called
neuromuscular junction (Katz, 1966; Johnston and Wu, 1995). It allows the experimentalist
to stabilize the membrane potential (via a feedback loop) at some fixed value, irrespective
of the currents that are flowing across the membrane in response to some stimulus. This
allows the measurement of EPSCs at various fixed potentials (as in Fig. 1.6). The EPSC
has its largest value at a holding potential of —65 mV, becoming progressively smaller and
vanishing around 0 mV. If the membrane potential is clamped to values more positive than
zero, the EPSC reverses sign (Fig. 1.6A). When the relationship between the peak current
and the holding potential is plotted (Fig. 1.6B), the data tend to fall on a straight line that
goes through zero around — 1.9 mV and that has a slope of 20.6 nS.
What we can infer from such a plot is that the postsynaptic event is caused by a
temporary increase in the membrane conductance, here by a maximal increase of about 20 nS
3. It should be pointed out that we are here looking at a population of synapses, made very close to the soma of the pyramidal
cell, thereby minimizing space-clamp problems.


===== Page 13 =====
1.4 Synaptic Input
17
(due to simultaneous activation of numerous synapses) in series with a so-called synoptic
reversal battery or potential, Esyn = —1.9 mV (since the conductance change is specific
for a particular class of ions). Spiking activity in the presynaptic cell triggers, through a
complicated cascade of biophysical events (further discussed in Chap. 4), a conductance
change in the membrane of the postsynaptic cell. Typically, the conductance gsyn(0
transiently increases within less than 1 msec, before this increase subsides within 5 msec.
The equivalent electrical circuit diagram of a synapse embedded into a patch of neuronal
membrane is shown in Fig. 1.7A. It is important to understand that from a biophysical,
postsynaptic point of view, a synapse does not correspond to a fixed current source—in
that case the slope of the I—V curve in Fig. 1.6 should have been zero—but to a genuine
increase in the membrane conductance. As we will reemphasize throughout the book, this
basic feature of the neuronal hardware has a number of important functional consequences.
Because of the existence of the synaptic battery, the driving potential across the synapse
is the difference between Esyn and the membrane potential. The postsynaptic current due
to a single such synapse is given by Ohm's law
(1.18)
Inserting this synapse into a patch of membrane (Fig. 1.7A) gives rise to the following
ordinary differential equation (on the basis of Kirchhoff's current law):
(1-19)
or, with T = CR, the passive membrane time constant in the absence of any synaptic input,
we can transform this into
Fig. 1.7 EQUIVALENT ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT or A FAST CHEMICAL SYNAPSE 
(A) Electrical
model of a fast voltage-independent chemical synapse. This circuit was put forth to explain events
occurring at the neuromuscular junction by Katz (1969). Remarkably, all fast chemical synapses in
the central nervous system, with the exception of the voltage-dependent NMDA receptor-synaptic
complex, operate on the same principle. Activation of the synapse leads to the transient opening of
ionic channels, selective to certain ions. This corresponds to a transient increase in the membrane
conductance gsyn(t) in series with the synaptic reversal potential Esyn, shown here in parallel with a
passive membrane patch. (B) If the evoked potential change is small relative to the synaptic reversal
potential, the synapse can be approximated by a current source of amplitude gSyn(0£syn- In general,
however, this will not be the case and synaptic input must be treated as a conductance change, a fact
that has important functional consequences.


===== Page 14 =====
18 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
(1.20)
Frequently the time course of synaptic input is approximated by a so-called a function.
It describes the transient behavior of synaptic input for a number of preparations, such as
nicotinic input to vertebrate sympathetic ganglion cells or the synaptic input mediated by
the mossy fibers (Brown and Johnston, 1983; Williams and Johnston, 1991; Yamada, Koch,
and Adams, 1998), reasonably well:4
(1.21)
We can now integrate Eq. 1.20 using the same values for fpeak and gpeak> but three different
values for the synaptic reversal potential (Fig. 1.8).
If £Syn > Vrest, the synaptic current is inward and—by convention—negative and will
act to depolarize the membrane. This is the hallmark of an EPSP, as observed at the most
Fig. 1.8 ACTION OF A SINGLE SYNAPSE
INSERTED INTO A MEMBRANE 
Three
different types of synaptic inputs and their
differential effect on the membrane po-
tential. (A) Time course of the synaptic-
induced conductance increase, here with
tPeak=0.5 msec and gpeak 
= 
1 nS
(Eq. 1.21). The synapse is inserted into a
patch of membrane (Fig. 1.7A) with R =
100 MQ, C = 100 pF, and r = 10 msec.
(B) Postsynaptic current in response to the
conductance increase if the synaptic rever-
sal potential is positive (Esyn = 80 mV rel-
ative to rest; solid line), negative (£syn =
—20 mV; dotted line), and zero (so-called
shunting inhibition; dashed line). By con-
vention, an inward current that depolarizes
the cell is plotted as a negative current.
(C) Associated EPSP (solid line) and IPSP
(lower dashed line), relative to Vrest, solved
by numerical integration of Eq. 1.20. No-
tice that the time course of the postsynap-
tic potential is much longer than the time
course of the corresponding postsynaptic
current due to the low-pass nature of the
membrane. Shunting inhibition by itself
does not give rise to any change in potential
(center dashed line).
4. gpeak, its peak value, attained at t = f^, defines const = gpeak e'/'peak-


===== Page 15 =====
1.5 Synaptic Input Is Nonlinear 
• 
19
common fast, excitatory synapse in the brain, the so-called non-NMDA synapse (named
after its insensitivity to Af-methyl-D-aspartic acid) that uses the neurotransmitter glutamate
with a reversal potential about 80-100 mV above the resting potential of the cell (for more
details, see Sec. 4.6).
If the converse occurs, that is, £syn < Vrest, the current is outward and the membrane
is hyperpolarized, away from the threshold for spike generation. In the central nervous
system, this is typically caused by a slower form of inhibition due to y-aminobutyric acid
B receptors (GABAg) at synapses that release the neurotransmitter GAB A and that let
potassium ions out of the cell and have a reversal potential 10-30 mV below the resting
potential (Fig. 1.8).
What happens if a synapse is activated whose battery potential is close to the membrane
potential, that is, Esyn « Kest? If the membrane is at rest, no driving potential exists across
the synaptic conductance, since Vm — Esyn & 0, and the membrane potential remains
unperturbed. But the total conductance of the membrane increases by gsyn(t).
If this system is now depolarized by excitatory input, activation of this silent or shunting5
inhibition causes a reduction in the EPSP amplitude.
Activation of a GABA/i synapse, one of the most common forms of fast inhibition in
cortex and associated structures, increases the membrane conductance for chloride ions
and has a reversal potential in the neighborhood of many cells' resting potential, thereby
implementing a form of shunting inhibition.
How do we deal with multiple synaptic inputs? Since currents add, we can extend Eq. 1.19
in a straightforward manner by placing the synapses in parallel with the RC circuit,
(1.22)
where the sum is taken over all synapses (each of which can have its own reversal potential).
Of course, this is very reminiscent of the linear summation of inputs in the "units" of standard
neural network theory (see Sec. 14.4).
1.5 Synaptic Input Is Nonlinear
What is not immediately apparent from Eq. 1.22 is the fact that synaptic input as conductance
change is of necessity nonlinear; that is, the change in membrane potential is a nonlinear
function of the synaptic input. Yet this turns out to be crucial. From the point of view
of information processing, a linear noiseless system cannot create or destroy information.
Whatever information is fed into the system is available at the output. Of course, any system
existing in the real world has to deal with noise, which places restrictions on the amplitude
of signals that can be discriminated. Therefore in a noisy linear system, information can
be destroyed. But what is needed in a system that processes information are nonlinearities
that can perform discriminations and decisions. Similarly, in order for a digital system to
be Turing universal, a nonlinearity such as negation and logical ANDing is required. As we
will see later on, one ever-present nonlinearity is the voltage threshold for spike initiation.
As we will see now, another nonlinearity that comes for free with synaptic hardware is
saturation.
5. Because both excitatory and inhibitory fast synapses act to increase a postsynaptic membrane conductance, all of them
can properly be said to be shunting. However, in this book we follow widespread usage and only refer to shunting inhibition as a
conductance increase with a reversal potential in the neighborhood of the cell's resting potential.


===== Page 16 =====
20 
• 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
1.5.1 Synaptic Input, Saturation, and the Membrane Time Constant
The nature of this effect can be perfectly well understood for a single synaptic input. If we
consider the change in membrane potential relative to rest in response to a slowly varying
synaptic input (that is, we can reduce gsyn(0 to g&yn), we can express the dynamics of V as
(1.23)
where the new value of the input conductance is
(1.24)
and the new value of the time constant in the presence of synaptic input is
(1.25)
In other words, each synaptic input, whether excitatory, shunting, or inhibitory, increases
the synaptic input conductance, thereby decreasing the membrane time constant (Fig. 1.9).
This is, of course, equally true when one considers the effect of numerous simultaneous
synaptic inputs. As we shall see further along in this book, under physiological conditions
neurons can be bombarded with massive synaptic input, which will lower the membrane
time constant significantly, as compared to the value of r measured under slice conditions
in the absence of normal synaptic input.
How does the membrane potential behave as a function of gsyn? Solving for Eq. 1.23
yields for the steady-state potential
(1.26)
If the synaptic input is small, that is, if Rgsya <SC 1 or gsyn <^C 1/R, the denominator is
roughly equal to 1, and the EPSP is
(1.27)
Here, the input can be approximated to a fair degree by a constant current source of amplitude
gsyn-Esyn- Doubling the input under these conditions leads to a doubling of the voltage
change.
As the EPSP becomes larger and larger, the driving potential across the synaptic
conductance Vm—EsyD becomes smaller and smaller, disappearing eventually at Vm = £syn.
No matter how large the conductance increase is made, there is no more potential to drive
ions across the membrane. Here, Rgsyn 3> 1 (or equivalently, gsyn ^> \/R; that is, the
synaptic input is considerably larger than the input conductance), and we have
(1.28)
The membrane potential has saturated at the synaptic reversal potential (Fig. 1.9).
1.5.2 Synaptic Interactions among Excitation and Shunting Inhibition
As we are devoting the entire Chap. 5 to the topic of synaptic interaction, we focus here on
the specific interaction between excitatory input and shunting inhibition occurring within a
single RC compartment (Fig. 1.10A). For the sake of simplicity, we assume that at t = 0,
both excitation (of constant amplitude ge andbattery Ee) and shunting inhibition (of constant


===== Page 17 =====
1.5 Synaptic Input Is Nonlinear
21
Fig. 1.9 SYNAPTIC INPUT, SATURATION, AND
THE TIME CONSTANT 
The effect of varying
the synaptic input conductance on (A) the in-
put conductance G-m (Eq. 1.24), (B) the mem-
brane time constant r' (Eq. 1.25), and (C)
the steady-state change in membrane potential
KCO (Eq. 1.26) in a single-compartment model
(Fig. 1.7A) as a function of gsyn. Conceptu-
ally, if we assume an excitatory synapse (with
Esyn = 80 mV) and a fixed peak amplitude
of ge = 1 nS, the x axis is logarithmic in
the number of synapses involved in the overall
synaptic event. Note that r' as well as Gjn will
increase irrespective of whether the synapses
are depolarizing, shunting, or hyperpolarizing.
The fact that the input to neurons comes in the
form of a change in the membrane conductance
implies that the very structure of the neuronal
hardware changes with the input, since the dy-
namics of the cell speeds up in the presence of
strong synaptic input.
amplitude g, and battery Ef = VKst) are turned on and remain on. Using Kirchhoff's current
law, we can express the change in membrane potential relative to Vrest in this circuit as
(1.29)
As in Eq. 1.23, we can transform this into
(1.30)
where the input conductance in the presence of the two synaptic inputs is
(1-31)
and the time constant is
(1.32)
The solution to this is a low-pass filter function multiplied with some constant, or


===== Page 18 =====
22 
. 
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
Fig. 1.10 NONLINEAR INTERACTION
BETWEEN EXCITATION AND SHUNT-
ING INHIBITION Inhibitory synaptic
input of the shunting type, that is,
whose reversal potential is close to
the cell's resting potential, can imple-
ment a form of division. (A) This is
demonstrated for an RC circuit (/? =
lOOMfi, C = 100 pF) in the presence
of both excitation (with battery Ee =
80 mV) and shunting inhibition (with
Ei = 0). We are here only consider-
ing the change in membrane potential
relative to VKst. (B) Time course of
the membrane depolarization in re-
sponse to a step onset of both exci-
tation (of amplitude ge = I nS) and
shunting inhibition (for three values
of gi =0,1, and 10 nS). One effect
of increasing g; is an almost propor-
tional reduction in EPSP amplitude.
A further consequence of increasing
the amount of shunting inhibition is
to decrease the time constant T', from
its original 10 msec in the absence of
any synaptic input to 9 msec in the
presence of only excitation to 4.8 msec
in the presence of excitation and the 10
times larger shunting inhibition.
(1.33)
(This can be checked by replacement into Eq. 1.30.) The steady-state potential for t -> oo
converges to
(1.34)
What is important to realize is that the numerator does not include any contribution from the
shunting inhibition (since the synaptic reversal potential is equal to the resting potential);
gi only appears in the denominator. Increasing gf therefore reduces the EPSP from its peak
value in a division-like manner. This is the reason shunting inhibition is frequently also
referred to as divisive inhibition (Bloomfield, 1974; Torre and Poggio, 1978). Of course,
due to the offset in the denominator, g{ only implements a true division in the limit of
gt ^ ge + 1/R- Under these conditions,
(1.35)
Increasing g, also affects the speed with which the cell converges to its steady-state, since
the time constant decreases with increasing shunting inhibition, as illustrated in Fig. 1.10B.
Finally, let us consider the voltage gain, that is, the sensitivity of the output to variations
in the excitatory input: by how much does the amplitude of the EPSP vary if ge varies? This
amounts to computing


===== Page 19 =====
1.6 Recapitulation 
• 
23
(1.36)
We see that the gain is maximal in the absence of any shunting inhibition, becoming
progressively smaller as gj increases. In the limit of g,- -> oo, the gain becomes zero;
in the presence of massive amounts of inhibition, the excitatory input becomes swamped
and is completely dominated by inhibition.
1.5.3 Gain Normalization in Visual Cortex and Synaptic Input
One example demonstrating the use of synaptic conductance changes to implement a
nonlinear operation crucial to the behavior of neurons in visual cortex has been proposed
by Carandini and Heeger (1994).
The standard model of a simple cell in primary visual cortex (VI) is that its firing rate is
a linear function of the visual input, using a Gabor filter for its spatial receptive field and
some low-pass or band-pass filter to account for its temporal behavior (Wandell, 1995).
While much evidence has accumulated in favor of this position, many VI neurons do show
a number of nonlinearities: (1) the response saturates with increasing visual contrast, (2)
at higher contrast level, the response occurs earlier, and (3) superposition does not hold;
that is, the response of the cell to a bar at its optimal orientation superimposed onto a bar
orthogonal to its optimal orientation is not equal to the sum of the response to the two bars
when presented by themselves. Carandini and Heeger (see also Nelson, 1994) account for
this behavior by using a simple RC model for a VI cell, as in Fig. 1.1 OA, augmented by
an input from a hyperpolarizing synapse. Their intriguing idea is to have the amplitude
of the shunting inhibition depend on the response rate of the entire population of cells at
this particular location in space, summed over all orientations and direction of motions
(Fig. 1.11). At high contrasts when ge is large, the network is very active and g, is also very
large; this leads to the divisive normalization witnessed in Fig. 1.10B as well as to a reduction
in the time constant, explaining the advance of the response at high contrast levels. Heeger,
Simoncelli, and Movshon (1996) have argued that the very same normalization mechanism
is also operating in other cortical areas. Note that a more physiological implementation
of this idea needs to take the additional conductance due to massive, excitatory recurrent
feedback among cortical cells into account (Ahmed et al., 1994; Douglas et al., 1995).
While the Carandini and Heeger (1994) model is elegant, leads to a simple mathematical
model of a cortical cell, and can account for much of the data (Fig. 1.11), it does have one
serious flaw that we can only allude to here. As will become apparent in Sec. 18.5 (Kernell,
1969, 1971; Holt and Koch, 1997), shunting inhibition acts in a linear, subtractive manner
when treated within the context of a spiking neuron, rather than in the saturating manner we
are accustomed to from a passive membrane. This is a natural consequence of the biophysics
of spike generation and throws doubt onto the hypothesis that contrast normalization is
implemented using the natural properties of conductance-increasing synapses.
1.6 Recapitulation
In this introductory chapter, we meet some of the key actors underlying neuronal information
processing. Basic to all cells is the capacitance inherent in the bilipid layer, limiting how
quickly the membrane potential can respond to a fixed input current. The simplest of all
neuronal models is that of a single compartment that includes a resistance, in series with a


===== Page 20 =====
24
THE MEMBRANE EQUATION
Fig. 1.11 GAIN NORMALIZATION IN NEURONS IN VISUAL CORTEX Response properties of a
simple cell in primary visual cortex of the monkey in response to drifting sinusoidal gratings (Carandini
and Heeger, 1994). (A) through (D) One cycle of the response to gratings of contrast 0.125, 0.25,
0.5, and 1.0. The cell saturates with contrast (doubling the contrast doubles the neuronal response
when going from A to B, but not when going from C to D) and advances its response (a shift of
about 50 msec occurs between A and D). (E) Amplitude and (F) Phase of the fundamental Fourier
component to sinusoidal gratings drifting at 6 Hz. Shown are the responses of the cell at its preferred
orientation (open symbols) and 20° away from the preferred orientation (solid symbols). Error bars
represent ±1 standard deviation and the solid lines correspond to the best fit of the model equation
that uses shunting inhibition, activated via massive feedback, to carry out this gain normalization.
Reprinted by permission from Carandini and Heeger (1994).
battery, and the capacitance. It can be completely described by a linear, low-pass filter. As
we will see in a later chapter, such an RC circuit, augmented by a simple voltage threshold,
constitutes one of the simplest yet also most powerful models of a spiking neuron: the leaky
integrate-and-fire unit.
We introduced fast chemical synapses, the stuff out of which computations arise.
Chemical synapses convert the presynaptic voltage signal—via a chemical process—into a
postsynaptic electrical signal, via a change in the membrane conductance specific to certain
ions. Such a synapse can be described by a time-dependent synaptic conductance gsyn (t) and
a synaptic battery Esyn. In general, synapses cannot be treated as constant current sources.
Chemical synapses, similar to an operational amplifier wired up as a follower, isolate the
electrical properties of the postsynaptic site from the presynaptic one. This allows synapses
to link neurons with very different electrical impedances. Furthermore, the amplitude,
duration, and sign of the postsynaptic signal can be quite different from those of the
presynaptic one. Electrical synapses, discussed in Sec. 4.10, share none of these properties.
The fact that synapses act by changing, usually increasing, the postsynaptic membrane
conductance has a number of important consequences. It allows for the natural expression
of several nonlinear operations, in particular saturation and gain normalization. As an
example, we saw how shunting inhibition, mediated by a type of synapse whose synaptic
reversal potential is close to the cell's resting potential, acts similar to division. We also
studied how synaptic input that increases the postsynaptic membrane conductance for some
combinations of ions, no matter what its reversal potential, acts to decrease the cell's input
resistance and thus its membrane time constant. As postulated by Carandini and Heeger
(1994), the effect of massive feedback synaptic input might, in a very physiological manner,
implement gain normalization in cortical areas.


