===== Page 1 =====
DENDRITIC SPINES
Dendritic spines, sometimes also called dendritic thorns, are tiny, specialized protoplasmic
protuberances that cover the surface of many neurons. First described by Ramon y Cajal
(1909; 1991) in light-microscopic studies of Golgi stained tissue, they are among the most
striking subneuronal features of many neurons. Indeed, the presence of a high density of
dendritic spines allows the unambiguous classification of neuronal types into spiny and
aspiny, sparsely spiny, or smooth neurons. Over 90% of all excitatory synapses that occur
in the cortex are located on dendritic spines. Spines can be found in all vertebrates as well as
in invertebrates (e.g., the dendrites of Kenyon cells in the mushroom bodies in the olfactory
system of the insect brain). The intimate association of spines with synaptic traffic suggests
some crucial role in synaptic transmission and plasticity.
Because of their submicrometer size (see below), physiological hypotheses as to the
function of dendritic spines have only very recently become accessible to the experimental-
ist. For the previous two decades, spine properties have been investigated through analytical
and computational studies based on morphological data, providing a very fertile ground for
the crosspollination of theory and experiment. (For a very readable historical account of
this see Segev et al., 1995.) The recent technical advances in the direct visualization of
calcium dynamics in dendrites and spines are now permitting direct tests of some of these
theoretical inferences (Guthrie, Segal, and Kater, 1991; Mu'ller and Connor, 1991; Yuste
and Denk, 1995; Denk, Sugimori, and Llinas, 1995; Svoboda, Tank, and Denk, 1996). As
discussed in this chapter and, more extensively, in Chap. 19, the theoretical models that
have endowed spines with active properties giving rise to all-or-none behavior (Perkel and
Perkel, 1985; Shepherd et al., 1985; Segev and Rail, 1988; Baer and Rinzel, 1991) have, in
general, been confirmed experimentally.
Historically, the possibility of implementing synaptic memory by modulating the elec-
troanatomy of spines was recognized early on (Chang, 1952) and was subsequently analyzed
in depth by Rail (1970, 1974, 1978) and many others. Because small changes in the spine
morphology can lead to large changes in the amplitude of the EPSP induced by the excitatory
synapse on the spine, spines have been considered to contribute to the modulation of synaptic
"weight" during long-term potentiation (see Chap. 13). In a radical extension of this original
idea, Crick (1982) advanced the "twitching spine" hypothesis, the notion that spines, using
actin-based contractile machinery in the spine neck, could subserve very fast changes (less
280
12


===== Page 2 =====
12.1 Natural History of Spines 
• 
281
than a second) in synaptic efficacy, and that this might provide a mechanism for short-term
memory. Remarkably, it has now been shown in cultured hippocampal neurons that spines
can change their shape within seconds (Fischer et al., 1998).
Within the last years the focus of research has shifted away from the electrical properties
of spines toward their ability to provide a local and isolated biochemical compartment for
calcium and other second messengers underlying the induction and expression of synaptic
plasticity (for the first clear statement of this, see Shepherd, 1972, 1978; for reviews, see
Koch and Zador, 1993; Harris and Kater, 1994; Shepherd, 1996). Furthermore, spines have
also been treated as devices subserving highly localized "pseudological" computations.
We begin this chapter by reviewing the natural history of spines before we analyze their
electrical properties and show how dendrites studded with spines can be reduced to smooth
dendrites in terms of the solution of the associated linear cable equation. We defer a thorough
discussion of the threshold type of logical computations that can be carried out in spines
with HH-like membranes to Sec. 19.3.2. Finally, we apply the concepts introduced in the
previous chapter to understand why spines can serve as a microenvironment for highly local
calcium changes that serve to isolate synapses on the spine from the dendrite and vice versa.
12.1 Natural History of Spines
In the following, we review some of the pertinent facts concerning the structure, size, and
distribution of dendritic spines.
12.1.1 Distribution of Spines
Neurons in different parts of the brain can be classified into two groups according to whether
or not their dendrites are studded with spines. Spiny neurons include pyramidal and stellate
cells and account for about three-quarters of the neurons in the neocortex, while smooth cells,
whose dendrites carry few or no spines, make up the remainder. Smooth cells include basket
cells, chandelier or axo-axonic cells, and double-bouquet cells, and stain for the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA (Douglas and Martin, 1998). It is at present a mystery why one
class of cortical cells, inhibitory interneurons, should have no spines, while excitatory cells
have so many.
It is important to realize that in many parts of the brain outside of the cortex, inhibitory
cells can be covered with spines. Two of the best known examples are the Purkinje cells
in the cerebellum (Llinas and Walton, 1998) and the principal cells in the neostriatum
(Kawaguchi, Wilson, and Emson, 1990; Wilson, 1998). Both are covered by spines, both
use an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and both constitute the only output of their respective
systems (Fig. 12.1).
Indeed, the proper generalization appears to be that spiny cells are the principal output
cell class of their particular brain area (frequently also referred to as projection cells;
Shepherd, 1998).
Spines are numerous. A large layer 5 pyramidal cell in the visual cortex may have as
many as 15,000 spines, averaging about two spines per micrometer of dendrite (Larkman,
1991), while the density for CA1 pyramidal cells varies from about one to five spines per
micrometer of dendrite, depending on the staining method used (Harris and Stevens, 1989;
Amaral, Ishizuka, and Claiborne, 1990). The inhibitory projection cells in the neostriatum
have a peak density of four to six spines per micrometer of dendrite (Wilson et al., 1983).
The record, though, is held by cells in the human cerebellum, where individual Purkinje


===== Page 3 =====
282 . 
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.1 SPINY INHIBITORY NEURON Dendritic (left) and axonal (right) arborization of a pro-
jection cell in the rat neostriatum, part of the basal ganglia, that was injected with biocytin and
reconstructed. The dendrites are covered by up to five spines per micrometer. In the human, three-
quarters of the approximately 110 million neostriatum neurons are of this type. They make both local
connections, as illustrated here, and leave the neostriatum (elongated arrow) to terminate in the globus
pallidus. These axons are the only output of the neostriatum and have an inhibitory effect on their
postsynaptic target. Spiny cells in neocortex and hippocampus, in contrast, are excitatory. Reprinted
by permission from Kawaguchi, Wilson, and Emson (1990).
cells are studded by up to 200,000 spines, each spine carrying a single excitatory synapse
from a parallel fiber (Braitenberg and Atwood, 1958; Harris and Stevens, 1988b).
12.1.2 Microanatomy of Spines
Spines are found in a wide variety of shapes (Jones and Powell, 1969; Peters and Kaiserman-
Abramof, 1970; Woolf, Shepherd, and Greer, 1991a,b; Figs. 12.2-12.4), ranging from short
and stubby, through the archetypal "mushroom shaped," to long and thin ones. Many spines
branch. In the case of spines on CAS hippocampal pyramidal cells receiving mossy fiber
inputs, up to 16 branches have been observed to emerge from a single dendritic origin
(Chicurel and Harris, 1992).
Given the diversity of spine shapes (Fig. 12.4), it is not easy to define the "average"
spine. However, most spines show a clearly differentiated "neck" and a "head." Their exact
morphology can best be appreciated via three-dimensional reconstructions of serial electron
micrographs of the entire cell (a heroic task) as carried out by White and Rock (1980) in
the mouse somatosensory cortex, by Wilson et al., (1983) in the neostriatum, and by Harris
and Stevens (1988a,b, 1989) in the cerebellum and the cortex. For CA1 pyramidal cells in
the rat hippocampus, Harris and Stevens (1989) found wide variability in the dimensions
of spines, with spine necks ranging in length from 0.08 to 1.58 /urn and in diameter from
0.04 to 0.46 //m. The total volume ranges from 0.04 to 0.56 /um3 (Fig. 12.4; see also Segev


===== Page 4 =====
12.1 Natural History of Spines
283
Fig. 12.2 STEREO VIEW OF A SPINY DENDRITE 
Stereoscopic view of a portion of a spiny dendrite
(of the type shown in Fig. 12.1) in the rat neostriatum. The large number of spines springing from
the dendrite can be viewed in depth by focusing the eyes at a point at infinity (that is, by looking
through the image). The reconstruction has been performed using high-voltage electron-microscopic
axial tomography from a single 3-^tm-thick section. The cube has a dimension of 0.5 p,m on each
side. Reprinted by permission from Wilson et al., (1992).
Fig. 12.3 DENDRITIC SPINES IN THE HIPPOCAMPUS
Three-dimensional reconstruction of a piece of dendrite
from a CA1 pyramidal cell of the rat hippocampus. There
are between one and three spines per micrometer of den-
drite. The diversity in the morphologies and dimensions
of spines is striking. Reprinted by permission from Harris
and Stevens (1989).
et al., 1995). Larger spine heads are associated with larger synapses—as measured by the
size of the associated postsynaptic density—and more vesicles in the presynaptic axonal
varicosity.
These dimensions indicate how spines bridge the gap between molecular and cellular
scales: at a resting concentration of 80 nM and for the average spine head volume of
0.05 //,m3, only about two unbuffered Ca2+ ions are expected to be found in a spine head.
Dendritic spines appear to be filled with complex cellular machinery (for an overview, see
Harris and Kater, 1994), most notably a specialized form of smooth endoplasmic reticulum
termed the spine apparatus. The membranes making up the spine apparatus are closely
apposed to the plasma membrane of the spine neck and appear to sequester calcium (Fifkova,
Markham, and Delay, 1983; Burgoyne, Gray, and Barron, 1983).


===== Page 5 =====
284 . 
DENDRITIC SPINES
Type of Spine 
dn (nm) 
L (jirn) 
Area (jim2) Volume (urn3)
Thin 
0.10 ±0.03 0.98 ±0.42 0.59 ±0.29 
0.04 + 0.02
Mushroom 
0.20 ±0.07 1.50 + 0.25 2.70 ±0.93 
0.29 ±0.13
Stubby 
0.32 + 0.13 0.44 + 0.15 0.45 ±0.14 
0.03 + 0.01
Fig. 12.4 DIVERSITY OF SPINE SHAPES Three most frequent types of spine shapes in the cortex with
some of their dimensions: spine neck diameter dn, total length L, surface area, and volume. The length
of the spine neck /„ is 0.51 ± 0.34 /zm for thin spines and 0.43 ± 0.21 /urn for mushroom-type spines.
All values are averages and standard deviations. Black areas indicate the postsynaptic densities (PSD)
of the asymmetric excitatory synapses on the spines. Frequently more than one synapse is located on
a spine. Stubby spines are also known as "sessile." The data are measured from electron-microscopic
reconstructions of spines on adult rat CA1 hippocampal pyramidal cells. Reprinted in modified form
by permission from Harris, Jensen, and Tsao (1992).
Other cellular organs, such as mitochondria, microtubules, or ribosomes, are usually
absent. An exception are the spines on granule cell dendrites, which make reciprocal dendro-
dendritic synapses with projection neurons in the mammalian olfactory bulb (Rail et al.,
1966; Cameron, Kaliszewski, and Greer, 1991; Sec. 5.3). Here the mitochondria are most
likely needed to provide energy to subserve presynaptic functions. Although spines lack
neurofilaments, spine heads contain a dense network of actin filaments (Fischer et al., 1998).
In the neck, actin filaments are oriented lengthwise along the spine apparatus (Fifkova,
1985). A number of proteins known to be involved in actin-mediated activities, such as
neuronal myosin (Drenckhahn and Kaiser, 1983), fodrin (Carlin, Bartelt, and Siekevitz,
1983) and calmodulin (Caceres et al., 1983), have been found in dendritic spines.
The close association of spines with the terminal boutons of axons prompted early specu-
lation that spines might conduct impulses between neurons (Ramon y Cajal, 1909). Electron
microscopic studies have since confirmed that spines are indeed the major postsynaptic
target of excitatory (asymmetric, type I) synaptic input (Gray, 1959). For instance, in cat
visual cortex, 93% of the afferent geniculate terminals in layer 4 is located on spines (LeVay,
1986), while a similarly high percentage is observed in the Schaffer projection from CA3
cells onto CA1 pyramidal cells in the hippocampus. Note, however, that not all excitatory
pathways terminate on spines. For instance, about 70% of the excitatory synapses from
layer 6 pyramidal cells terminates directly on the dendrites of layer 4 spiny stellate cells,
and only a bit less than one-third of layer 6 synapses chooses spines as their termination
zones (Ahmed et al., 1994). As mentioned before, excitatory projections onto inhibitory
cells always make a synapse directly onto the dendrites since these cells lack spines.
Interestingly, the association between spines and synapses is limited to excitatory traffic.
Inhibitory (symmetric, type II) profiles are only observed at a small fraction (between 5
and 20%) of spines in the cortex, but usually in conjunction with excitatory synapses and


===== Page 6 =====
12.2 Spines only Connect 
• 
285
never by themselves (Jones and Powell, 1969; Dehay et al., 1991; Fifkova, Eason, and
Schaner, 1992).
12.1.3 Induced Changes in Spine Morphology
Both the absolute number and the shape of spines can change—sometimes quite drastic-
ally—in the young and in the mature animal, and also as a function of external stimulation.
During development, absolute spine density can more than double relative to densities
in the adult. Yet this increase does not occur homogeneously across all spines. Rather,
thin, branched, and certain types of mushroom spines increase fourfold in density (between
2 weeks postnatal and adulthood in the rat hippocampus), while stubby spines decrease
by more than half (Harris and Stevens, 1989; Harris, Jensen, and Tsao, 1992; see also
Schiiz, 1986; Papa et al, 1995; and Fig. 12.4). In adult female rats, the dendritic spine
density on CA1 hippocampal pyramidal cells varies by 30% or more over the five-day
estrus cycle, while pyramidal cells in the CAS region show little statistically significant
variation (Woolley et al., 1990). It is not known whether the number of synapses also varies
by this fraction, or whether it is just the spines that wax and wane, but this certainly makes
for a very dynamic environment.
Other studies have shown that the shape of spines—in particular the length and diameter
of the neck—can change in response to behavioral or environmental cues such as light,
social interaction, or one-shot learning or exploratory motor activity (Purpura, 1974; Coss
and Globus, 1978; Bradley and Horn, 1979; Brandon and Coss, 1982; Rausch and Scheich,
1982; Lowndes and Stewart, 1994; Moser, Trommald, and Andersen, 1994).
As discussed in the following chapter, long-term potentiation (LTP), the best studied
form of synaptic plasticity, is induced by brief high-frequency electrical stimulation. In
the hippocampus, stimulating cells in this manner causes alterations in the spine structure
(Van Harrefeld and Fifkova, 1975; Lee et al., 1980; Greenough and Chang, 1985; Desmond
and Levy, 1990; Calverly and Jones, 1990; Harris, Jensen and Tsao, 1992). Some of the
reported changes include larger spine heads, distortions in the shape of the spine stem,
an increased incidence of concave spine heads, and an increase in the number of shaft
synapses. It is not known what role—if any—the changes in spine shape play in the
increase in synaptic efficacy (see also Desmond and Levy, 1988). Remarkably, some of
these changes in spine shape occur within seconds, mediated by actin filaments (Fischer et
al., 1998).
12.2 Spines only Connect
Most of the early hypotheses considered the establishment of physical contact with presy-
naptic terminals as the main function of spines. (For a modern view of this, see Swindale,
1981.) It was argued that because dendritic space is scarce, spines provide additional
membrane areas for synapses to make contact with. This idea has been largely dismissed,
however, because electron microscopic views of spiny dendrites show that the dendritic
membrane between spines often lacks synapses.
On the basis of their three-dimensional electron-microscopic reconstructions, Harris
and Stevens (1988a) estimate that 29-45% of the dendritic membrane area of Purkinje cells
would have been covered by synapses if all spines had been deleted and the associated
synapses moved onto the dendrites. For CA1 pyramidal cell dendrites, only 5-9% of the
total dendritic surface area would have been covered by the spine synapses (Harris and


===== Page 7 =====
286 
• 
DENDRITIC SPINES
Stevens, 1988a), arguing against the hypothesis that spines are necessary to supplement
the dendritic membrane area available for synaptic contacts. This is corroborated by the
observation (Schiiz and Dortenmann, 1987) that the density of excitatory synapses on
nonspiny dendrites in the cortex exceeds the spine density of pyramidal cell dendrites.
These results do not, however, address whether spines play a role in streamlining the
layout of axonal and dendritic processes in the three-dimensional neuropil. It is certainly
true that for a fixed dendritic radius, spiny dendrites sample a larger brain volume than
dendrites devoid of spines (indeed, the latter tend to be thicker than the former; Harris and
Kater, 1994).
In order to understand the functional theories that have been proposed to explain
the existence of spines, we need to study their electrical properties and their ability to
compartmentalize various important biological molecules.
12.3 Passive Electrical Properties of Single Spines
Rail (1974, 1978) was the first researcher to analyze the properties of passive spines,
followed by many others (Wilson, 1984; Turner, 1984; Koch and Poggio, 1983a,b; Brown
et al., 1988). We here follow the derivation of Koch and Poggio (1983b).
12.3.1 Current Injection into a Spine
The principal idea can be understood in terms of the simplified electrical circuit of a passive
spine attached to a dendrite (Fig. 12.5). Any current injected into the spine head must flow
either across the spine head resistance R/, and capacitance Cf, or down through the spine
neck impedance and into the dendrite. Neglecting capacitive and cable properties of the
neck—due to its tiny size—we model the spine neck resistance as that of a cylinder of
length /„, diameter dn, and resistivity /?,-,
(12.1)
The input impedance of the spine head membrane can be described by the complex function
(12.2)
where rm = RhCh = RmCm. Because RH is inversely proportional to the spine head area,
for average spine dimensions, Rh > 1000 GQ.
The input impedance at the spine head Ksp<sp(f) is determined by current flowing either
through the spine head or through the spine neck. Remembering the way parallel resistances
add, we have
(12.3)
where Kdd(f) is the dendritic input impedance. Because for the entire relevant frequency
range (up to hundreds of kilohertz) the spine head impedance is so much bigger than the
sum of the spine neck resistance and the dendritic input impedance, we obtain the simple
additive relationship between spine and dendritic input impedance,
(12.4)


===== Page 8 =====
12.3 Passive Electrical Properties of Single Spines 
• 
287
Fig. 12.5 ELECTRICAL MODEL OF A PASSIVE SPINE 
(A) Schema of a spine with a single synaptic
input on a passive dendrite. Drawn to scale, the dendrite is 0.63 /u.m thick, the spine head has a diameter
of 0.7 ^m, and the spine neck has dimensions of dn =0.1 fj,m and /„ = 1 /xm. With /?; = 200 £2-cm,
the spine neck resistance is 254 MS (Eq. 12.1). With a spine neck half as thick, Rn quadruples to just
beyond 1 G£2. (B) Lumped electrical model of such a spine, described by an RC "head" compartment
attached through an ohmic neck resistance Rn to the parent dendrite. Due to its small size, the cable
and capacitive properties of the neck can be neglected.
Solving directly for the transfer impedance from the spine to the parent dendrite on the basis
of Fig. 12.5 while assuming that no current loss occurs across the spine head membrane up
to very high frequencies, leads to
(12.5)
Numerically, the two last equations hold to within a small fraction of a percent (Koch and
Poggio, 1983b). By exploiting transitivity (Eq. 3.29), we can write an expression for the
transfer impedance from the spine to any point i in the dendritic tree as
(12.6)


===== Page 9 =====
288 
• 
DENDRITIC SPINES
In other words, the depolarization at any point i in a passive dendritic tree due to a spine
input is identical to the EPSP caused by the same current injected into the dendrite at the
base of the spine. Or, put more succinctly, electrically speaking, "spines don't matter in the
linear case" (Koch and Poggio, 1985c). The reason why any current injected into the spine
will reach the dendrite is that practically no current is lost across the membrane of the spine
head and neck.
However, it should be noted that the membrane potential in the spine neck might need to
exceed some critical threshold value to be able to initiate some biochemical event (such as
those leading to long-term potentiation, as described in Chap. 13). If a synapse were made
directly on the dendrite, it would require a far larger conductance change to achieve the
same EPSP amplitude than a synapse on a spine. Thus, spines might matter for essentially
"local" reasons (see below and Segev et al., 1995).
12.3.2 Excitatory Synaptic Input to a Spine
As discussed above, spines always appear to carry at least one excitatory synapse (Fig. 12.5).
We can express the current flowing across this synapse as
(12.7)
where Vsp is the EPSP at the spine head. Applying Ohm's law, we arrive at
(12.8)
Dealing first with stationary (or slowly varying) synaptic input, we can express the
steady-state amplitude of the spine EPSP as
(12.9)
where Ksp^sp corresponds to the amplitude of the steady-state spine input resistance. By the
judicious use of Ohm's and Kirchhoff 's laws, we can derive a similar expression for V^,
the EPSP in the dendrite just below the spine,
(12.10)
Let us consider these equations in the case of very small and very large synaptic input.
If the product of the synaptic conductance change gsyn and the spine input resistance
Ksp<sp is much less than 1, the numerator in Eqs. 12.9 and 12.10 can be approximated by 1
and the spine and dendritic EPSPs can be expressed as
(12.11)
and
(12.12)
In other words, if the synaptic-induced conductance change gsyn is small relative to the
spine input conductance ]/KspiSp, the action of the synapse can be approximated by a
constant current source of amplitude gsynEsyn. As we saw above, spines do not matter in
this limit. More specifically, changes in spine morphology have no effect on the dendritic
potential just below the spine. Note, however, that this does not imply that the spine EPSP is
identical to the dendritic EPSP; they are not. Indeed, the dendritic EPSP will be attenuated


===== Page 10 =====
12.3 Passive Electrical Properties of Single Spines 
• 
289
with respect to the spine EPSP by a factor of Vj/Vsp = Kddl(f-dd + Rn) (Kawato and
Tsukahara, 1983; Turner, 1984; Koch and Poggio, 1985c).
At the other extreme, if gsyn is large (that is, if gsyn KspiSp 3> 1), the voltage at the spine
head saturates and the spine potential converges toward the synaptic reversal potential
(12.13)
while the dendritic EPSP converges to
(12.14)
Because in this regime the synapse-spine complex acts as a voltage—rather than a current—
source, that is, like a battery, changes in the geometry of the spine neck will—via changes in
/?„—affect the amount of synaptic current entering the spine head. Under these conditions,
changes in spine morphology will change the effective "weight" of the synapse.
Figure 12.6A indicates graphically how stretching or squishing the spine neck, keeping
its membrane area constant, affects the somatic EPSP for a sustained synaptic input of
gpeak = 1 nS. Spine geometry only plays a role for very thin and elongated spines, when
gpeak > l/Rn (the curve bends around dn = 0.05 /^m, where gpeak & !//?„). For transient
inputs, very similar considerations apply (Fig. 12.6A and B). Owing to the very small
membrane area of the spine head, the total spine capacity is exceedingly small, leading to
very large impedance values even at high frequencies. Thus, relative independence of the
dendritic membrane potential for small conductance inputs and saturation for large inputs
also hold for very rapid inputs (Fig. 12.6). Spine neck geometry can affect the weight of
the synapse significantly if the spine starts out very thin and elongated and becomes very
short and chubby. (However, a factor of 5 change of the somatic EPSP requires an order of
magnitude change in both /„ and dn.)
Depending on the product of the synaptic conductance change and the spine input
resistance, gSynKSp,sp = gsyn(Kdd + ^«)» the spine-synapse complex will thus tend to
act either more as a current or as a voltage source, constraining the extent to which the
morphology of the spine can alter the synaptic efficiency of the synapse. An additional
requirement for the spine shape to influence the synaptic weight is that Rn needs to be large
compared to the dendritic input resistance. Otherwise, modulating /?„ will have little or no
effect on Ksp,sp (Eq. 12.10).
We can now pose the critical question: are spines elongated and thin enough to be able to
effectively modulate synaptic weight? Technical advances in the last decade have provided
sufficient data to estimate the spine operating regime. Probably the most complete data are
available at the Schaffer collateral input to region CA1 pyramidal cells in the hippocampus.
Here, the experimental estimates of gsyn are 0.05-0.2 nS for the fast voltage-independent
AMPA synaptic component (Bekkers, Richerson, and Stevens, 1990; Malinow and Tsien,
1990) and less than 0.5 nS for the NMDA component (Bashir et al., 1991).
Based on their reconstruction of spines in the same region, Harris and Stevens (1988b,
1989) estimate the spine neck conductance Gn — !//?„ to lie mainly between 18 and
138 nS, making the critical ratio gsyn/Gn very small. Even taking account of the spine
apparatus, the smooth endoplasmic reticulum that partly occludes the spine neck, does not
change this conclusion appreciably. Svoboda, Tank, and Denk (1996), on the basis of high-
resolution two-photon microscopy, directly estimated the diffusive and resistive coupling
between the spine head and its parent dendrite, concluding with a lower bound on Gn
of7nS.


===== Page 11 =====
290
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.6 How Do CHANGES IN SPINE NECK GEOMETRY AFFECT SYNAPTIC WEIGHT? 
Neck
length ln of a single spine is varied in the presence of a single fast ((peak = 0.5 msec) voltage-
independent excitatory synapse (gpeak = 1 nS) on a spine along the upper portion of the apical tree in
the layer 5 pyramidal cell (around location a 1 in Fig. 3.7). We here assume that the total surface area
of the spine neck remains constant (at 0.157 /xm2) as dn (upper part of label on x axis) is changed,
implying that the spine neck length /„ (lower part of label on x axis) changes inversely. It follows from
Eq. 12.1 that the spine neck resistance scales as d~3. The resultant EPSP is computed at the spine head
itself (in A) as well as at the soma (in B). Experimental estimates of the spine neck resistance Rn are
below 150 M£2, corresponding here to values of dn > 0.15 /xm, falling on the portion of the curve that
is relatively flat. Given the large spine neck conductance relative to the peak synaptic conductance
change (estimated to be about 0.2 nS for the AMPA component), changes in spine geometry are
likely to have only a minor effect on the size of the associated EPSP. In other words, postsynaptic
changes in spine geometry are unlikely to implement synaptic "weight" changes. The dotted curve in A
corresponds to the steady-state change in membrane potential in response to a sustained conductance
input of the same amplitude as the transient input. When the spine is shielded from any dendritic
capacitance, that is, for dn -> 0, the capacitance of the spine itself can be neglected.


===== Page 12 =====
12.3 Passive Electrical Properties of Single Spines 
• 
291
In agreement with earlier estimates of spine dimensions (Wilson, 1984; Turner, 1984;
Brown et al., 1988), we conclude that the hippocampal projection onto spines on CA1
pyramidal cells acts as a current source and that changing the morphology of these spines
most likely does not affect the associated dendritic EPSP. A similar conclusion has also
been reached for a reconstructed spiny stellate cell in somatosensory cortex (Segev et al.,
1995).
A different way to understand this is to ask: What effective synaptic conductance does an
excitatory synapse directly on the dendrite need to possess in order to inject the same current
as an excitatory synapse of amplitude gsyn on a spine? Neglecting all capacitive effects and
any other synaptic input, the single spine will inject the current /„ = gsyn^syn/O + ^ngsyn)
into the dendrite. Thus, a synapse on a spine can be mimicked by a dendritic synapse of
amplitude
(12.15)
We see that unless the product of the spine neck resistance with the synaptic conductance
change is on the order of unity (or larger), the effect of the spine can be neglected.
The observation that spine necks probably do not contribute toward modulating synap-
tic weight agrees with experimental evidence regarding the mechanisms underlying the
expression of LTP in the hippocampus. While the specific pathways and sites of action
remain controversial, there is little to suggest that a postsynaptic change in the electrical
impedance of the spine is involved (see the next chapter). This conclusion is also likely
to hold in the neocortex, unless synaptic conductance changes are substantially larger and
spines thinner and longer than in hippocampus.
12.3.3 Joint Excitatory and Inhibitory Input to a Spine
As mentioned above, it has been a consistent observation that between 5 and 15% of all
spines in the cortex carry symmetrical, GABAergic synaptic terminals. Almost always,
these same spines are also contacted by excitatory synapses. Such a pair of excitatory and
inhibitory synapses localized on a single spine would be the ultimate in highly specific
microcircuitry.
Koch and Poggio (1983a,b; see also Diamond, Gray, and Yasargil, 1970) proposed that
such a dual synaptic arrangement can implement a temporally and spatially very specific
veto operation on the basis of the nonlinear interaction between excitation and inhibition of
the silent or shunting type (see Sec. 5.1). Indeed, they found that fast GABA^ inhibition can
reduce the EPSP in the spine to very small levels provided that it arrived within a very tight
time window around the onset of excitation (Fig. 12.7A). According to these numerical
solutions to the linear cable equation, such a microcircuit implements an AND-NOT gate
with temporal discrimination at the 0.1 msec level.
The degree of temporal specificity, caused by the exceedingly small capacitance in the
spine head, can be quantified by the use of the input delay in the spine Dsp,sp (Sees. 2.4
and 3.6.2). Following Agmon-Snir and Segev (1993), this corresponds to the delay between
the centroid of the synaptic current and the centroid of the local EPSP. On the basis of the
electrical model of the spine illustrated in Fig. 12.5 and neglecting the tiny current loss
across the spine head membrane, we have
(12.16)


===== Page 13 =====
292
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.7 AND-NOT GATING AT THE LEVEL OF A SINGLE SPINE Nonlinear interaction of the AND-
NOT type between a fast excitatory synaptic input (of the AMPA type) and inhibition at a single spine.
(A) The effectiveness of silent GABA/i inhibition in reducing excitation when both are colocalized
either on the spine (solid curve) or on the dendrite at the base of the spine (dotted curve). The curve
shows the F factor (Eq. 5.14), that is, the ratio of EPSP without inhibition to the mixed excitatory-
inhibitory potential, as a function of the onset of inhibition relative to excitation. The half-widths of the
curves are 0.12 and 0.22 msec for the spine and dendrite case, respectively. The linear cable equation
for a spine located on a pyramidal cell was solved with 1^^. = 0.25 msec for both excitation and
inhibition, Et = 0 and Ee = 80 mV. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Koch and Poggio
(1983b). (B) Time course of the spine membrane potential (relative to rest) for the nonlinear Nernst-
Planck electrodiffusion model. Here a small EPSP (solid line; (peai; = 1 msec, G^ = 0.1 nS) can be
effectively vetoed by a hyperpolarizing potassium conductance increase (due to a GAB AS inhibition
with ?peak = 1 msec, GK = 1 nS; lower dotted curve), while the same or a hundred times stronger
conductance change associated with silent inhibition of the GABA/i type (intermediate dashed curves)
had almost no effect. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Qian and Sejnowski (1990).
where D^ is the local dendritic delay at the base of the dendrite. If the spine neck is
sufficiently thin and elongated, the time window during which inhibition can effectively
veto excitation can be a fraction of the corresponding dendritic time window. This effect
is particularly strong for spines close to the soma—providing an isolated environment for
excitation and inhibition to interact on a very small time scale—while the local spine
delay for spines in the distal dendritic tree will be close to the local dendritic delay
(Kdd/Rn -> oo).
However, as described in Sec. 11.3, for very thin processes it is important to account


===== Page 14 =====
12.3 Passive Electrical Properties of Single Spines 
• 
293
for the change in the relevant ionic concentrations. In the case of a spine, even small
synaptic inputs can significantly alter the reversal potentials for chloride and potassium,
both across the membrane and between the spine head, neck, and the dendrite. This
requires solving the nonlinear Nernst-Planck equation as advocated by Qian and Sejnowski
(1989, 1990). They studied the interaction between excitation and inhibition on a spine
and found that for reasonable inhibitory conductance changes associated with chloride ions
(such as would be caused by activation of GAB A^ receptors), the intracellular concentra-
tion of chloride rapidly increases, bringing the synaptic reversal potential of inhibition
substantially above the resting potential, thereby rendering it ineffective (Fig. 12.7B).
Indeed, massive activation of GABA^ receptors in thin processes will lead to a depo-
larization as the chloride concentration gradient decreases, shifting ECI to progressively
more depolarized values. Such "paradoxical" EPSPs have indeed been observed in distal
dendrites of pyramidal cells following intense GABAA activation (Staley, Soldo, and
Proctor, 1995).
While shifts in the potassium reversal battery will also occur, rendering GABA^ inhi-
bition equally ineffective for large conductance changes, the situation is quite different for
small inputs. Here £K moves toward the resting potential of the spine, causing a profound
reduction in the amplitude of the EPSP without leading to a hyperpolarizing response
(Fig. 12.7B). This leads Qian and Sejnowski (1990) to argue that should inhibition play a
role in selectively vetoing excitation on a spine or on thin dendrites, that inhibition must be
of the GABAfi type (for large dendrites, the advantage reverts to silent GABA^ inhibition).
We find no fault in their arguments.
Must dual-input cortical spines necessarily be functional? Dehay et al., (1991) throw the
entire idea into doubt by serially reconstructing selected spines that receive geniculate
input in cat primary visual cortex. Here, as elsewhere, about 8% of all spines in the
input layer (layer 4) carry both an excitatory as well as an inhibitory synaptic input.
Because Emerson et al., (1985) as well as Koch and Poggio (1985b) hypothesized that
direction and orientation selectivity in visual cortex neurons is mediated by very specific
interactions among excitation and shunting inhibition possibly localized on spines, Dehay
and colleagues investigated whether geniculo-cortical synapses on spines are a preferred
target for inhibition. Using a laborious electron-microscopic reconstruction technique, they
showed that these synapses do not have a higher likelihood of being paired with an inhibitory
synapse than the majority of synapses originated among cortical cells. Furthermore, in
certain cases Dehay et al., (1991) observed an axon from an inhibitory cell making both a
synapse on a spine and, a few micrometers away, another synapse on the parent dendrite,
revealing a lack of spatial specificity.
At least in cat visual cortex, it appears that dual-input spines could simply be the logical
consequence of an imprecise developmental rule that specifies that inhibitory synapses
should primarily innervate dendrites and that a small fraction fails to do so.
12.3.4 Geniculate Spine Triad
In other parts of the brain, however, the association between dual synaptic input and spines is
much stronger. We encountered already one such microcircu.it (Rail et al., 1966; Shepherd,
1978) in the mammalian olfactory bulb (Sec. 5.3), which mediates self and lateral inhibition.
We will here discuss another instance of a synaptic microcircuit, involving dual input to a
spinelike structure.


===== Page 15 =====
294
DENDRITIC SPINES
The mammalian lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), the midway station for visual input
between the retina and the visual cortex, is the site of a very complex synaptic structure
known as glomerulus (Fig. 12.8). At the heart of each glomerulus lies a terminal from a
retinal axon. It is surrounded by the complex intertwining of very thin dendritic processes
of a geniculate interneuron with those of a geniculate relay cell (Harnori et al., 1974; Hamos
et al., 1985). This circuit is also termed a triad because of the intimate association among
three different synaptic terminals: the retinal input makes a synapse both on the spine of a
geniculate relay cell and on the interneuron. The GABAergic interneuron, in turn, makes a
synapse on the geniculate spine.
Retinal output is organized in multiple parallel channels of information. One of these,
the X cells, which are particularly sensitive to high spatial frequencies, tends to make the
majority of synaptic contacts onto geniculate relay cells and interneurons in association with
these spine triads (Wilson, Friedlander, and Sherman, 1984). At least in cat, the Y cells, the
other major retinal output pathway, tend to make their synapses directly onto the dendrites
of their geniculate target relay cells, bypassing the inhibitory interneurons (Sherman and
Guillery, 1996).
Passive cable modeling of geniculate relay cells with the spine-triad local circuit using
excitation and shunting inhibition (Koch, 1985) shows that if the size of the inhibitory
Fig. 12.8 SYNAPTIC SPINE TRIADS IN THE LGN
These drawings, based on laborious electron-
microscopic reconstructions of cells in the cat
LGN (Hamos et al., 1985), illustrate the very
intricate and baroque synaptic microcircuits that
can be found in the nervous system. The arrange-
ment shown, known as a glomerulus, includes
(A) a dendrite (marked d) of a local inhibitory in-
terneuron from which a dozen very thin processes
spring forth. The full circles indicate the location
of excitatory synapses from a retinal axon. The
interneuron in turn inhibits the geniculate relay cell
at the nine sites indicated with full arrows. (B) This
interneuron (in black) is shown grappling with five
spinelike appendages on a dendrite of a geniculate
relay cell (in white), which are shown more fully in
(C). The full circles indicate nine retinal synapses,
and the filled triangles 40 inhibitory synapses from
other interneurons. The triad is a synaptic arrange-
ment in which an excitatory input (here, an optic
nerve axon) excites both an interneuron as well as
the geniculate relay cell. The interneuron, in turn,
directly inhibits this site. Reprinted by permission
from Hamos et al., (1985).


===== Page 16 =====
12.4 Active Electrical Properties of Single Spines 
• 
295
conductance change due to the GABA^ receptors is neither too small nor too large, it can
effectively and specifically veto the retinally induced EPSP without inhibiting EPSPs from
neighboring synapses. Thus, although the inhibition is postsynaptic, from a functional point
of view it acts similar to presynaptic inhibition.
Because of the expected 1 or 2 msec delay between retinal input triggering an EPSP in
the interneuron and the opening of postsynaptic GABA^ receptors on the spine in response
to this input, inhibition is likely to be not very effective at low firing rates (caused, for
instance, by a low contrast stimulus). Inhibition would be strongly activated for sustained,
high-contrast input. Because the spine-triad circuit is essentially limited to X cells, Y cells
should not show any comparable localized and specific type of inhibition. Experimentally, it
is known that geniculate cells are more phasic than their retinal counterparts (Cleland, Dubin,
and Levick, 1971) and that inhibition is independent of stimulus contrasts for Y cells but
increases with increasing stimulus contrast in X cells (Berardi and Morrone, 1984). Finally,
it is clear that the level of activity in the interneuron itself will be crucial in determining
whether or not it can inhibit the retinal input (Bloomfield and Sherman, 1989). Such context-
dependent inhibition could be important, for instance, during saccadic suppression.
We conclude that the spine-triad microcircuit on geniculate X cells appears to implement
a specific type of activity-dependent inhibition (Hamori et al., 1974; Koch, 1985).
12.4 Active Electrical Properties of Single Spines
In the mid-1980s, several independent groups worked on the idea of synaptic amplification in
dendritic spines endowed with active, regenerative electrical properties (Perkel and Perkel,
1985; Miller, Rail and Rinzel, 1985; Shepherd et al., 1985; Pongracz, 1985; Segev and
Rail, 1988). At first viewed with skepticism by experimentalists, recent calcium-imaging
experiments have shown that spines on hippocampal pyramidal as well as cerebellar
Purkinje cells can show all-or-nothing responses (Yuste and Denk, 1995; Denk, Sugimore
and Llinas, 1995; see Sec. 12.6.2). It remains to be seen whether these spikes are actually
restricted to the spines or whether they invade the neighboring dendrites.
The basic idea is simple and will be explained with reference to the painstakingly
executed Segev and Rail (1988; see also Rail and Segev, 1987) study. They endowed the
head of a single spine—on an otherwise passive dendrite—with the fast sodium and delayed-
rectifier potassium conductances found in the squid axon (adjusted for 20° C and with a
tenfold increase in peak conductances; see Fig. 12.9). With a single-channel conductance
of about 15 pS (Table 8.1) this corresponds to 1050 sodium channels per spine. Using a
very fast synaptic input (fpeak = 0.035 msec), Segev and Rail found that the amplitude of
the synaptic input gpeak nad to exceed a very sharp threshold in order to generate an all-
or-nothing action potential in the spine (Fig. 12.10). Such a tongue-twisting "spine spike"
will be initiated once Vsp exceeds a critical voltage threshold V& (see the discussion in
Sees. 6.3.1 and 19.2). At Vth, the sum of the synaptic and active spine currents exceeds the
current /„ flowing through the spine neck and onward into the dendrite.
In the suprathreshold domain, the amplification that can be obtained with a small number
of strategically placed active channels on a spine is evident in the lower graph of Fig. 12.10.
The 90 mV spine action potential is attenuated across the 1000 M£2 neck but still leads to a
5 mV EPSP at the base of the spine. Contrariwise, a passive spine would have depolarized
to 27 mV, of which only about 1 mV would have survived the attenuation through the spine
neck (dotted lines in Fig. 12.10). Thus, a tiny 1 /zm2 patch of active channels leads to a
fivefold voltage amplification.


===== Page 17 =====
296 
• 
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.9 MODEL OF AN ACTIVE SPINE Lumped electrical model of an active spine, as used in the
Segev and Rail (1988) study. The spine head is endowed with squid axon membrane (at 20° C, but with
a tenfold increase in the maximal conductances G^ and GK). With Cm = 1 ju,F/cm2, the passive time
constant in the spine at rest is 1.4 msec. The synaptic input is very fast, with fpeak = 0.035 msec and
£syn = 100 mV. A tenfold slower synaptic input is expected to yield a similar behavior in the presence
of a tenfold slower membrane time constant. The input resistance at the base spine is 262 M£2.
The amplitude (as well as the integrated area) of the dendritic EPSP is independent
of variations in gpeak (as long as gpeak is above threshold; Fig. 12.10), since the maximal
value of Vsp is determined by the height of the action potential, which is rather fixed.
Given the large variability in the postsynaptic amplitude of individual synaptic inputs at
cortical synapses (see, Fig. 4.4), active spines can thereby eliminate a source of uncertainty
associated with passive spines (as well as amplify their responses).
Figure 12.11 illustrates the dependency of Vsp and Vd on the spine neck resistance.
For small values of Rn (here below 620 M£2), the spine input impedance KsptSp is not
sufficiently high in order for the local EPSP to exceed V±: the peak value of both Vsp and
Vd in the presence of sodium and potassium channels is little different from the peak value
of the potential in the passive situation (right panels in Fig. 12.11). For /?„ = 630 M£2,
a spike is generated after a short delay, while for the high resistance neck (curve b),
an action potential is established in a very secure manner and with a larger amplitude.
Seemingly paradoxically, however, the amplitudes of the resulting EPSPs at the dendrite
are reversed. While a larger spine neck resistance increases the spine input impedance
(witness Eq. 12.4), thereby facilitating spike generation, it also causes a larger voltage
attenuation across the spine neck. In the limit of an infinitely thin spine neck, the smallest
input will cause V,/ to "lock up" at £syn; yet none of that will be visible at the base of
the spine. (For all the subtleties of this dependency, see Segev and Rail, 1988.) As the
lower right panel in Fig. 12.11 best summarizes, amplification over the passive spine is
obtained within a narrow range of Rn. Given the inverse quadratic dependency of Rn
on dn (Eq. 12.1), this translates into a very strong dependency of Vj on the spine neck
geometry.


===== Page 18 =====
12.4 Active Electrical Properties of Single Spines
297
Fig. 12.10 ACTIVE SPINES AS A FUNCTION or THE INPUT AMPLITUDE Time course and peak
depolarization in the spine and dendrite shown in Fig. 12.9 as a function of the amplitude of the fast
('peak = 0.035 msec) voltage-independent synaptic conductance change gpeak- The two left panels
illustrate Vsp(t) and Vj(t) for two values of gpeak (0.2 nS for a and 0.4 nS for V) while the right
panels plot the peak values of Vsp and Vj as a function of the input amplitude. Rn is always set to
1 GR. Dotted curves are for a passive spine, whereas the solid curves are for an active spine. Close
inspection of these plots reveals some minimal evidence of active channels for the smaller inputs of
the two. If the input is doubled, a very robust all-or-none spike is initiated. Further increases of gpeak
have no further effect on the peak of either Vsp or Vj. The dashed line in the lower right panel shows
the peak of V^ when the same synaptic input is applied directly to the passive dendrite, rather than to
the spine. Active spines can be used to amplify synaptic input. Reprinted by permission from Segev
and Rail (1988).
At present, we do not know whether sodium channels are present on dendritic spines.
However, phenomena similar to those discussed here could be instantiated with slower
calcium-mediated all-or-none spine spikes. Two-photon microscopy experiments using
calcium dyes have provided tantalizing preliminary evidence for all-or-none calcium events
following synaptic input onto spines of hippocampal and Purkinje cells (see Sec. 12.6.2).
What Segev and Rail (1988; see also Perkel and Perkel, 1985; Miller, Rail, and Rinzel,
1985; Shepherd et al., 1985) demonstrate is that active spines can significantly amplify
(two to tenfold) synaptic input at minimal metabolic costs (only requiring the insertion of
voltage-dependent channels into a very small membrane patch the size of a spine head). We
conclude that active spines could provide the biophysical substrate for information storage
as well as information processing.
The strong dependency of Vj on parameters associated with spine neck geometry
provides the cell with a sensitive mechanism to modulate the synaptic weight of individual
inputs. Only within a narrow range of Rn will the synaptic input be high; outside of this range,
the dendritic EPSP will be much reduced. At the same time, this sensitivity also represents
the Achilles heel of the hypothesis: as evidenced by the large degree of variability in the


===== Page 19 =====
298
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.11 ACTIVE SPINES AS A FUNCTION OF THE SPINE NECK RESISTANCE Time course and
peak depolarization in the spine and dendrite shown in Fig. 12.9 as a function of the spine neck
resistance (for gp^ = 0.37 nS and fpeak = 0.035 msec). The two left panels illustrate Vsp(t) and
Vd(t) for Rn = 630 Mfl (curve a) and Rn = 1000 Mfi (curve b) while the right panels plot the peak
values of Vsp and Vj as a function of R„. Dotted curves are for a passive spine, whereas the solid
curves are for an active spine. Large amplification of the dendritic EPSP with respect to a passive
spine only occurs in a relatively narrow range of Rn values: if the neck is too short or too thick, the
electrical decoupling of excitable channels at the spine head from the rest of the cell is insufficient to
initiate an action potential, while for very thin and long spine necks (implying large values of Rn),
the attenuation across the spine neck is excessive. This dependency on spine neck geometry could be
exploited in synaptic plasticity. Reprinted by permission from Segev and Rail (1988).
spine neck geometry (Fig. 12.4), the brain might not be able to control spine neck geometry
with sufficient accuracy to exploit it in a consistent manner.
What remains unclear from an experimental point of view is whether action potentials
are restricted to the spines themselves or whether they spread to the parent dendrite. As
witnessed by Fig. 12.11, a true spiking spine requires a very thin or elongated neck to
achieve the necessary isolation from the parent dendrite.
More interesting from the point of view of neuronal computation are the combinatorial
possibilities for nonlinear interactions among active spines on distal dendrites. Under
certain circumstances, one or a small number of simultaneous inputs to active spines can
trigger action potentials in neighboring spines. We will pick up the threads of this story in
Sec. 19.3.2.
12.5 Effect of Spines on Cables
Given the large spine density (up to 10 spines per micrometer of dendrites), 50% or more of
the total neuronal membrane area resides in spines. It is therefore important to account for


===== Page 20 =====
12.5 Effect of Spines on Cables 
• 
299
this additional area to properly analyze the propagation of electrical signals in the dendritic
tree. Although these effects provide no insight into the function of spines, they may be
ironically the only ones that we can infer with confidence to be important.
Accounting for the effect that spines have on cable propagation is based on the assumption
that for current flow from the dendrite back into the spine the membrane area of the spine
can be incorporated into the membrane of the parent dendrite. As we expect from basic
cable theory and as discussed more fully below, there exists almost no voltage attenuation
from the dendrite back into the spine (contrary to the voltage attenuation from the spine
into the dendrite). This isopotentiality is the reason that the spine area can be lumped into
the overall area of the dendrite. Several different methods to deal with this problem have
been proposed, based on the intuition that in the presence of a large number of spines, the
total capacitance will increase while the membrane resistance will decrease.
One method (Stratford et al., 1989) transforms the spiny dendrite (with diameter d and
length /) into a single "equivalent" (and smooth) cylinder, whose diameter d' and length /'
are larger than those of the parent dendrite by some fraction y, with
(12.17)
where Adend is the total membrane area of the "stem" dendrite without any spines, and
^spine is the total membrane area of all spines (spine necks and spine heads) on the dendrite.
The dimensions of this equivalent cable are
(12.18)
and
(12.19)
Solving for the membrane potential in a cable studded by n spines requires the solution of
2n + 1 coupled equations (assuming that each spine is modeled using two compartments,
one for the neck and one for the head). The transformation described here reduces this to
solving the cable equation in a single, unbranched cylinder. The effective area of the cable
is scaled by J7, its infinite input resistance by JF~1//2, and its electrotonic length of the
equivalent cable by JF1/2. The time constant remains unchanged. The transformed segment
behaves like the spiny original under most circumstances (Stratford et al., 1989).
An alternative transformation method (Shelton, 1985; Holmes, 1989; Segev et al., 1992)
preserves the dimensions of the dendrite but scales Cm and Rm appropriately by
(12.20)
and
(12.21)
Both methods are mathematically equivalent.
A novel analytical method to incorporate spines into the continuous cable equation was
developed by Baer and Rinzel (1991). It is powerful, since it can deal with passive as well
as active spines. Baer and Rinzel replace the cable equation for a single passive cable by
two equations, one for the voltage along the dendrite Vd(x, t) and one for the voltage in
the spines Vsp(x, t). The density of spines per unit electrotonic length of cable is s(x). A
single spine receives synaptic input current Isya(x, 0 (which can vary with the position of


===== Page 21 =====
300 • 
DENDRITIC SPINES
the spine along the cable), generating a local current across the spine head /ionic that can
include Hodgkin-Huxley or other voltage-dependent currents. Spines are independent of
each other, only interacting with the dendrites via the neck current /„ that flows through the
spine neck. The associated cable equation can be expressed as
(12.22)
(12.23)
with an additional equation for the neck current,
(12.24)
Here T, A. and 7?oo are the time and space constants and the input resistance of a semi-infinite
cable in the absence of any spines, and C/, is the tiny spine head capacitance (Fig. 12.5).
Baer and Rinzel (1991) go on to solve these equations for active as well as passive spines.
In the former case, wavelike propagation can occur along the passive cable, supported by
the amplifying spines. In the latter case, both equations are linear and /ionjc = Vsp/Rh-
Assuming a constant density of spines, s (x) = s, and steady-state conditions, they compute
the effective electrotonic length of a spiny dendrite as
(12.25)
and the infinite input resistance as
(12.26)
Since under almost all circumstances Rh ^> /?„, these reduce to
(12.27)
and
(12.28)
as in the more heuristic methods discussed at the beginning of this section.
In summary, all of the spine-replacement methods discussed here conclude that the
collective effect of dendritic spines is to increase the effective membrane capacitance and
decrease the membrane resistance, leading to a lower input resistance and an increased
electrotonic length compared to a smooth dendrite of equal diameter and physical length
(Wilson, 1988). Indeed, Jaslove (1992) argues that these population effects—influencing
the degree of spatio-temporal integration occurring in the dendrites—are the primary
functional reason for why some cells are studded with spines while others are devoid
of them.
12.6 Diffusion in Dendritic Spines
So far, we have focused exclusively on the electrical properties of spines. Yet, over the
last decade, an alternative view of spines has emerged which emphasizes their effect on
chemical, rather than electrical, signaling. As discussed in Chap. 13, chemical dynamics of


===== Page 22 =====
12.6 Diffusion in Dendritic Spines 
• 
301
intracellular calcium and other second messengers in the spine are of particular importance
in the induction of long-term potentiation.
12.6.1 Solutions of the Reaction-Diffusion Equation for Spines
Compartmental modeling of calcium diffusion and binding following synaptic input to the
spine (Robinson and Koch, 1984; Coss and Perkel, 1985; Gamble and Koch, 1987; Wickens,
1988) played a trail-blazing role here, followed a few years later by the experimental study
of calcium dynamics in single spines (Miiller and Connor, 1991; Guthrie, Segal and Kater,
1991; Jaffe, Fisher, and Brown, 1994; Eilers, Augustine, and Konnerth, 1995; Yuste and
Denk, 1995; Denk, Sugimore, and Llinas, 1995; Svoboda, Tank, and Denk, 1996). More
recent modeling studies have, of course, become much more sophisticated and use a very
fine grained spatial resolution to keep track of substances in the spine head and neck (Holmes
and Levy, 1990; Zador, Koch, and Brown, 1990; Koch, Zador, and Brown, 1992;DeSchutter
and Bower, 1993; Gold and Bear, 1994; Zador and Koch, 1994; Woolf and Greer, 1994;
Jaffe, Fisher and Brown, 1994).
The principal ideas are really very simple, in particular in light of the linearized reaction-
diffusion equation discussed in Sec. 11.7. Using the geometry of Fig. 12.12A, and in the
presence of low calcium concentration, a linear nonsaturable calcium pump in the spine neck
and head membrane, and a fast second-order nondiffusible buffer, the reaction-diffusion
equations (Eqs. 11.48) in the presence of calcium pumps can be reduced to the linear partial
differential equation (Eq. 11.51), formally identical to the cable equation.
This allows us to define the "chemical input resistance" (Carnevale and Rosenthal, 1992;
Zador and Koch, 1994), in analogy to the standard electrical input resistance, as the change
in calcium concentration in response to a current of calcium ions (Table 11.2). Both the
chemical and the electrical spine input resistances are much larger than the associated
dendritic input resistances. At the spine head, the input resistance is 4.2 x 10~2 /zM/fA
while the dendritic input resistance is 4.8 x 10~3 /u-M/fA. In other words, a sustained
calcium current injected into the spine head leads to a tenfold larger increase in calcium
concentration than the same current applied at the dendritic shaft.
A key difference between the electrical and the chemical properties of spines arises from
the effect of the spine neck. In our analysis, as well as in almost all published studies of the
electrical properties of spines, the electrical cable properties associated with the spine neck
are neglected, since no significant current will cross the membrane of the 1 -/zm long "cable,"
a direct consequence of the large value of A.. In order to estimate the loss of calcium current
through the spine neck membrane, we compute the space constant of Eq. 11.55 associated
with the linearized reaction-diffusion equation. Reading off from Fig. 11.9, \r-d for a
0.1 /xm thin cable is 0.46 /urn (0.27 /urn without diffusible buffer). Because the dendritic
shaft is more than 1kr-d away from the spine head, the calcium concentration at the shaft
is expected to be tenfold lower than at the head. This is in dramatic contrast to the almost
complete lack of electrical current attenuation experienced between the spine head and the
base (A. is close to three orders of magnitude larger than Ar__rf; Fig. 11.9).
These principles are illustrated in simulations of the fully nonlinear calcium dynamics
thought to underly the induction of LTP (Zador, Koch, and Brown, 1990; Brown et al.,
1991b). In the model, synaptic input activates a fast non-NMDA conductance (Eq. 4.5) as
well as an NMDA voltage-gated conductance (Eq. 4.6; Fig. 12.12A). 2% of the NMDA
current is assumed to be carried by Ca2+ ions. Subsequent to entry into the intracellular
cytoplasm, these ions can bind to one of the four calmodulin binding sites (Fig. 11.7),


===== Page 23 =====
302
DENDRITIC SPINES
Fig. 12.12 SPATIO-TEMPORAL DYNAMICS OF CALCIUM IN A SPINE 
(A) Compartmental represen-
tation for solving the reaction-diffusion equation associated with the system controlling intracellular
calcium in response to a mixed excitatory voltage-independent non-NMDA and a voltage-dependent
NMDA synaptic input. Opening of the NMDA channels causes an influx of calcium ions. These
are removed by the action of membrane-bound pumps in the spine head and neck, by binding to
cytoplasmic calcium buffers, as well as by diffusion into the dendrite. The drawing is to scale, with
dn = 0.1 fj,m. The individual compartments are shown by thin lines. (B) Spatio-temporal dynamics
of Ca2+ in response to a train of three presynaptic stimuli (at 100 Hz) while the membrane potential
in the spine was simultaneously clamped to —40 mV (mimicking a somatic voltage-clamp protocol).
Changes in [Ca2+],-—induced by the calcium influx through the NMDA channel—are restricted
mainly to the spine head, x indicates the distance from the dendritic shaft (with 0 corresponding to
the shaft and x = 1.3 /zm to the subsynaptic cleft). Reprinted by permission from Zador, Koch, and
Brown (1990).
they can be pumped out of the cell via two different pumps, and they can diffuse along
the spine neck and out into the dendrite (assumed to be an infinite capacity sink with a
resting calcium level of 50 nM). Simulated calcium dynamics following a train of synaptic
stimuli are shown in Fig. 12.12B. Due to the tiny volume of the spine, the small Ca2+
influx following synaptic stimulation leads to a large transient increase in the spine calcium
concentration (here, [Ca +]sp = 10/u,M corresponds to about 350 Ca2+ions). We conclude
that spines can amplify the small incoming calcium signal dramatically. Yet due to the large
mismatch in volumes and the associated small chemical input impedance at the dendrite, the


===== Page 24 =====
12.6 Diffusion in Dendritic Spines 
• 
303
large peak changes in [Ca2+](- at the spine cause the dendritic level of [Ca2+],- to fluctuate
only by several tens of nanomolars.
Due to the difference in input impedances between the spine and the dendrite, both
calcium and voltage will be severely attenuated when going from the spine to the dendrite,
even though no current is lost across the spine neck membrane in the case of the cable
equation. This is illustrated in a different manner in Fig. 12.13, showing both voltage and
calcium attenuation along the spine, that is, the ratio of the voltage (or calcium concentration)
at one location to the voltage (or calcium concentration) at another location.
Quite a dramatic difference emerges when considering antidromic attenuation. When
voltage clamping the dendrite to any particular value, the voltage at the spine head will be
attenuated by the factor (Eq. 3.34)
(12.29)
Since Ksp^ «* K^d (Eq. 12.5) to a pretty good approximation, no voltage attenuation is
expected into the spine, as confirmed by the upper dashed line in Fig. 12.13. However,
due to the sustained loss of calcium ions as they are being pumped through the spine neck
membrane into the extracellular cytoplasm, the effective value of Ksp^ for the reaction-
Fig. 12.13 VOLTAGE AND CALCIUM ATTENUATION IN AND OUT OF A SPINE 
Voltage and calcium
attenuation for two different simulations as a function of the distance from the dendrite (at 0; the spine
neck ends at 1 /u.m and the spine head extends from 1 to 1.3 /zm). The upward diagonal dashed and
solid curves illustrate voltage and calcium attenuation from the spine into the dendrite. These curves
are taken from the simulation shown in Fig. 12.12B and indicate peak calcium and voltages following
three presynaptic stimuli to the spine synapse. Both variables attenuate about tenfold. In a different
simulation illustrating antidromic steady-state behavior, either the calcium (downward going solid
curve) or the voltage (constant dashed line) is clamped to a fixed value in the dendrite. Due to the
presence of calcium pumps in the spine neck, calcium rapidly attenuates and reaches baseline levels
at the spine head. The membrane potential, however, does not attenuate across the spine neck due to
the negligible current loss across the spine neck and head membranes. Reprinted by permission from
Koch and Zador( 1993).


===== Page 25 =====
304 . 
DENDRITIC SPINES
diffusion system is very low. As a consequence, when the calcium concentration in the
dendrite is "clamped" to 1 /xM, the calcium attenuation into the spine head is very large:
it remains protected from the high dendritic calcium values by the presence of calcium
pumps in the membrane of the spine neck (Zador, Koch, and Brown, 1990; Koch, Zador,
and Brown, 1992), providing a graphic illustration of the tiny size of the associated space
constant. Given the square-root dependency of Ar_^ on the density of pump molecules in
the membrane (Table 11.3), this density would have to change substantially before any
significant effect of dendrite calcium on the spine head would be seen. Or, short and sweet,
"spines are electrically coupled but chemically isolated from changes occurring in the
dendrite." Of course, the presence of the spine apparatus or other organelles would further
impede the flow of calcium ions into the spine head. What applies to calcium will, of course,
also apply to other second messenger systems (see also Woolf and Greer, 1994).
The value of many of the relevant biophysical and biochemical parameters can only be
specified within a factor of 2, 5, or even 10. For instance, relatively small changes in the
spine neck geometry or in the buffer concentration can cause the peak calcium concentration
in the spine head to vary quite a bit. Whether this sensitivity of peak [Ca2+]sp subserves a
function, as contended by Gold and Bear (1994) (Fig. 13.7) is not known.
One obvious effect that should be emphasized is that the electrical as well as the chemical
input impedance increases with increasingly longer and thinner spines. If the establishment
of LTP were to depend on exceeding either a voltage threshold or a critical concentration
of [Ca2+],, the thin and elongated spines would be in a better position than the short,
stubby ones to achieve this. Conversely, since the synaptic weight depends little on the
spine neck—for the range of geometries reported in hippocampus and for passive spines—
stubby spines could be considered to be permanently modified, while elongated or thin
spines would constitute a reservoir that can be recruited for long-term synaptic potentiation
as well as for long-term depression. Indeed, several reports have emphasized that high-
frequency synaptic stimulation that causes LTP leads to an excess of short or thick spines
(Lee et al., 1980; Chang and Greenough, 1984).
Although we mainly use arguments from linear cable theory, the simulations in Figs.
12.12 and 12.13, based as they are on the peak transient calcium concentration changes in
the full nonlinear model, confirm these expectations.
12.6.2 Imaging Calcium Dynamics in Single Dendritic Spines
While it remains technically impossible to record spine EPSPs directly, a number of groups
are "pushing the technological envelope" by imaging calcium activity in dendrites and in
individual spines via calcium-sensitive fluorescent dyes (Miiller and Connor, 1991; Guthrie,
Segal, and Kater, 1991;RegehrandTank, 1992; Jaffe, Fisher, and Brown, 1994; Yuste and
Denk, 1995; Segal, 1995a; Eilers, Augustine, and Konnerth, 1995; Denk, Sugimore, and
Llinas, 1995; for a review see Denk et al., 1996). The more recent studies make use of
confocal laser scanning or two-photon fluorescence microscopy. They confirm that in the
absence of calcium entry through voltage-dependent calcium channels, spines do isolate in
both directions: a high calcium concentration in the dendrite is frequently not paralleled by
an equally high concentration change in the spine (Fig. 12.14C). Control experiments with
injected cobalt indicate that the lag is not due to a physical diffusion barrier between the
dendrite and the spine (Guthrie, Segal, and Kater, 1991), supporting the idea that calcium-
dependent processes, such as calcium pumps or other uptake systems, were responsible
for isolating the spine head. Conversely, synaptic stimulation leads to restricted calcium


===== Page 26 =====
12.6 Diffusion in Dendritic Spines 
• 
305
Fig. 12.14 IMAGING CALCIUM IN A SINGLE SPINE Fluorescence signal from a single spine on a
CA1 pyramidal cell in a rat hippocampus slice. (A) Using two-photon microscopy, Yuste and Denk
(1995) record the increase in fluorescence of a calcium indicator, due to an increase in free intracellular
calcium, evoked either by spontaneous synaptic activity (sy) or by the antidromic invasion of a
postsynaptic action potential (ap). Following synaptic input, calcium rises within 2 msec, the temporal
resolution of the measurement. The influx of calcium in response to a postsynaptic spike is mediated
by voltage-dependent calcium currents in the dendrites and spines. (B) Stochastic failure of synaptic
transmission at the same spine can also be visualized. Left column: fluorescence measurements in
response to subthreshold synaptic stimulation. Right column: simultaneous current recording at the
soma. In only three cases is a clear synaptic response evident at the single spine. Only in about 20
to 40% of the cases will a presynaptic spike cause release of a synaptic vesicle and a postsynaptic
response. (C) Spontaneous synaptic activity causes an increase in [Ca2+], at a single spine (1) and
the adjacent dendritic shaft (2), while a neighboring spine (3) or dendrite (4) shows no such increase.
Later during the same recording session, a synaptic-evoked calcium accumulation was restricted to
the spine (3). Reprinted by permission from Yuste and Denk (1995).
increase in individual spines but not in the dendrite, confirming the basic aspects of the
models discussed above. Indeed, the resolution of these methods is such that stochastic
failure of synaptic transmission can be observed in the calcium response at a single spine
(Fig. 12.14B).
In real life, things become more interesting, but also more complicated, by the presence of
high-threshold noninactivating voltage-dependent calcium channels in dendrites and spines:
both somatic depolarization via an intracellular electrode and antidromic spike invasion
lead to calcium increases in dendrites and in spines throughout the cell (Fig. 12.14A;
Markram, Helm, and Sakmann, 1995; Sec. 19.1). With the exception of Robinson and
Koch (1984) and Gamble and Koch (1987), previous compartmental models have assumed
that all calcium entry occurs via the activated NMDA synaptic receptors at the stimulated


===== Page 27 =====
306 
• 
DENDRITIC SPINES
spine. Since antidromic spike invasion does occur under physiological conditions and may
indeed be facilitated by the presence of sodium channels on the apical dendrites (Stuart and
Sakmann, 1994; Sees. 19.1 and 19.2.2), it is unclear what this implies about the specificity
of LTP, which is generally believed to be restricted to the stimulated synapse (see the
following chapter). It might well be that under physiological conditions the critical calcium
concentration required to initiate the biochemical cascade that leads to the enhancement of
the synapse cannot be achieved unless calcium accumulation from synaptic (calcium entry
viaNMDA and non-NMDA receptors; Schneggenburger et al., 1993) as well as nonsynaptic
(voltage-dependent calcium channels and calcium-triggered calcium release; Regehr and
Tank, 1992) sources cooperate.
12.7 Recapitulation
The small extent of dendritic spines, somewhat smaller than the average-sized Escherichia
coli colon bacterium, precluded until very recently direct experimental access, making the
function and properties of dendritic spines a favorite subject among modelers. Hypotheses
concerning their function can be divided into two major categories: spines as devices for the
induction and/or the expression of synaptic plasticity and spines as devices subserving spe-
cific computations. Other proposals have been advanced, such as that spines primarily serve
to connect axons with dendrites (Swindale, 1981), that spines serve to increase the effective
membrane capacity of a dendrite (Jaslove, 1992), or that spines serve to protect the dendrite
from high, and therefore possibly toxic, overdoses of calcium during synaptic activation
(Segal, 1995b). While each of these ideas may contain some grain of truth, we here empha-
size those properties of spines of direct relevance to information processing and storage.
That changes in the electrical resistance of the spine neck can modulate the EPSP
amplitude of a synapse on this spine has been a popular idea since it was discussed in detail
by Rail (1970, 1974). It now appears, at least in the case of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal
cells (but most likely also for neocortical spines), that the spine neck conductance is too
large relative to the synaptic-induced conductance change to be able to effectively modulate
the dendritic EPSP for passive spines. Furthermore, as covered in the following chapter,
the weight of the evidence leans in favor of a pre- rather than a postsynaptic site as the
locus where the long-term changes in synaptic weight are affected. It is most likely in
the induction phase of Hebbian long-term changes in synaptic plasticity that spines play a
critical role.
Both theoretical and experimental evidence is accumulating that spines may create an
isolated biochemical microenvironment for inducing changes in synaptic strength. In the
induction of associative (or Hebbian) LTP, for example, the spine could restrict changes
in postsynaptic calcium concentration to precisely those synapses that met the criteria
for potentiation. Furthermore, changes in spine shape could control the peak calcium
concentration induced by synaptic input: all other factors being equal, long and skinny spines
would have higher peak calcium levels than short and stubby spines. This could provide
an alternative explanation for some of the environmental effects on spine morphology. The
biochemical compartmentalization provided by dendritic spines could, of course, be equally
crucial for a number of other diffusible second messengers, such as I?3, calmodulin, cyclic
AMP, and others. We conclude that while spines may not play any role in the expression
of synaptic plasticity, they may be crucial in the induction phase by offering a protected
microenvironment for calcium and other messenger molecules.


===== Page 28 =====
12.7 Recapitulation 
• 
307
Spines can provide a very rich substrate for computation if they are endowed with
regenerative, all-or-none electrical properties as experimental data are now suggesting.
The elevated spine input resistance, as compared to the input resistance of the parent
dendrite, and the partial electrical isolation of the spine from the rest of the cell, could
make spines a favorable site for the initiation of action potentials. The proposal that spines
contain voltage-dependent membrane conductances, first advanced by theoreticians and
now experimentally supported by evidence for calcium spikes, implies that a dendritic
spine is a basic computational gate with two states, on or off. Modeling studies, treated
in Sec. 19.3.2, demonstrate that a population of strategically placed active spines can
instantiate various classes of quasi-Boolean logic. The combination of excitatory and
inhibitory synapses on a single spine—whether passive or active—observed in certain brain
areas can only enhance this computational power. With up to 200,000 spines on certain cell
types, it remains to be seen whether the nervous system makes use of this vast computational
capacity.


