===== Page 1 =====
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
The previous chapter dealt with the solution of the cable equation in response to current
pulses and steps within a single unbranched cable. However, real nerve cells possess highly
branched and extended dendritic trees with quite distinct morphologies. Figure 3.1 illustrates
the fantastic variety of dendritic trees found throughout the animal kingdom, ranging from
neurons in the locust to human brain cells and cells from many different parts of the nervous
system. Some of these cells are spatially compact, such as retinal amacrine cells, which are
barely one-fifth of a millimeter across (Fig. 3. IE), while some cells have immense dendritic
trees, such as a motoneurones in the spinal cord extending across several millimeters
(Fig. 3.1 A). Yet, in all cases, neurons are very tightly packed: in vertebrates, peak density
appears to be reached in the granule cell layer of the human cerebellum with around 5 million
cells per cubic millimeter (Braitenberg and Atwood, 1958) while the packing density of
the cells filling the 0.25 mm3 nervous system of the housefly Musca domestica is around
1.2 million cells per cubic millimeter (Strausfeld, 1976). The dendritic arbor of some cell
types encompasses a spherical volume, such as for thalamic relay cells (Fig. 3.1G), while
other cells, such as the cerebellar Purkinje cell (Fig. 3.IF and K), fill a thin slablike volume
with a width less than one-tenth of their extent.
Different cell types do not appear at random in the brain but are unique to specific parts
of the brain. By far the majority of excitatory cells in the cortex are the pyramidal cells
(Fig. 3.1C). Yet even within this class, considerable diversity exists. But why this diversity
of shapes? To what extent do these quite distinct dendritic architectures reflect differences
in their roles in information processing and computation? What influence does the dendritic
morphology have on the electrical properties of the cell, or, in other words, what is the
relationship between the morphological structure of a cell and its electrical function?
One of the few cases where a quantitative relationship between form and some aspect
of neuronal function has been established is the retinal neurons. It seems obvious that the
larger their dendritic tree, the larger the visual area over which they can receive input.1
That this is true for large cells was shown by Peichl and Wassle (1983). They correlated
the electrophysiologically defined receptive field of one type of retinal ganglion cell (brisk
transient or Y cell) with its dendritic tree size. It is well known that the physiologically
I. The area in visual space in which an appropriate visual input will excite a cell is termed its classical receptive field.
49
3


===== Page 2 =====
50
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.1 DENDRITIC TREES OF THE WORLD Great variety of dendritic trees (in addition to a glia
cell and an axonal tree) observed in the nervous systems of animals. The cells are not drawn to
scale. (A) a motoneuron in spinal cord of cat (2.6 mm). Reprinted by permission from Cullheim,
Fleshman, and Burke (1987). (B) Spiking intemeuron in mesothoracic ganglion of locust (0.54 mm).
Unpublished data from G. Laurent, with permission. (C) Layer 5 neocortical pyramidal cell in rat
(1.03 mm). Reprinted by permission from Amitai et al., (1993). (D) Retinal ganglion cell in postnatal
cat (0.39 mm). Reprinted by permission from Maslim, Webster, and Stone (1986). (E) Amacrine
cell in retina of larval tiger salamander (0.16 mm). Reprinted by permission from Yang and Yazulla
(1986). (F) Cerebellar Purkinje cell in human. Reprinted by permission from Ramon y Cajal (1909).
(G) Relay neuron in rat ventrobasal thalamus (0.35 mm). Reprinted by permission from Harris (1986).
(H) Granule cell from olfactory bulb of mouse (0.26 mm). Reprinted by permission from Greer (1987).
(I) Spiny projection neuron in rat striatum (0.37 mm). Reprinted by permission from Penny, Wilson,
and Kitai (1988). (J) Nerve cell in the nucleus of Burdach in human fetus. Reprinted by permission
from Ramon y Cajal (1909). (K) Purkinje cell in mormyrid fish (0.42 mm). Reprinted by permission
from Meek and Nieuwenhuys (1991). (L) Golgi epithelial (glia) cell in cerebellum of normal-reeler
mouse chimera (0.15 mm). Reprinted by permission from Terashima et al., (1986). (M) Axonal
arborization of isthmotectal neurons in turtle (0.46 mm). Reprinted by permission from Sereno and
Ulinski (1987). The lengths given are approximate and correspond to the maximal extent. Reprinted
by permission from Mel (1994).
defined Y cells correspond to the anatomically defined a ganglion cells while x corresponds
to ft (Saito, 1983; Stanford and Sherman, 1984). Figure 3.2 shows the dendritic tree and the
cell body of an ft cell, including its presynaptic input from bipolar cells, reconstructed from
serial electron micrographs (Freed and Sterling, 1988). Because a cell can only respond
to light stimulation in that part of the retina where it has functional connections with
the photoreceptors (via horizontal and bipolar) cells, it is not surprising that the position,
shape, and size of the receptive field are determined by the position, shape, and size of the
underlying dendritic tree (Fig. 3.3). Indeed, a compartmental model of the type discussed
in this chapter has shown that the passive electrotonic properties of the dendritic tree itself
contribute very little to the spatial profile (Freed, Smith, and Sterling, 1992). Because of
the horizontal spread of the neuronal elements interposed between the photoreceptors, the
receptive field is on average 1.4 times larger than the dendritic tree.


===== Page 3 =====
CENTER
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES . 51
PERIPHERY
Fig. 3.2 STRUCTURE-FUNCTION RELATIONSHIP IN RETINAL GANGLION CELLS The relationship
between the extent of the receptive field of visual neurons and the size of their dendritic tree differs
depending on the size of the receptive field. Shown here is the functional architecture of a central
(1 °; left column) and a peripheral (20°; right column) ft ganglion cell in the cat retina. (A) Receptive
field of these cells, determined by fitting a Gaussian sensitivity curve through their center (dark)
and their surround fields. (B) Their dendritic tree, reconstructed at the electron-microscopic (left)
and the light-microscopic (right) levels. The small cell receives excitatory input from about 170
bipolar ribbon synapses, while the large one is excited by 1700 bipolar ribbon synapses (see Fig. 1.5).
(C) Compartmental modeling of these two cells, assuming a passive dendritic tree, shows that voltage
attenuation is negligible. (D) The receptive field of the two ganglion cells, obtained from the literature,
is superimposed onto the receptive field of the presynaptic neuron, a bipolar cell. The effect of
synaptic input from the bipolar cell onto the ganglion cell—expressed by the dendritic tree itself—is
summarized by the "synaptic weight" curve. For a central ft cell, it contributes little to the ganglion
cell receptive field, since the input receptive field is substantially broader than the contribution from
synaptic input onto the dendritic tree (solid inner curve in the left panel). Since the dendritic tree
contribution for a cell in the periphery (solid middle curve in the right panel) is larger than the extent
of the receptive field of the input, it gives rise to the observed linear scaling of the receptive field with
the dendritic tree size for large cells. Unpublished data from P. Sterling and R. Smith, printed with
permission.


===== Page 4 =====
52 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.3 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN RECEPTIVE-FIELD SIZE AND DENDRITIC TREE 
Comparison
of the dendritic tree and the receptive field center, shape, and extent of a retinal ganglion cell in the
cat. Morphologically, this cell type is known as a; its axon (not shown) projects to the geniculate. The
continuous contour lines correspond to equal response contours and represent peak firing rates of the
indicated amount in response to a flashing spot of light. The maximum discharge of 300 spikes per
second is marked by a spot. The maintained background activity of the cell was 32 Hz. The dotted line
corresponds to the cell's receptive field. The physiologically defined receptive field extends roughly
100-150 jam beyond the dendritic tree. Reprinted by permission from Peichl and Wassle (1983).
A very similar structure-function relationship also holds for the anatomically defined ft
class of cat retinal ganglion cells in the periphery, where the dendritic tree of these cells is
relatively large (Fig. 3.2). This cell type corresponds to the physiologically defined X type
(Saito, 1983; Stanford and Sherman, 1984). The proportionality between receptive field size
and the extent of the dendritic tree fails for small ft type ganglion cells near the center of
the retina. Here, the receptive field of the presynaptic neurons providing the driving input,
bipolar cells, is already substantially larger in extent than the dendritic tree of the ganglion
cell, obscuring any contribution the passive dendritic tree might make.
Besides this simple size relationship, what other functional aspects might the different
retinal ganglion cell morphologies reflect? And what about possible structure-function
relationships of other cell types? In the periphery, one can expect specific structural elements
of the nervous system to reflect specific attributes of the physical world they are designed
to extract. This is unlikely to be the case for more central structures. Can one still say
something meaningful about how information processing is related to different dendritic
trees (Borst and Egelhaaf, 1994)?
In this chapter, central to the book, we discuss how the previously introduced concepts
from linear cable theory can be applied to study the electrical properties of complex, spatially
extended dendritic trees. Why should the reader study passive dendritic trees when evidence
from calcium imaging experiments, coupled with intradendritic recordings, shows that most,
if not all, dendritic trees include substantial voltage-dependent, that is, nonlinear membrane


===== Page 5 =====
3.1 Branched Cables 
• 
53
components? This challenge can be answered by citing the truism "You can't run before you
can walk." An understanding of information processing in active trees can only be based
upon knowing the properties of passives ones. Furthermore, under certain well-specified
conditions, for instance, for "small" synaptic inputs, voltage-dependent nonlinearities do
not come into play and the dendrite acts essentially like a passive one. Let us therefore press
on, delaying the confrontation with active trees until Chap. 19.
3.1 Branched Cables
An extended dendritic tree can be treated as a branched cable structure, where each cable or
cylinder can, in principle, have different diameters and membrane properties. Since there
exists no evidence for loops within a given dendritic tree structure, that is, one dendritic
branch connecting—either directly or with the aid of a synapse—to another dendrite of the
same cell, dendritic arbors can be considered to be true trees in the graph theoretic sense,
with a unique path between any two points in the tree.
3.1.1 What Happens at Branch Points ?
The cable equation (Eq. 2.7) as applied to a finite cable holds for any particular unbranched
cylindrical segment with constant membrane properties and a constant diameter. How can
we use this equation to study the potential in two or more such segments connected together?
The way in which finite cable segments are linked resides in the appropriate choice of
boundary conditions for each segment. In order to understand this better, let us focus on the
highly simplified dendritic tree illustrated in Fig. 3.4A. We assume that the three branches
have electrotonic lengths LQ, L\, and LI, with infinite input resistances ROO,O> ^oo,i» ar|d
/?oo,2- As discussed in Sec. 2.2.2, the infinite input resistance of a finite cable is equal to
the input resistance of a semi-infinite cable of the same diameter and having the same Rm
and RJ values, looking toward the infinitely far away terminal, and is computed according
to Eq. 2.16.
We will assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the two rightmost branches terminate
with a sealed-end boundary condition. The input resistances of the two rightmost daughter
branches at the branch point, looking toward their terminals, are specified by Eq. 2.21 as
(3-1)
and
(3.2)
For an arbitrary boundary condition at the rightmost terminal of the daughter branches
(rather than the sealed end assumed here) we replace these expressions by Eq. 2.28.
The right-hand side of the main cable ends at the branch point with the two daughter
cables. Its terminal resistance RL$ is determined by the input resistances of the daughter
branches, by making use of the fact that the net conductance of two parallel conductances is
simply given by their sum. In other words, we compute the terminal resistance by effectively
replacing the two conductances of the daughter branches by a single one. The effective
terminal resistance of the main cable is given by
(3-3)


===== Page 6 =====
54 • 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.4 PASSIVE BRANCHING DENDRITE 
(A) Schematic drawing of a passive cylindrical dendrite,
with diameter do and electrotonic length LQ — A) Ao. with 'wo daughter branches, each with its distinct
diameter and electrotonic length Lj = /; /A.j. A simple recursive scheme exists to compute exactly the
voltage in such tree structures in response to current input (Rail, 1959). All terminals are assumed to be
sealed. (B) Compartmental-model representation of this passive dendritic tree. The voltage dynamics
in this circuit approximate the solution to the cable equation of the continuous cable in A in the sense
that the cable equation (Eq. 2.7) describes the dynamics of the membrane potential in the limit that the
grid size becomes infinitely fine. For the sake of simplicity, we set Vrest to zero (see Fig. 2.3). Standard
software packages, such as NEURON or GENESIS, automatically solve for the voltage in these circuits.
In a final step, we apply Eq. 2.28 to arrive at the input resistance at the left terminal of the
main branch (looking toward the daughter branches),
(3.4)
The same algorithm can, of course, be applied in a recursive manner to evaluate the input
resistance of arbitrary passive trees. Moving from the outermost dendritic tips and using
either Eq. 2.21 or Eq. 2.24 (depending on the choice of boundary conditions), we compute
the input resistances of the daughter branches. Adding the inverse of these input resistances
gives the inverse of the terminal resistance of the branch of the parent generation. We now
use Eq. 2.28 to compute the input resistance of this branch and its sibling, add them in
parallel, and so on. Of course, this "folding" algorithm needs to be carried out on both ends
of the cylinder. (In our pedagogical example in Fig. 3.4, we did not consider the effect of one
or more cables connecting to the left terminal of the parent cable.) In this manner, the input
resistance at any point in the tree can be evaluated exactly, a procedure proposed by Rail
(1959) and described in considerable detail in Chap. 7 of Jack, Noble, and Tsien (1975).
Once we compute the input resistance at any particular location in the dendritic tree,
we can derive the steady-state voltage at that location in response to a current injection 7,nj
using Ohm's law. For instance, the voltage at x = 0 in the parent cable is


===== Page 7 =====
3.2 Equivalent Cylinder 
• 
55
(3.5)
Given VQ, we can use Eq. 2.27 to compute the sustained voltage change anywhere along
the main branch in response to the sustained current injection 7jnj. Furthermore, recursive
evaluation of this equation allows us to compute the voltage at any location in the tree of
Fig. 3.4. Altogether, four linear equations (Eqs. 2.27, 2.28, 3.3, and 3.5) need to be applied
iteratively to solve for the input resistance, and therefore for the sustained voltage following
a sustained current input, in any dendritic tree structure in response to a current injection at
any location (Rail, 1959).
Assuming that the parent cable delivers the current /o to the two daughter branches, what
fraction I\ of this current will flow into one and what fraction li into the other (Fig. 3.4A)?
Using Eqs. 2.2 and 2.20 and the definition in Eq. 2.16, we compute the current flowing in
one of the daughter cables, assuming that its terminal is sealed (this is not necessary),
(3-6)
where V\ is the voltage at the branch point. At this point, X = 0 (for the daughter branch),
and the current flowing into this branch is given by
(3.7)
where we made use of Eq. 3.1. Since the same principle applies to the second daughter
branch and also holds true for an arbitrary boundary condition (in this case Eq. 2.20 must
be replaced by Eq. 2.27), it follows that
(3-8)
where G;nj = l//?in,i and likewise for G-m^- In other words, the current divides among
these branches according to their input conductances.
3.2 Equivalent Cylinder
Under certain conditions one does not need to solve numerous equations to derive the
potential in a branched tree, a great simplification discovered and exploited by Rail (1962,
1964). Let us compute the voltage distribution in the simple tree shown in Fig. 3.4,
assuming that the two daughter branches are identical (that is, LI = L2 and d\ = d2
with identical membrane parameters) and that a sustained current is injected into the left
terminal of the parent cylinder. The normalized voltage profile throughout this minitree
is illustrated in Fig. 3.5 for three different combinations of parent and daughter branch
diameters: (I)d0 = 2d\,(2)d0 
= 2-d^ ,and(3)c?o = d\. The upper and lower curves
indicate the two limiting cases in which the parent cable is terminated at the right end either
with a sealed-end boundary condition or in a short circuit. In the cases where the parent
diameter has either twice the diameter or the same size as the daughter branches, close
inspection of the curves in Fig. 3.5 reveals a discontinuity in the derivative of the voltage
at the branch point.
In the third case, dQ 
= 2dl , all derivatives of the voltage profile are continuous and a
rather interesting phenomenon occurs. In contrast to the other two cases, the voltage decay
along both sets of cables can be described by a single expression. To see why, let us return


===== Page 8 =====
56 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.5 VOLTAGE DECAY ALONG A SIMPLE DENDRITIC TREE Steady-state voltage decay along
the tree shown in Fig. 3.4A, assuming that the two daughter branches are identical, with d\ = d2
and LI = L2 = 0.5. The three dashed curves correspond to (1) d0 - 2dt, (2) d^2 - 2d^/2, and
(3) do = d\. For the dotted curve, the potential at the right-hand terminal of the main branch is set
to zero (short circuit). For the upper, continuous curve, the membrane is sealed. At the branchpoint
x = 500 /j,m, the voltage profile has a discontinuous derivative for do = 1d\ and for do = d\.
If the input resistance of the parent at this point is matched to that of the daughter branches (as
is the case for the second condition, dQ 
= 2d{ ), the voltage decay across the cables can be
described by a single, simple expression. This trick is exploited by Rail in his concept of the
equivalent tree.
to Eq. 2.27, expressing the voltage in a finite cable of length LQ with an arbitrary terminal
condition specified via the terminal resistance RL$,
(3.9)
Since both daughter cables are identical and therefore have identical input resistance,
Rin ! = Rin 2 (Eqs. 3.1 and 3.2), it follows from Eq. 3.3 that the combined input resistance
of both cables is
(3.10)
We now return to Eq. 2.16 for the input resistance of a semi-infinite cable, noticing its
dependency on the inverse of the cable diameter to the | power
(3.11)
If^/2 = 2^/2,then


===== Page 9 =====
3.2 Equivalent Cylinder 
• 
57
(3.12)
That is, the infinite input resistance of the parent cable is matched to the infinite input
resistances of the two daughter branches in parallel. Combining Eqs. 3.10 and 3.12 leads to
(3.13)
If we place this back into Eq. 3.9, we have
(3.14)
Comparing this to Eq. 2.20, we see that the above equation describes the voltage in a single,
unbranched cylinder of length LQ + L\ with a sealed-end boundary condition. Instead of
having to model this structure as three interconnected cylinders, we can reduce it to a single
equivalent cylinder, whose electrotonic length is given by LQ + L \ and whose diameter is
identical to the diameter of the main branch. The reason we are able to carry out this sim-
plification is that the infinite input resistance of the main branch is "matched" to the infinite
input resistance of the two daughter branches in parallel, a principle known as impedance
matching. In particular, the voltage and the input resistance now have continuous derivatives
across the branch point, as witnessed in Fig. 3.5. Note that, in general, impedance matching
does not imply that the input resistance R-m of the daughter cables is matched to that of the
main cable (since the input resistance of the main cable at the right terminal is proportional
to coth(Lo) while the input resistance of the daughter branches is proportional to coth(L i)).
As Rail (1962, 1964) first showed in the early 1960s, an entire class of dendritic trees
can be reduced or collapsed into a single equivalent cylinder provided the following four
conditions are met. (1) The values of Rm and /?; are the same in all branches. (2) All terminals
end in the same boundary condition. (3) All terminal branches end at the same electrotonic
distance L from the origin in the main branch, where L is the sum of the L,- values from the
origin to the distal end of every terminal; L corresponds to the total electrotonic length of
the equivalent cylinder. (Note that this requirement does not necessarily include only trees
with perfect symmetric branching.) (4) At every branch point, infinite input resistances must
be matched. If all cables possess the same membrane resistance and intracellular resistivity,
this implies
(3.15)
This last condition is known as the d3/2 law. If these four conditions are met, the equivalent
cylinder mimics perfectly the behavior of the entire tree. In other words, injecting current
into the leftmost terminal of the tree will yield exactly the same voltage response as injecting
the identical current into its equivalent cylinder.
If input to any of the daughter branches is considered, an additional constraint must
be obeyed. (5) Identical synaptic inputs, whether current injection or conductance change,
must be delivered to all corresponding dendritic locations. In the case of Figs. 3.4 and 3.5,
injecting a current /o into both daughter branches at the same electrotonic distance X\ from
the branch point corresponds to injecting the current 2/o into the equivalent cable at location
X = LO + Xj. If we are only interested in describing the voltage in the primary branch,
because this is close to the cell body where the intracellular electrode is usually located,
injecting the current 2/0 into only one of the two daughter branches will lead to the same


===== Page 10 =====
58 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
voltage change in the primary branch as injecting the current 2/o at the distance LQ + X\
in the equivalent tree (Rail and Rinzel, 1973). This ceases to be true when considering the
voltage profile in other parts of the equivalent tree, outside of the region X < LQ.
The transformation from a branching cable structure to an equivalent cylinder preserves
membrane area. In other words, the branching tree has the same membrane surface area
as the unbranched cylinder that has the same diameter as the trunk of the tree and the
same electrotonic length as the whole dendritic tree. This implies that all variables that are
expressed per unit membrane area, such as channel densities, Rm, and Cm, are conserved
in the transformation to an equivalent cylinder.
The principle of impedance matching is a powerful one and can be generalized to many
situations. While here we have only considered the case of stationary inputs, the reduction
of a tree to a cylinder can also be carried out for transient inputs, as long as the above
four conditions are satisfied and Cm is constant throughout the entire tree. In other words,
the dynamic behavior of the voltage is identical in the two cases. Furthermore, impedance
matching can be generalized to tapering cables (Rail, 1962) and even holds in the presence
of an active membrane containing voltage-dependent elements. In particular, axonal trees
fulfilling the above conditions can similarly be reduced to a single equivalent axon.
Rail exploited this technique to great advantage in his extensive research on the electrical
behavior of cat a motoneurons (Rail, 1977; Rail et al, 1992; see also Fleshman, Segev,
and Burke, 1988), where the somatic potential of the cell in response to synaptic input
in the dendritic tree is modeled by a single equivalent cylinder with the cell body being
represented by an RC element tacked onto one end of the cylinder. Under these conditions,
the electrical behavior of an entire neuron is characterized by a simple model with six
free parameters (the R and C values of the isopotential soma, the Rm,Cm, and /?, of the
equivalent cylinder, as well as its electrotonic length L).
Real dendritic trees rarely conform to all of the assumptions underlying the equivalent
tree reduction. In some cases the d3/2 rule is observed to a remarkable extent at branch
points (e.g., relay cells in the cat's lateral geniculate; Bloomfield, Hamos, and Sherman,
1987). In general, neither this local rule dictating the diameter of branching processes nor
the assumption that all dendrites terminate at the same distance from the cell body hold
(Hillman, 1979; Burke, 1998; Larkman et al., 1992; Turner et al., 1995).
With a few exceptions, then, most neurons violate one or more of the constraints required
for reducing a tree to an equivalent tree. In fact, one can ask why should dendritic trees obey
the d3/2 law at all? What functional advantages can be realized for a neuron if its dendritic
tree can be reduced to a single equivalent cylinder? Voltage "reflections" at branch points will
be absent if the d3/2 law is obeyed, but it is unclear why this should be relevant to neurons.2
3.3 Solving the Linear Cable Equation for Branched Structures
Historically, much effort was spent on deriving solutions to linear differential equations
like the cable equation in terms of series expansions of specialized functions (such as
Bessel functions) and we will briefly touch upon these methods. Yet, given the widespread
usage of digital computers and the complicated geometries of cells as well as their non-
linear membrane characteristics, the majority of research today is being carried out using
numerical methods.
2. Concepts from the matched transmission lines literature in electrical engineering are germane to some of these questions.
We will not pursue any of the interesting analogies; see Davidson (1978) or Briihl, Jansen, and Vogt (1979).


===== Page 11 =====
3.3 Solving the Linear Cable Equation for Branched Structures 
• 
59
3.3.1 Exact Methods
A number of iterative techniques have been developed to solve exactly for the voltage
transient in treelike structures in response to an arbitrary current input I(t). All of them
rely on the superposition principle, that is, on the linearity of the membrane (although a
linear membrane need not necessarily be passive; see Chap. 10).
Linearity of the membrane implies that the injection of a sinusoidal current of frequency
/ only gives rise to a voltage response at the same frequency. The above equations can be
reformulated in the Laplace (or Fourier) domain to compute the potential V(f) anywhere
in the tree in response to a sinusoidal current /(f) = /o sin(2jr/£) applied anywhere
else. One set of methods (Butz and Cowan, 1974; Horwitz, 1981; Koch, 1982; Koch and
Poggio, 1985a; Holmes, 1986) uses variants of this approach to derive Vm(f) in arbitrary
dendritic trees with the help of a small number of rales. Usually, these equations have simple
graphical interpretations and can be implemented recursively, leading to very efficient and
small programs.
For instance, Koch and Poggio's (1985a) four rules specify the impedance of a single
cylinder (Eq. 2.28), the effective impedance at a branch point (Eq. 3.3), and the voltage at
any point in a cylinder as a function of either the injected current (by combining Eqs. 2.25
and 2.26) or the voltage at one terminal (Eq. 2.27). One advantage of this method is that it
can be applied to evaluate the potential in dendritic trees with arbitrary linear membranes,
such as those containing inductances as can be obtained by linearizing certain active
types of membranes (see Chap. 10). The number of equations that need to be evaluated
in these methods is proportional to the number of cylindrical segments in the dendritic tree
considered. Note that these methods require the inverse Laplace (or Fourier) transform to
obtain V(t).
A completely different approach was pioneered by Abbott and his group (Abbott, Farhi,
and Gutmann, 1991; Abbott, 1992; Cao and Abbott, 1993), based on a path integral approach
of the type used so successfully in quantum mechanics and quantum field theory (Feynman
and Hibbs, 1965). The voltage at x in response to current input at y in an arbitrary tree
(including trees with loops) is obtained by evaluating the Green's function of the cable (for
example, Eq. 2.31) along all possible "paths" between x and y. The number of paths is
potentially infinite, since a path, starting out at point x and heading toward y, may change
direction at every node or terminal it encounters on its way and may pass through x and
y an arbitrary number of times but must begin at x and end at y. Of course, the longer
the path, the smaller its final contribution toward the potential. (The Green's function in
Eq. 2.31 suppresses long paths of length Lpath exponentially as e~Lf^4T.) We met such
an approach while evaluating the potential in a single finite cylinder by summating over
infinitely many reflecting terms (Eq. 2.41 and Fig. 2.10). The primary advantage of this
method lies in computing V(t) explicitly for short times, since under these conditions only
as few as four paths need to be evaluated (Cao and Abbott, 1993). Furthermore, distinct
from the methods working in the Laplace/Fourier domain, the path integral method yields
the membrane potential directly as a function of time.
3.3.2 Compartmental Modeling
All the algorithms discussed so far solve for Vm(f) and Vm(t) in response to an arbitrary
current input /(/) and /(?), respectively. They come, though, with serious drawbacks. (1)
In the presence of n current inputs—rather than a single one—on the order of n2 additional
computations have to be performed (see Sec. 3.3); that is, these methods do not at all scale


===== Page 12 =====
60 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
well to massive synaptic input. (2) While these methods can be adapted to treat synaptic input
as conductance changes, it is not computationally efficient to do so. (3) Finally, and fatally,
they assume linearity and fail in the presence of voltage-dependent membrane components.
The method of choice for most work in the field is to solve the partial differential equations
numerically by discretizing the underlying equations. This approach, introduced by Rail
in his landmark (1964) paper (see also Segev, Rinzel, and Shepherd, 1995), is known as
compartmental modeling and leads to the discrete electrical circuits illustrated in Fig. 3.4B.
Instead of solving the continuous, linear or nonlinear, partial differential cable equation,
it is discretized into a system of ordinary differential equations, corresponding to small
patches of neuronal membrane that are isopotential. These compartments are then coupled
by sparse matrices.
The most fundamental requirement of any numerical method is convergence, that is,
that the error between the solution using the numerical method and the exact solution be
made as small as possible. Furthermore, the method must be stable. These requirements
place constraints on how fine time and space must be discretized in order to arrive at an—
approximately—correct solution. A conservative rule of thumb is to divide the cable into
segments equal to or smaller than one-tenth of the associated effective length constant A.
(Segev et al., 1985). How to achieve all of this properly and in an as efficient manner
as possible is a well-established subject within applied mathematics. Appendix C, written
by Barak Pearlmutter and Anthony Zador, treats modern numerical techniques—using the
matrix formalism—for approximating the solution of these equations.
A number of public-domain single-cell simulators with graphical interfaces, in particular
NEURON and GENESIS, implement such methods in an efficient manner. (For an overview
of about half a dozen of them see DeSchutter, 1992; for more comprehensive references see
Bower and Beeman, 1998 and Koch and Segev, 1998.) Indeed, the field has advanced to
such a point that a set of benchmarks has been introduced to compare simulators in a more
quantitative manner (Bhalla, Bilitch, and Bower, 1992).
The power of compartmental methods derives from their flexibility in permitting arbitrary
levels of functional resolution to be included into the model. As long as the mechanism
at hand, say a particular membrane conductance or pump, can be described by a steady-
state or a differential equation, it can be incorporated into the model. Indeed, the numerical
simulations discussed in this book range from the submillisecond to the second scale and
from the submicrometer regime to several millimeters. Ultimately, the limiting factor in
erecting ever more complex models is the exploding number of functions and parameters
that need to be specified and measured as well as the speed of the computer implementing
the algorithm.
3.4 Transfer Resistances
Let us now introduce a different, and much more intuitive, manner of calculating the voltage
change in response to current input in passive dendritic trees of arbitrary geometry. Rather
than expressing the properties of some electrical network in terms of an analytical expression
figuring the various cellular parameters (e.g., the Green's function Eq. 2.31), the system is
"observed" at one, two, or more discrete locations, and its properties are summarized in
terms of a handful of functions called transfer functions. Their usage is based on multiport
theory, in which a linear or nonlinear system is characterized by n ports, or independent
pairs of current and voltage at each port (Oster, Perelson, and Katchalsky, 1971; Chua,
Desoer and Kuh, 1987; Wyatt. 1992). Resistance, diode, capacitance, or inductance are all


===== Page 13 =====
3.4 Transfer Resistances 
• 
61
instances of one-port devices, since a pair of numbers, the voltage across the device and
the current through it, completely captures their behavior, while the simplest model of a
bipolar transistor is a three-terminal element (collector, emittor and base) with two pairs of
current-voltage relationships. As we will see in Chap. 4, a chemical synapse can also be
approximated as a two-port device (at a short time scale).
The two-port formulation of cable theory, in which voltage and current are manipulated
at two locations in an arbitrary tree, has proven to be of great intuitive value. In particular,
it allows the attenuation experienced by synaptic input on its way to the soma to be easily
expressed. In the version popularized by Butz and Cowan (1974) (see also Fig. 3.6 and
Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1982; Caraevale and Johnston, 1982) it assumes that the dendritic
tree is linear (although n-port theory does not require this straight-jacket).
3.4.1 General Definition
As long as one is dealing with a linear system, the voltage change Vj(t) at location j in
response to an arbitrary current input /,-(f) at location i can always be expressed as
(3.16)
where K;j(t) is the impulse response or Green's function of the system (Fig. 3.6). The last
relationship assumes that the impulse function is causal, implying that Ki/(t) = 0 for
t < 0 (since no effect can precede its cause) and that no current is injected prior to t = 0.
The subscripts ij signify that the current is injected at i and the voltage recorded
at j, a convenient mnemonic short form for summarizing the input-output relationship.
Equation 3.16 holds for any cable structure and simply expresses the linearity of the system.
The Green's function can be obtained by injecting a delta pulse of current into the cable,
that is, /,(?) = IoS(t), and computing V/(f) by solving the appropriate cable equation.
This yields
(3.17)
with the dimension of a resistance. If location i coincides with location j, the equation
reduces to
(3.18)
One way to visualize the meaning of Kjj(t) is to compute its Fourier transform (see
Appendix B) Kfj (/), where / is the temporal frequency in units of hertz. It is a complex
Fig. 3.6 TRANSFER FUNCTIONS Neuronal transfer func-
tions are used throughout the book to characterize an ar-
bitrarily complex, but linear neuron. The unknown system
is observed at two points, or ports, i and j. The behavior
at these two points can be fully described by knowledge
of the three transfer functions KH, KI; = KJI, and KJJ. In
particular, the attenuation of the input ati propagating to j
can be easily expressed in terms of these functions. Its chief
drawback is that these functions are not useful for expressing
the voltage at some other location I. This requires knowledge
of Kit and KU-


===== Page 14 =====
62 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
function whose amplitude is measured in ohms. Any particular value of KIJ (/) can be
measured by injecting a sinusoidal current of frequency / at location i, that is, /,• =
sin(2jT/f), and recording the resultant voltage amplitude and phase at location j at the
same frequency /.
The steady-state voltage change in response to a stationary current (that is, for / = 0)
can be recovered with the aid of the real number
(3.19)
We follow the practice of referring to the complex function Kjj(f) 
as the transfer
impedance, to its stationary or dc value K/j (f = 0) > 0 as the transfer resistance, and to its
inverse as the transfer conductance. Unless otherwise noted, Ky refers to KJJ (f = 0) > 0.
Similarly, the amplitude of KH (/) is called the input impedance and Kti (f = 0) > 0 the
input resistance.
3.4.2 An Example
In order to relate transfer resistances to the previously computed Green's functions, let
us consider events in an infinite, passive cable of diameter d. Following Eq. 2.31 we can
directly write
(3.20)
where |z — j\ is a shorthand notation to represents the distance between i and j, that is,
between the sites where the current is injected and the voltage is recorded, and T = t/rm
is the normalized time. To compute KH, we set \i-j\to zero,
(3.21)
The Fourier transform of Ktj (T) yields
(3.22)
where R&, is the input resistance of a semi-infinite cylinder (Eq. 2.16). For the transfer
resistance at / = 0 we arrive at
(3.23)
and for the input resistance,
(3.24)
The transfer resistance decays exponentially with the distance between the two sites and
indicates the degree of coupling between the two sites i and j, which decreases with
increasing distance.
3.4.3 Properties of KIJ
We will now assume that we are dealing with current inputs that either are stationary or
change much more slowly than the membrane time constant Tm. Since this corresponds to


===== Page 15 =====
3.4 Transfer Resistances 
• 
63
the solution of Eq. 3.16 with t -> oo, the convolution is replaced by multiplication and the
function Ktj (t) is replaced by the dc component of its Fourier transform; that is,
(3.25)
for the transfer resistance between i and j and
(3.26)
for the input resistance at location z. Transfer and input resistances have several noteworthy
properties.
Symmetry
The most important property is symmetry,
(3.27)
If the current /o is injected at location i somewhere in the dendritic tree, and the voltage
V0 = KIJ • /o is measured at location j, for instance, at the cell body, we obtain the
same change in voltage Vb at location i if the identical current /o is injected at location j:
Vi = Kji • Ij = K{J• • /o = VQ. This is true for any reciprocal linear system, irrespective of
the positions of z and j. It is important to point out that this does not mean that the attenuation
from location z to location j is the same as the other way around. Most emphatically not
(see Sec. 3.5.2)!
Symmetry, in the electrical engineering literature also known as reciprocity, is a general
property of n-ports created by interconnecting linear, two-terminal resistances. Its proof
requires the use of Tellegen's theorem (Penfield, Spence, and Duinker, 1970; Reza, 1971)
and is beyond the scope of this book.
Positivity
A second property is
(3.28)
from which it follows that the input resistance KU is always larger than the transfer resistance
between location z and any other location. Furthermore, the more removed z and j are, the
smaller the transfer resistance KIJ. Thus, KIJ is related to the degree of coupling of site i
to site j.
Transitivity
A third property of any dendritic tree structure without loops is
(3.29)
where t corresponds to any location on the direct path between locations i and j. This
relationship does not hold if £ is located on a branch off the direct path between z and j
(Koch, 1982). For instance, if we consider the transfer resistance Ka^,<s between cz3 and the
soma in Fig. 3.7, Eq. 3.29 holds for points aL and a 1 but not for a4, a 11, or b 1. It can be
viewed as a form of transitivity (as long as all three points are located along a direct path).
All three properties remain in force not only for the dc value of the transfer impedance
but for any one frequency (e.g., Kjj(f) = 
Kjt(f)).


===== Page 16 =====
64 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.7 A LAYER 5 NEOCORTICAL
PYRAMIDAL CELL Morphology of
the neocortical pyramidal cell we use
throughout this book. The cell was
stained and reconstructed by Douglas,
Martin, and Whitteridge (1991) from
the visual cortex of an adult cat. The
cell body is located in layer 5 while the
most distal dendrites lie in layer 1. A
few locations that are used as synaptic
input sites are indicated by letters.
While these properties are true for any cable system with a linear membrane, an additional
property of cables with passive membranes is that the membrane becomes increasingly more
conductive to current flow as the temporal frequency increases due to the presence of the
capacitive element. Or,
(3.30)
for any |/| > |/'|. 
In particular, £^(0) > \Kjj(f)\. 
In other words, the transfer and
input impedances show low-pass behavior. If the membrane contains inductive-like ele-
ments, caused, for instance, by the small signal behavior of a voltage-dependent potassium
conductance activated by depolarization, \K{j(f)\ 
can have a maximum at some nonzero
frequency, with interesting consequences for information processing (see Chap. 10).
3.4.4 Transfer Resistances in a Pyramidal Cell
In order for the reader to develop his or her intuition about these transfer resistances and
other related concepts in the following section, we will make use of our "canonical" model
of a nerve cell, a pyramidal cell from the mammalian neocortex. We choose this particular
neuron both for idiosyncratic reasons as well as for the general interest many scientists
have in understanding the information processing operations occurring in cortex. Most of
the concepts discussed in this book apply equally to other cell types.
The morphology of this neuron (Fig. 3.7) is derived from a layer 5 pyramidal cell
in primary visual cortex filled with the intracellular dye HRP during experiments in the
anesthetized adult cat (Douglas, Martin, and Whitteridge, 1991) and is translated into several


===== Page 17 =====
3.4 Transfer Resistances
65
hundreds of compartments, similar to the ones shown in Fig. 3.4. The dendrites are passive
while eight voltage-dependent membrane conductances at the cell body enable the cell
to generate action potentials and shape the interspike interval between them accordingly
(for details consult Beraander, 1993; Bernander et al., 1991, 1992, 1994). In this chapter
we consider a linear model of the cell, obtained by replacing the active somatic membrane
conductances by an appropriately chosen passive conductance, such that the input resistance
and the resting potential throughout the cell are identical to the ones obtained in the full
model. In other words, for small steady-state inputs this "passified" model behaves as the
full, active model.
Unless otherwise noted, the ever-present spontaneous synaptic background activity has
been incorporated into the passive membrane parameters. Because each transient opening
of a synapse briefly increases the local membrane conductance, the random background
activity will affect the "passive" membrane resistance Rm, with the effective membrane
resistance varying from around 12,000 £1 • cm2 at the soma to 52,000 Q • cm2 for distal
dendrites (see Sec. 18.3). The membrane capacitance is set to 1 /zF/cm2 and the intracellular
resistivity to 200 £2-cm.
A number of the analytical techniques presented in Sec. 3.3 can be used to compute Ky
in trees of arbitrary geometry, in particular the recursive techniques of Rail (1959), Butz and
Cowan (1974), and Koch and Poggio (1985a). We refer the reader to these and other papers
discussed in Sec. 3.3 and to Appendix C for more details. Table 3.1 shows representative
values for KU and KIS for sustained and ac inputs. The steady-state input resistance KU
increases dramatically as one moves along the apical tree toward more distal sites, from
16.5 MS2 at the soma to several gigaohms in the far periphery. This is not unexpected, as
we can see from Eq. 2.21 that the input resistance of a finite cable of electrotonic length L
with a sealed end increases as 1/L as L —> 0, somewhat analogous to moving toward the
distal dendritic tips. Using rapidly varying sinusoidal input of 10 or 1000 Hz reduces the
input resistance moderately.
The transfer resistance to the soma K{s (by Eq. 3.27 identical to the transfer resistance
Ksj from the soma to the dendritic site i), on the other hand, only varies by about a factor
{
  "table_name": "TABLE 3.1",
  "description": "Transfer and Input Resistances",
  "columns": ["Location", "Kti", "Kis", "|g»(10)|", "\\Kis(W)\\", "\\Kti(lW)0)\\", "|fr,(1000)|", "L"],
  "rows": [
    {"Location": "soma", "Kti": 16.5, "Kis": 16.5, "|g»(10)|": 14.6, "\\Kis(W)\\": 14.6, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 1.71, "|fr,(1000)|": 1.71, "L": 0},
    {"Location": "bl", "Kti": 388, "Kis": 15.5, "|g»(10)|": 383, "\\Kis(W)\\": 13.6, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 71.4, "|fr,(1000)|": 0.18, "L": 0.24},
    {"Location": "b2", "Kti": 751, "Kis": 15.2, "|g»(10)|": 667, "\\Kis(W)\\": 13.3, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 99.3, "|fr,(1000)|": 0.053, "L": 0.43},
    {"Location": "al", "Kti": 63.4, "Kis": 13.9, "|g»(10)|": 50.7, "\\Kis(W)\\": 11.1, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 6.48, "|fr,(1000)|": 0.052, "L": 0.33},
    {"Location": "a2", "Kti": 194, "Kis": 12.1, "|g»(10)|": 156, "\\Kis(W)\\": 8.43, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 23.4, "|fr,(1000)|": "3.3x10^-3", "L": 0.52},
    {"Location": "a3", "Kti": 342, "Kis": 10.5, "|g»(10)|": 258, "\\Kis(W)\\": 6.62, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 30.8, "|fr,(1000)|": "0.11x10^-3", "L": 0.75},
    {"Location": "a4", "Kti": 3298, "Kis": 7.8, "|g»(10)|": 2609, "\\Kis(W)\\": 4.10, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 216, "|fr,(1000)|": "0.053x10^-6", "L": 1.31},
    {"Location": "all", "Kti": 178, "Kis": 12.4, "|g»(10)|": 148, "\\Kis(W)\\": 8.94, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 30.9, "|fr,(1000)|": "5.2x10^-3", "L": 0.49},
    {"Location": "a12", "Kti": 404, "Kis": 11.2, "|g»(10)|": 335, "\\Kis(W)\\": 7.53, "\\Kti(lW)0)\\": 45.2, "|fr,(1000)|": "0.30x10^-3", "L": 0.69}
  ]
}

Input and transfer resistances (in megaohms) between dendritic locations and the soma of the layer 5 pyramidal cell shown in
Fig. 3.7. \Kis\ is computed for sustained as well as for 10 and 1000 Hz sinusoidal inputs. The voltage-dependent conductances
at the soma were replaced by their slope conductances, rendering the cell passive but with the same steady-state input resistance
and resting potential as the active cell. This is reflected in the low-pass behavior of | Ky \ which decreases with frequency. The last
column lists the normalized electrotonic distance between the synapse and the soma (computed according to Eq. 3.33). Notice the
dramatic uncoupling between dendritic sites and the soma for rapidly varying input. For a discussion of the parameters used see
Sec. 3.4.4.


===== Page 18 =====
66 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
of 2 between the most proximal and the most distal sites. Remember that the somatic
potential induced by the current injection is given by the product of the injected current and
the transfer resistance Kis. This implies that the coupling between dendritic sites and the
soma depends only weakly on distance for dc or slowly varying current inputs. For rapidly
varying inputs, on the other hand, the coupling will effectively be zero since the distributed
capacitance throughout the tree will absorb the charge before it reaches the soma. We will
develop this theme further in the following section.
To derive transfer resistances between dendritic sites we can use the third property of
KIJ (Eq. 3.29). For instance, to obtain the transfer resistance between two points in the
apical tree, say a3 and al, we use
(3.31)
yielding Ka^al = 47.65 M£l
3.5 Measures of Synaptic Efficiency
The introduction of the transfer impedance Kij(f), or, for stationary current input, the
transfer resistance A^-(O) = KIJ, allows us to characterize the voltage as well as the
current attenuation between the site / of current injection and any other location in the
dendritic tree, for instance, the soma s. As we will see, these are but two of a number of
different measures characterizing the efficiency, or the degree of coupling, between any
particular synaptic input site and the cell body where the initiation of the action potential
occurs.
3.5.1 Electrotonic Distance
The simplest of all measures, yet a potentially misleading one, is an estimate of the
electrotonic distance between any one location i and the soma. In an infinite cylinder
or in a single finite cylinder of diameter d, the electrotonic distance between two points i
and j is
(3.32)
where |i — j\ is a shorthand notation to represent the physical distance between the two
points and A the space constant. This expression immediately generalizes to the frequency-
dependent electrotonic distance by replacing A. with A(/), as in Eq. 2.36. In as far as the cell
under investigation can be approximated by a single equivalent cylinder (see Sec. 3.2; Rail et
al., 1992), any point along this cylinder, corresponding to one or more equivalent locations
in the original tree, can be assigned a meaningful electrotonic distance, say, relative to one
end of the equivalent tree. However, as discussed in Sec. 3.2, real cells rarely satisfy the
conditions necessary for them to be reduced to an equivalent cylinder.
One method to estimate the "distance" between i and the soma is to compute the
electrotonic lengths of all the cylinders between i and the soma and add them up. In the
continuous case, we have
(3.33)


===== Page 19 =====
3.5 Measures of Synaptic Efficiency 
• 
67
where integration takes place along the direct path between the cell body and location i. In
an infinite cylinder, there exists a simple exponential relationship between the electrotonic
length and the voltage attenuation (Sec. 2.2.1). In all other structures, Lis does not provide
a measure of the efficacy of signal transfer, since the underlying space constant A. assumes
the convenient fiction of an infinite and constant cylinder. This can be seen graphically
in Fig. 2.4 for the case of a single, finite cylinder. Depending on the type of boundary
condition imposed, the actual voltage attenuation in a cable can be stronger (for a killed-
end) or weaker (for a sealed-end boundary condition) than in an infinite cylinder with the
same diameter and membrane parameters. This difference can be substantial in real trees,
given the heavy load imposed by all the additional branching. Under these conditions, Lis
seriously underestimates the attenuation experienced by dc or transient inputs on their way
to the soma. For instance, the electrotonic distance between point a4 in the distal apical
tree and the soma is 1.31 (Table 3.1), giving rise to the expectation that the attenuation
from that point to the soma (assuming an infinite cylinder) should be e1"4-* = 3.7, yet the
true voltage attenuation is around 423 for sustained current inputs and higher for transient
inputs. Thus, for almost any dendritic tree, L,-s fails to even be in the ballpark of the true
voltage attenuation.
3.5.2 Voltage Attenuation
One of the most common measures is the voltage attenuation among two sites (Rail and
Rinzel, 1973), that is, the ratio of the voltage at location i to the voltage at location j,
(3.34)
Since we are dealing with passive structures without a voltage-dependent membrane that
can amplify the signal, the voltage at the input site i will always be larger than the voltage
anywhere else in the tree: Ay > 1. For the general case of a sinusoidal input current /,• (/)
of frequency /, we have (Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1982)
(3.35)
In general Ay (/) is a complex number. As usual, if we do not explicitly express the
dependency of Ay on /, we refer to the dc component for / = 0.
This definition does not depend on whether this current injection was caused by a synapse
or by an intracellular injection. The magnitude of Ay (/) describes by how much the voltage
attenuates between i and j, with large values indicating large decrements. For a fixed input
site z, Ay depends only on the transfer resistance Kfj. Figure 3.8 illustrates this dependency
for the voltage attenuation between site a3 in the apical tuft (Fig. 3.7) and the rest of the cell
as well as the attenuation from the soma to other points. Because the ordinate is specified in
units of KIJ, this axis is inversely proportional to Ay. This type of graph is quite instructive
and was first used in Rail and Rinzel (1973) to demonstrate a number of important points.
1. The attenuation from any one point toward more distal points is small. Witness this when
considering the attenuation away from the soma (lower curve) or the voltage decrement
from «3 backward, that is, toward a4, or in a branch away from the soma (e.g., all and
a 12). This is not surprising, since the injected current has a much easier job depolarizing
high-impedance sites than low-impedance ones.


===== Page 20 =====
68 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.8 VOLTAGE AND CHARGE ATTENUATION IN A PYRAMIDAL CELL 
Two curves showing the
steady-state transfer resistance KIJ between a site in the apical tuft (at a3 in Fig. 3.7) and other parts
of the tree (upper trace) as well as from the soma to dendritic sites for the layer 5 pyramidal cell.
The upper curve is inversely proportional to the voltage attenuation from a 3 to other sites in the tree
(Eq. 3.34), while the lower curve is inversely proportional to the charge attenuation between sites in
the tree and the soma (Eq. 3.47). Note the pronounced asymmetry between large voltage attenuation
but much smaller charge attenuation. The input resistances Ka3,a3 and Ks^s are indicated by arrows.
2. On the other hand, the voltage decrement at sites on the way to the soma, a very low
impedance site, is substantial. For instance, Aaj,tS = 341.68/10.46 *» 33: if a synaptic
input to a 3 causes a local sustained EPSP of 10 mV, the sustained somatic EPSP will be
only 0.3 mV.
3. For rapid synaptic input, the actual attenuation will be larger due to the distributed
capacitance that "soaks" up the high-frequency components on their way to the cell
body. When the input consists of a rapid and transient current (peaking at 0.5 msec) into
the dendrite at a3, the effective Aa3i-s, defined as the peak of the local potential (here
equal to 4.86 mV) divided by the peak somatic potential (0.051 mV), is 94, about three
times larger than for sustained inputs.
4. Both sustained as well as transient voltage attenuation can be considerably larger. For
the distal site a4, the dc attenuation alone is already 423.
5. The attenuation away from the soma is considerably smaller (Rinzel and Rail, 1974).
For instance, ASit,3 is only 1.6, about twentyfold less than the voltage attenuation in the
reverse direction (see also the lower curve in Fig. 3.8). In fact, except for an infinite
cylinder,
(3.36)
This relationship appears to run counter to the symmetry of the transfer impedance,
but upon closer inspection this discrepancy is resolved: Eq. 3.27 expresses symmetry


===== Page 21 =====
3.5 Measures of Synaptic Efficiency 
• 
69
between current input and voltage output, while Eq. 3.36 expresses lack of symmetry
between voltages at two different sites. The symmetry of ^,3^ is expressed in the fact
that the location marked soma on the upper curve in Fig. 3.8 has the same numerical
value as the location marked a?> on the lower one (Rail, 1989).
The physical reason for the pronounced asymmetry between AJS and Asi is the large
difference in input impedance between dendritic sites and the soma. While most of the
current flows toward the low-impedance (or high-conductance) cell body (as expressed
by Eq. 3.8), this current causes a much smaller change in the membrane potential at the
soma than at high-impedance locations. This fact also explains why the voltage attenuation
between a 3 and the most distal part of the apical tree (a4) is comparatively minor. Given
thin branches and sealed-end boundary conditions, only a very small voltage gradient exists.
This is important to keep in mind when trying to understand the antidromic spread of the
somatic action potential to dendritic sites.
By exploiting Eq. 3.29, we can express the voltage attenuation from i to j using any
point t lying on the direct path between i and j as a function of the attenuation between /
and I and between I and /,
(3.37)
This property allows us to introduce a sort of pseudo attenuation metric. Following Zador
(1993), Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev (1995) and Brown et al., (1992), we define the
log attenuation as
(3.38)
using the natural logarithm. Note that to differentiate this dimensionless variable from the
electrotonic distance, it carries a superscript. Because | AJJ | > 1,
(3.39)
as expected for a distance. We now make use of Eq. 3.37 and have for any point I on the
direct path from i to j,
(3.40)
Additivity constitutes an elegant feature of L"j, rendering it somewhat similar to a distance
measure. Note that L". is not a true metric, since symmetry does not hold due to the
asymmetry in the voltage attenuation,
(3.41)
In the special case of an infinite cylinder, it follows from Eq. 3.23 that
(3.42)
and, therefore,
(3.43)
Because the logarithm of the voltage attenuation between two points in an infinite cable
equals the electrotonic distance between them, L". can be viewed as a generalization of the


===== Page 22 =====
70 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
traditional notion of electrotonic distance to arbitrary cable structures (Zador, Agmon-Snir,
and Segev, 1995).
While voltage attenuation has been and continues to be a popular measure of synaptic
efficiency, it should not be forgotten that it represents a relative measure. And whether or
not the cell spikes by exceeding a threshold voltage depends on the absolute amplitude of
the somatic EPSP and not on the relative ratio of voltages.
3.5.3 Charge Attenuation
Another measure of synaptic efficiency is the ratio of the charge transferred across the
membrane at the location of the input i to the charge reaching location j (Koch, Poggio,
and Torre, 1982). The total charge transferred at i due to the current 7,-(f) is
(3.44)
This equals the steady-state value of the Fourier transform of the current
(3.45)
The charge transferred across the membrane at j is
(3.46)
The charge attenuation from i to j, defined by analogy to the voltage attenuation, is
(3.47)
Or, the charge attenuation from i to j is identical to the voltage attenuation in the reverse
direction (for this reason, Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev, 1995, also refer to the charge
attenuation as outward going attenuation). This allows us to use the lower trace in Fig. 3.8,
which is proportional to the voltage decrement As, from the soma to dendritic sites, as an
indicator for the charge attenuation between these sites and the soma. For the parameters
used in this model, Asi is usually below 2, even for the most distal sites in the layer 1
dendrites. It should not be forgotten that Asi is a relative measure and does not tell us
anything about the absolute amount of charge transferred from the synapse i to the cell
body. Due to the equivalence of charge attenuation and inverse voltage attenuation, the
logarithmic transform of Eq. 3.38 can be used to define a pseudodistance.
The charge attenuation has, in contrast to the voltage attenuation, the distinction that it
is independent of the time course of the current 7,-(f)- It simply provides an index of the
relative amount of charge reaching the cell body. Of course, this measure also stipulates
that the period of integration extends to infinity, which means in practice several time
constants, until all ions have charged and discharged the neuronal membrane between i and
the soma.
It is also possible to define the current attenuation as the ratio of the input current flowing
at location i and the current flowing across the neuronal membrane at j,
(3.48)


===== Page 23 =====
3.5 Measures of Synaptic Efficiency 
• 
71
This implies that the steady-state current attenuation between i and j is identical to the
charge attenuation between these two sites. It is important to understand here that the
current /,- does not correspond to the intracellular current that flows from / to j. Rather, /,•
is the current that needs to be injected across the membrane at location j in order to change
the potential at j by the same amount as the current i does (namely, by A!/,/,-).
3.5.4 Graphical Morphoelectrotonic Transforms
It is more and more common that the detailed, three-dimensional morphology of recon-
structed neurons is available in computer readable form. It therefore becomes possible
to reexpress the geometry of a specific tree using different measures, for instance, the
electrotonic length, the log attenuation pseudodistance measure, or the dendritic delay.
As a group, these transforms, introduced by Zador (1993; Zador and co-workers 1992,
1995; see also Bernander, Douglas, and Koch, 1992), have been called morphoelectrotonic
transforms (METs). In a MET, the anatomical length of each dendritic cable segment is
replaced by one of these various measures, while the diameter and the orientation of the
segment are preserved. In this way, different aspects of the electrotonic structure of the cell
can be directly visualized. Color can be used as a further visual aid to identify corresponding
points between different METs and the original anatomy.
Figure 3.9 illustrates these procedures without the use of color. The original anatomy,
derived from projecting the three-dimensional digitized coordinates of the tree onto the
image plane, is shown in (A). In (B), the anatomical length of each compartment is replaced
by its electrotonic length. Therefore, the distance between a point i and the soma corresponds
to L{S (Eq. 3.33). In particular, the thin basal and distal apical dendrites are accentuated
at the cost of the thick apical trunk, since thinner cables have shorter space constants and
are therefore electrotonically longer. The electrotonic length does not correspond to the
strength of coupling between i and the cell body, since the use of L is conditioned upon the
space constant A. that is defined for an infinite cylinder. With the total electrotonic length
of the cell being on the order of one A., we would expect that stationary signals from the
periphery decay by a factor of \/e, while their actual decay is more substantial (Table 3.1).
The log transform of the voltage attenuation from the dendritic tree to the soma (Lv
is;
Fig. 3.9C) and from the soma to dendritic sites (L"f', Fig. 3.9D) emphasizes the large
differences (about a factor of 10) between incoming and outgoing voltage decrement. The
outgoing voltage attenuation MET in Fig. 3.9D corresponds to the logarithmic transform
of the charge attenuation from sites in the dendritic tree to the soma. The transforms are
functional, in the sense that the voltage transfer can be directly read off from the figure.
(This is a consequence of the additivity of the L" measure, as expressed in Eq. 3.40.) For
instance, the voltage attenuation from b2 at the tip of a basal dendrite is e3 9 » 50, while
the charge injected at the same site will only attenuate by e°'os ^ 1.09. This also means
that a long-lasting hyperpolarization at the cell body of 10 mV will hyperpolarize the entire
basal tree, an area that accounts for 62% of the cell's membrane area, by at least 9.5 mV.
Since the most distal sites in layer 1 of the apical tree have an ASI- value of about 2.1, even
these parts will be hyperpolarized by about 4.8 mV.
Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev (1995) offer another interpretation of Lv
si. A frequently
asked question relates to the cost of moving a synapse from the soma to a particular location
i in the tree. Assuming that the synaptic input can be treated as a current and is identical
to /o at both locations, the voltage induced by the somatic location is given by Ksslg,
while the somatic potential in response to the dendritic input is A^/O. The ratio of the


===== Page 24 =====
72 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.9 MORPHOELECTROTONIC TRANSFORMS Graphical means of visualizing different mea-
sures of synaptic efficiency using morphoelectrotonic transforms (METs) (Zador, 1993). (A) Two-
dimensional projection of the layer 5 pyramidal cell (see also Fig. 3.7). (B) The physical length (.
of each dendritic compartment is replaced by the electrotonic length L = lj\, while the orientation
of the compartment remains constant. In an infinite cable, the voltage attenuation between two sites
a distance L apart is e~L. But because the electrical structure of the dendritic tree is quite distinct
from that of an infinite cable, the voltage decay from dendritic sites to the soma is much larger than
indicated by this measure. (C), (D) METs corresponding to the logarithmic voltage attenuation from
sites i in the tree toward the soma, L"v = In |A,S|, and from the soma to the tree, L"; = In \Asi\,
for stationary input. The latter measure is equivalent to the charge attenuation, that is, to the ratio
of the charge injected at i to the charge reaching the soma (after integrating for a time that is long
compared to rm). Notice the very different scales (corresponding to the distance over which the signal
attenuates by a factor of e1 -° = 7.39 and e02 = 1.22, respectively), attesting to the fact that neurons
are very compact from the point of view of charge but very dispersed from the point of view of voltage
attenuation. These METs provide a snapshot of the cell's electroanatomy for a particular configuration
of electrical parameters.
membrane potential induced by the somatic input to the EPSP induced by the dendritic
input is Kss/Kis — ASJ. As an example, moving a sustained current injection from the
soma to site a4 in the distal apical tree, reduces the effect of this input by only a factor
of 2.1. Of course, for rapidly varying input, the cost of moving to the dendrites can be
substantially higher (for the same synapse, a factor of about 4 for input changing at the
10-Hz scale and a factor of 20 million for input varying at the kilohertz scale).
If transient input is used at the soma, the outgoing voltage attenuation is much larger. This
is demonstrated in Fig. 3.10 for a sinusoidal input of 1000 Hz. This frequency corresponds


===== Page 25 =====
3.5 Measures of Synaptic Efficiency
73
approximately to the inverse of the width of a typical action potential and provides us with
some intuition for how far the very rapid portion of a somatic action potential will propagate
into a passive tree (a phenomenon known as antidromic spike invasion). While the somatic
potential in response to current input at a distal, apical site (a4 in Fig. 3.7) is 423 times
smaller than the dendrite EPSP for stationary inputs (but only losing half of the injected
charge in the process) and 630 times smaller for a 10-Hz sinusoidal, it is attenuated by
a staggering factor of 4 billion for a 1000-Hz sinusoidal input. In other words, without
dramatic amplification by active processes, a distal high-frequency input has no chance of
ever influencing anything occurring close to the soma (see Chap. 19).
A further feature of METs is that they reflect the momentary state of the cell, a state that
can be modulated by any number of different events in the brain. For instance, as discussed
in Sec. 18.3.3, varying the synaptic background—corresponding to effectively varying the
membrane resistance Rm—modulates the electrotonic geometry of the cell by changing the
Lis or Lv
is (see Fig. 18.6). Or if some brainstem afferent releases a neuromodulator, such as
noradrenaline or acetylcholine, onto part of the cell, its electroanatomy can shrink or grow,
reflecting the corresponding change in the efficiency of synaptic inputs.
Figure 3.11, from Zador, Agmon-Snir and Segev (1995), provides a graphical comparison
of L"(. for four different neurons with identical, albeit passive, membrane properties. The
differences between them are dramatic. Given the large diameter of the Purkinje cell
dendrites, almost no charge attenuation occurs for sustained current inputs. The electrotonic
behavior of the layer 2/3 pyramidal cell is very similar to the behavior of the basal tree of
the layer 5 cell. Finally, the apical tree of the hippocampal pyramidal cell sprouts into a
long, central stalk across which substantial charge attenuation occurs.
Fig. 3.10 DYNAMIC MORPHOELECTROTONIC TRANSFORMS 
(A) Logarithm of the voltage atten-
uation, In \AiS(f)\ = L"s(f) for a 1000 Hz input. For such transient input, the most distal site is 27
units away from the cell body (for stationary inputs, the corresponding distance is 6.7; see Fig. 3.9C).
(B) Logarithm of the voltage attention L"(. (/) from the soma to dendritic sites for the same 1000-Hz
input. This frequency has been choosen to demonstrate how far the fast components in a somatic
action potential (with an approximate width of 1 msec) can propagate back into the dendritic tree.


===== Page 26 =====
74 
. 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.11 MORPHOELECTROTONIC TRANSFORMS FOR DIFFERENT CELL TYPES Comparison of
the logarithm of the charge attenutation—corresponding to the log-voltage attentuation from the soma
to dendritic sites for stationary inputs—for four different neurons: the layer 5 neocortical pyramidal
cell used throughout, a layer 2/3 neocortical pyramidal cell, a Purkinje cell from the cerebellum of a
guinea pig, and a CA1 pyramidal cell from rat hippocampus (Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev, 1995).
The left column corresponds to the morphology and the right one to L"(. (0). The scale bar, indicating the
distance over which the voltage attenuates by e°-' « 1.1, applies to all cells. To facilitate comparison,
all neurons are passive with identical membrane parameters (Rm = 100,000f2-cm2, /?,- = lOOS-cm).
Reprinted in modified form by permission from Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev (1995).


===== Page 27 =====
3.6 Signal Delays in Dendritic Trees 
• 
75
3.6 Signal Delays in Dendritic Trees
We discussed in Sec. 2.3 transient inputs and their effect on the voltage in single cables.
The most important parameter regulating how fast the membrane potential equilibrates is
the neuronal time constant Tm. But how is rm measured experimentally in dendritic trees?
Following Agmon-Snir and Segev (1993), we also introduced a new measure of neuronal
delay in terms of the difference between the centroid or center of mass of the current input
and the voltage signal. How do these definitions fare in spatially extended structures?
3.6.1 Experimental Determination o1rm
A general property of the voltage response to current input into an arbitrary complex,
passive cable structure (whether a single finite cylinder or a large dendritic tree) with
uniform electrical parameters throughout the tree is that it can always be expressed as an
infinite sum of exponentials (Rail, 1969a; for more details, consult Appendix C),
(3.49)
where the Bt 's depend both on the initial conditions and on x, and Voo captures the steady-
state components of the voltage. The T; 's can be thought of as equalizing constants that
govern the rapid flow of current (and the reduction of voltage differences) between different
regions of the cable. They are independent of the site of the current input, the site of
recording, or the initial voltage distribution in the tree. In general, solving for these r, 's
involves extracting the root of a recursively defined transcendental equation. (For more
recent work on this, see Holmes, Segev, and Rail, 1992; Major, Evans, and Jack, 1993a.)
Several important points need to be mentioned here. First, in a tree with uniform
membrane properties with sealed ends (and without a shunt or a voltage clamp) the slowest
time constant TO is always equal to the membrane time constant, TO = tm = RmCm.
Second, all time constants scale with the membrane capacitance Cm. Third, introducing a
shunt conductance at the soma—mimicking the effect of an intracellular electrode—reduces
all the time constants, including TQ. In other words, under realistic experimental conditions,
the measured slowest TO represents a lower bound on the actual value of rm. As evident in
Eq. 2.40, these T,- 's have a particularly pleasing and simple interpretation for a single finite
passive cable with sealed-end boundaries.
Direct measurements of Tm in neurons depended on the development of the intracellular
electrode, introduced by Graham and Gerard (1946) for muscles and first applied to central
mammalian neurons (spinal motoneurons) by Woodbury and Patton (1952) and Brock,
Coombs, and Eccles (1952). These early studies neglected the cable properties of the
dendrites and estimated rm = 2 msec. A common numerical technique for extracting
time constants involves the peeling of low-order exponentials from a semilogarithmic plot
of the voltage decay (Rail, 1969a,b; see Fig. 3.12). It was first applied to the problem of
extracting time constants in a motoneurons by Burke and Ten Bruggencate (1971).
They estimated that rm ranges from 5 to 7 msec. Averaging over 50 voltage transients
allowed them to determine not only TO = rm but also the next slowest time constant r\, which
they calculated to be around 1 msec. Assuming that the dendritic tree of the motoneuron
can be reduced to a single, equivalent cable, allowed Burke and Ten Bruggencate (1971) to
exploit Eq. 2.42 to estimate the electrotonic length at around 1.5.
Experimentally, tm can be determined by injecting a brief current pulse into the soma
and recording the voltage response at the same point. Long current steps tend to activate


===== Page 28 =====
76 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.12 ESTIMATING THE FIRST Two TIME CONSTANTS Peeling procedure to assess the time
constants of voltage decay in response to a small and short current pulse. The data shown here were
obtained by recording from a pyramidal cell located in the upper layers in the frontal cortex of the
guinea pig. The voltage response is shown as a logarithmic function of time. Due to the nonisopotential
nature of the dendrites, the voltage decays initially rapidly; the slowest time constant TO = Tm is only
evident toward the tail of the response, with TO = 16 msec. Peeling it away reveals the second slowest
time constant r\ = 1.7 msec. The recordings were carried out at the cell's resting potential of —65 mV
in the laboratory of Yosef Yarom. Reprinted by permission from Koch, Rapp, and Segev (1996).
voltage-dependent components (e.g., the over- and undershoot dealt with in detail by Ito and
Oshima, 1965) that severely interfere with the measurement of the passive time constant.
In a linear system, the response to a current pulse is given by the temporal derivative of
the response to a step. Because the derivative of Eq. 3.49 still leaves an infinite number
of exponential terms with the slowest term decaying as g~'/Tm, the peeling method is also
applicable to the derivative of V(t) in Eq. 3.49 with the advantage that the steady-state
component of the voltage disappears. The slope of the tail of the decaying phase of Vm,
when plotted on a semilogarithmic scale, is — l/rm. Figure 3.12 illustrates this procedure
for a voltage transient in a guinea pig neocortical pyramidal cell, showing how the voltage
gradients over the cell surface equalize after about 6-8 msec; from this time on, the voltage
decays exponentially. The slowest time constant TO = 16 msec corresponds to the inverse
of the slope at the tail end of the voltage distribution (see also Kim and Connors, 1993).
Subtracting this component from the original voltage curve gives rise to a new transient
(noisy curve at bottom) whose tail can now again be fitted with a straight line whose slope
is — 1 /TI . In this case t\ - 1.7 msec. If we assume that the membrane of this cell is uniform
and that the intracellular electrode did not cause a significant shunt (injury), TO — rm.
It is important to emphasize that the quality of the electrical recording depends to a large
extent on the tightness of the resistive seal around the electrode. During the impalement
of the neuronal membrane, the intracellular electrode frequently rips a large hole in the
membrane, allowing ions to flow through, thereby seriously compromising the quality of
the recording. The introduction of the whole-cell recording of in vitro cells and the perforated
patch clamp technique (Edwards et al., 1989; Spruston and Johnston, 1992) has dramatically


===== Page 29 =====
3.6 Signal Delays in Dendritic Trees 
• 
77
improved the situation with an effective electrode shunt on the order of 0.1 nS. Indeed, over
the last four decades the estimate for Tm in central neurons has grown significantly. In
the 1950s it was assumed to be only a few milliseconds. With improved averaging and
recording techniques, the recent estimates of rm from intracellular recordings range from
10 to 40 msec for the major types of central neurons. (See Fleshman, Segev, and Burke,
1988 and Clements and Redman, 1989, for a motoneurons, Brown, Fricke, and Perkel,
1981, for hippocampal neurons, Nitzan, Segev, and Yarom, 1990, for vagal motoneurons
and Rapp, Segev, and Yarom, 1994, for cerebellar Purkinje cells.) With tight-seal whole-cell
recordings, the estimates are growing even further and are approaching 100 msec in slice
preparations (e.g., Andersen, Raastad and Storm 1990 found time constants ranging from
50 to 140 msec in the hippocampus; Major et al., 1994 report an average value of 93 msec
in CA3 pyramidal cells; see also Spruston, Jaffe, and Johnston, 1994). A notable exception
to such high values is the 2-msec time constant in slices in the avian cochlear nucleus
responsible for processing high-fidelity sound information, measured by using whole-cell
recording with tight seal (Reyes, Rubel, and Spain, 1994). We conclude this section by
noting that rm estimates depend heavily on the composition of the physiological solution
during the experiment. Adding specific blockers to the solution, as is frequently done
(e.g., caesium ions to block K+-dependent rectification or blockers of NMDA-dependent
channels), directly affects (typically increases) estimates of rm.
3.6.2 Local and Propagation Delays in Dendritic Trees
The problem with the standard definition of Tm is twofold. Firstly, because rm is a property
of the membrane it does not take into consideration the effect of the neuronal structure
on the dynamics of the membrane potential at the input site (which can be the soma, a
thin dendrite, or an elongated spine). Secondly, r does not inform us about how rapidly
the membrane can respond to more physiological input than a current pulse or step. Both
problems were addressed by Agmon-Snir and Segev (1993) (see also Zador, Agmon-Snir,
and Segev, 1995). In Chap. 2, we defined the transfer delay Dtj to be the difference in
the centroid of the induced voltage at location j and the centroid of the current flowing at
i (Eq. 2.45) and the input delay DH as the difference between the centroids of the local
voltage and the injected current at the same location (Eq. 2.46). For an infinite cable, the
transfer delay Dtj = (1 + \i - j\/k)rm/2 (Eq. 3.50).
The center of mass method can be applied to calculate analytically the local delay at
any point in an arbitrary dendritic tree. Figure 3.13 illustrates a few delays arising in
the pyramidal cell for fast current injections of the form expected during activation of
fast voltage-independent synaptic input. The time course follows that of the a function
introduced in Eq. 1.21,
(3.50)
(We here approximate the synaptic input by a current source.) The current attains its peak
value /peak at? = ?peak- Values for the latter are in the 0.25-1-msec range, depending on the
exact circumstances (for more details see Sec. 4.6). The centroid of the current is located
at 2rpeak-
The local delay D,, reflects the RC properties of the local membrane as well as the
electrotonic structure of the cell as seen from location i. It is maximal (and equal to rm) for
the membrane patch case (Eq. 2.48), since here the input current can only discharge through


===== Page 30 =====
78 
• 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.13 LOCAL DELAY Four examples of the local delay DH defined as the difference between the
centroid of the local voltage (upper curves in the four panels) and the centroid of the local current injection
that gave rise to this depolarization (lower curves in the four panels) for the layer 5 pyramidal cell from
neocortex. DH reflects the contribution of the geometry of the cable structure to the voltage dynamics
and is independent of the waveform of the current input. The input current is given by Eq. 3.50 with
'peak — 0.5 msec and a centroid at 1 msec (the centroids are marked with arrows). At the soma (lower
left) DH = 17.7 msec fa ^m, while at distal sites, such as a layer 1 apical dendrite (upper right) or the
tip of a layer 5 basal dendrite (lower right), DH can be much faster than rm. Rm = 20,000 £2 • cm2 and
Cm = I /zF/cm2throughout the cell. The amplitude of all responses have been normalized and shifted by
0.5 msec to the right. Reprinted by permission from Koch, Rapp, and Segev (1996).
one pathway. In an infinite cable, DH = Tm/2, since current can flow through membrane re-
sistance as well as through the intracellular resistivity (Fig. 2.11). Adding additional current
sinks, in the form of a complex and highly branched dendritic tree, further reduces DH .
Because the soma is relatively large (with a radius of 20 /urn), DH at the soma is not
very far from that of an isopotential membrane patch, DH — 17.7 msec « rm (lower left
in Fig. 3.13). For distal sites in the layer 5 pyramidal cell, DH « rm/10 or less (upper and
lower right-hand panels in Fig. 3.13), while for dendritic spines DH « rm/20 (not shown).
Such small values of A, go hand in hand with a narrow (brief) voltage transient at the
input sites (Rinzel and Rail, 1974). Indeed, distal dendritic arbors, in particular the many
fine branches of the basal tree, provide for multiple sites with a very brief (compared to rm)
and local voltage response, provided the input is also brief. This will be taken up in more
detail further below as well as in Chap. 19.
The transfer delay between i and j really includes two components, the time it takes for
the current input to depolarize (or hyperpolarize) the local membrane (that is, DH) and the


===== Page 31 =====
3.6 Signal Delays in Dendritic Trees 
• 
79
time it takes the centroid of the local potential to propagate to j. Accordingly, Agmon-Snir
and Segev (1993) define the propagation delay as
(3.51)
This measure has a number of similarities with the log attenuation L". measure defined in
Sec. 3.5.2. In particular, it is not symmetric,
(3.52)
but it is additive for all locations t on the direct path between locations i and j:
(3.53)
This last property allows us to compute the morphoelectrotonic transforms for P(y just like
we did for the log voltage attenuation measure (Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev, 1995).
Before we discuss the functional significance of these different delays in realistic dendritic
trees, we would like to note the analogies between input and transfer resistances and input
and transfer delays. Both sets of variables are defined as quantities relating current at location
i to voltage at location i or j and both obey the same symmetry relationships.
The propagation delay P, s from a dendritic site i to the soma s is obtained by subtracting
the local delay at i from the transfer delay from i to the soma, reflecting the actual
propagation time of the voltage centroid from the input site to the soma. We can, of course,
also define a propagation delay from the soma to dendritic sites Psi (Agmon-Snir and Segev
call this the net dendritic delay, to indicate that PSJ measures the "cost" in terms of delay
that results from placing the input at the dendritic site i rather than at the cell body). This
measure turns out to be the most useful of all. Reverting back to the definitions of P,; and
Dij given in Sec. 2.4, we have
(3.54)
that is, we can think of Psi as the difference between the voltage response at i to a somatic
input and the voltage response at the soma to a somatic input. Because the decay phases
of both EPSPs are relatively similar (being primarily dictated by the properties of the large
cell body), P,,- reflects differences in the rising phases of the EPSPs. In this sense, P,,-
has similar values and can be interpreted as the time delay between the peak of the local
EPSP and the peak in the somatic EPSP. Figure 3.14 illustrates the MET of the propagation
delay Psi for the layer 5 pyramidal cell devoid of synaptic background activity. An extreme
case is shown for which Rm is reduced tenfold. In an infinite cable, this leads to a \/To
reduction in the propagation delay (Eq. 2.52). In fact, the scaling is more complex for a
distributed dendritic tree. It takes the centroid of the somatic EPSP between 1 and 2 msec
to propagate to the tips of the basal dendrites (and proximal apical dendrites) independent
of Rm, while P,, to the tip of a typical apical dendrite decreases by about a factor of 2 to
about 10-15 msec.
The outward going propagation delay Ps; has another interesting interpretation. Using
Eq. 2.51, we have
(3.55)
In other words, it corresponds to the difference between the centroids of the current at the
soma and at site i.


===== Page 32 =====
80
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
Fig. 3.14 PROPAGATION DELAY Morphoelectrotonic transform (MET) for the outward going
propagation delay Pst from the soma to dendritic sites (Agmon-Snir and Segev, 1993) computed
for the layer 5 pyramidal cell with (A) a very high value of Rm = 100, 000 £2 • cm2 or (B) a 10 times
reduced value of 10,000 fi • cm2. P,, corresponds to the effective delay between the peak of the local
EPSP at i and the somatic EPSP. Changing Rm by a factor of 10 should reduce the propagation by
•s/10 for an infinite cable, while the effect is much less in a distributed tree. Pj, to the main branch
point of the apical tree is 6 msec for the high and 2.5 msec for the low Rm value.
3.6.3 Dependence of Fast Synaptic Inputs on Cable Parameters
While the dynamics of the membrane potential in response to a slowly varying input current
is dictated by rm, this is most emphatically not the case for rapid inputs (Segev and Parnas,
1983). For fast synapses onto thin dendrites, the rise time as well as the initial decay of the
associated postsynaptic potential is almost completely independent of Rm and is primarily
limited by the dynamics of the synaptic current, that is, ultimately by how fast the underlying
ionic channels open and close (e.g., DH for distal dendritic sites in Fig. 3.13).
Let us consider how three aspects of the excitatory postsynaptic potential depend on the
three cable parameters, Rm, Cm, and /?,-: (1) its rise time or rate of depolarization, (2) its
peak potential, and (3) its rate of repolarization.
For a fast synaptic input, the rate of depolarization in an infinite cable of diameter d is
limited by the temporal derivative of the membrane potential in response to a current step
of amplitude /Q. Using Eq. 2.33 and recalling that the derivative of the error function is
2e~~x /^/TT yields
(3.56)
At very short times when the exponential term can be developed in a Taylor series, the
derivative behaves as const/^/t, where const depends on /?;, /Q, and Cm, but not on Rm.
What happens is that initially the injected current primarily charges up the membrane
capacitance at the site of current injection as well as at neighboring locations (via the
axial resistance /?,). The larger the /?, or the smaller the Cm, the faster the voltage
will change. It is only the slow components of the decay that are affected by low-pass
filtering, as demonstrated graphically in Fig. 3.15. Here the dendritic potential in response
to a single depolarizing current input (Eq. 3.50) in the pyramidal cell is computed for


===== Page 33 =====
3.6 Signal Delays in Dendritic Trees
81
Rm - 10,000 £2 • cm2 and R = 100,000 £2 • cm2. While the dc input and transfer
resistances are affected appropriately, almost no effect on the rise time is evident.
Surprisingly, both the peak depolarization as well as the initial phase of the repolarization
of the voltage change are not affected by the tenfold change in Rm. This surprising behavior
is only seen in thin dendrites and not at the soma: because of the limited membrane area,
all of the injected current charges up the associated capacitance. The rapid repolarization
Fig. 3.15 WEAK DEPENDENCE OF FAST DENDRITIC EPSP ON Rm 
(A) Dendritic and (B) somatic
synaptic potentials in response to a single fast excitatory synapse activated 5 msec into the simulation
and located at a3 in the distal apical tree of the layer 5 pyramidal cell (see Fig. 3.7) for two different
values of Rm (in units of £2 • cm2). The current peaks 0.5 msec after onset and is over within 2 msec.
This is so fast compared to the membrane time constant of either 10 or 100 msec that the rising phase
as well as the peak dendritic response is more or less independent of Rm. Indeed, because the input
is so fast compared to the time constant of the dendrite, the local voltage response approximates
the impulse response. Due to the low-pass filtering between the synapse and the soraa, the somatic
potential is strongly affected by the decrease in electrotonic distance and the increase in rm. This
shows the fallacy of using rm as an indicator for how rapidly the membrane can respond to synaptic
input. Arrows point to the location of the centroids.


===== Page 34 =====
82 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
occurs because the capacitances outside the immediate neighborhood of the site of current
injection (which includes the distant cell body) soak up the charge. The synaptic current is
so rapid that all of this takes place with only little involvement of the membrane resistance.
Because of the much larger capacitance present at the soma, the dendrites branching from
the cell body fail to provide any substantive capacitive sink and repolarization is much
slower (witness the decay of the somatic and the dendritic voltages in Fig. 3.13).
Rail (1964) first observed that this capacitive effect allows for faster than exponential
decay, in particular in dendrites (reviewed extensivley in Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975).
Softky (1994) derives an approximate expression for the peak potential and the rate of
repolarization. By neglecting any leak conductances (that is, working in the limit of
Rm -» oo), the situation is formally equivalent to treating diffusion of charge inside a
cylinder (see Fig. 11.3). This allows Softky to find the following expression for the peak
depolarization in response to a very fast current pulse,
(3.57)
(see also Eq. 3.56). Note that Rm never appears here and that the peak potential scales with
the square root of fpeak- Softky quantifies the rate of repolarization by estimating the time
Ti/2 it takes for the potential to decay from Vp^ halfway to zero,
ri/2 « 6/peak. 
(3.58)
Figure 3.16 illustrates how well this approximation works for very rapid current inputs. It
does badly on the slower components of the voltage decay since it completely neglects the
effect of the membrane resistance.
As enthusiastically argued by Softky (1994, 1995), such rapid membrane dynamics,
outpacing rm by far, give rise to the possibility of submillisecond coincidence detection in
the thin basal and apical dendrites, in particular if Hodgkin-Huxley-like nonlinearities are
present. We will pick up this story in Chap. 19.
3.7 Recapitulation
While Chap. 2 is concerned with solutions to the cable equation in single cables, this one
concentrates on studying the membrane potential in realistic dendritic trees with the aim
of understanding the relationship between dendritic architecture and function. A number
of exact, recursive techniques exist to derive the membrane potential at any point in the
dendritic tree in response to an arbitrary current injection at some other point. Because
these techniques do not generalize well to n simultaneous inputs and do not work in the
presence of membrane nonlinearities, today's method of choice is the numerical solution
of the appropriately spatio-temporal discretized cable equation (compartmental method).
Several well-documented, graphics-oriented, public software packages are available that
implement the appropriate algorithms.
An alternative approach for gaining intuition about the events occurring in a dendritic
tree is to "observe" the system at two points i and j, where the input is applied at i and the
output recorded at j. The entire system can then be characterized in terms of three frequency-
dependent functions that, in general, take on complex values: the input impedances KH (f)
and Kjj(f) 
and the transfer impedance Kjj(f) 
= Kjj(f). 
For sustained current input,
these reduce to three real numbers, corresponding to the conventional input resistances KH
tj/2 «3 6/peak .


===== Page 35 =====
3.7 Recapitulation
83
Fig. 3.16 SUBMILLISECOND RISE AND DECAY OF POTENTIALS Rapid membrane depolarization
at the center of a thin basal dendrite of the pyramidal cell (close to bl in Fig. 3.7) in response to
local current injections with different rise times. The current took the form of Eq. 3.50 with fpeak
of (A) 0.05, (B) 0.1, (C) 0.2, and (D) 0.4 msec. The approximations derived by Softky (1994) are
indicated in bold. They describe well the peak membrane potential (Eq. 3.57) and the early part of
the rapid repolarization. It is only during the slow, late part of the membrane depolarization, where
the approximation diverges from the correct solution, that the membrane resistance plays any role.
The somatic depolarizations in response to these inputs are minute, typically less than 0.5 mV. The
morale is that brief and rapid synaptic inputs can give rise to changes in the membrane potential in
the submillisecond range. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Softky (1994).
and KJJ and transfer resistance Kij (with the dimensions of a resistance). This approach
allows us to define in a straightforward manner the voltage attenuation AJS between any
dendritic site i and the soma s and the outgoing voltage attenuation Asi from the soma to
sites in the dendritic tree. This last measure is identical to the charge attenuation, the ratio
of the total charge injected at the synaptic site i to the total charge reaching the soma.
The chapter also introduces the logarithmic transform of the attenuation, LV. = In | A,-y |.
As compared to a true distance metric, this measure is not symmetric: the logarithm of the
voltage attenuation between i and j is different from the logarithm of the voltage decrement
between j and i. Indeed, for passive trees, the voltage attenuation from any dendritic site
to the soma is always considerably larger than in the reverse direction. The reason for this
profound asymmetry is that dendritic sites have high impedance while the cell body has a
low impedance. A further consequence is that, if integrated over sufficiently long times (in
practice several time constants), about half of the total charge injected into distal dendritic
sites can reach the soma. We discussed a frequently used measure of synaptic efficiency,
the total electrotonic distance Lis. Due to the fact that real trees are quite distinct from
infinite cables, this measure sharply underestimates the true voltage attenuation. All of this
can be visualized graphically, using the morphoelectrotonic transforms. METs are a useful
dynamic tool for portraying different features of the electroanatomy of a cell.


===== Page 36 =====
84 . 
PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREES
We also considered delays in the dendritic tree and between dendritic sites and the
soma. Using the definition of delays in terms of differences in the centroids of voltages and
currents, we can show that im represents an upper bound on how slowly the voltage decays
in response to fast inputs. At the soma, the local delay is on the order of the membrane time
constant, while for distal sites the local delay can be much faster, as small as 5 or 10% of
rm, implying that events in the dendritic tree can be very rapid. This is particularly true for
rapid synaptic events in thin dendrites, where the rise and early decay times of the dendritic
membrane potential are independent of Rm, allowing for the possibility of carrying out
precise timing relationships in these structures that are not limited by rm.
The take-home message is that one has to be careful in applying the concepts that
characterize an infinite cable (A, Tm, and /?jn) to realistic neurons. These have finite arbors,
with multiple dendrites terminating at different distances and branching patterns that do
not obey the necessary geometrical constraints for reduction to an equivalent cylinder.
These considerations have significant effects on how the voltage spreads and attenuates in
dendrites and hence in how synaptic inputs are integrated.


