===== Page 1 =====
19.1 Experimental Evidence for Voltage-Dependent Dendritic Membrane Conductances 
· 429
The last decade has seen a proliferation of studies of active dendrites, propelled by a
number of simultaneous technical advances: (1) patch-clamp recordings in brain slices that
allow for very high-quality records of somatic and dendritic electrical signals (Edwards et
al., 1989; Stuart and Spruston, 1995), (2) calcium-dependent fluorescent dyes that enable
the dynamics of intracellular free calcium in dendrites and even spines (e.g., Fig. 12.14)
to be accurately recorded (Tsien, 1988, 1989), and (3) new forms of visible and infrared
microscopy for high-resolution imaging of dendrites in brain slices as well as in the living
animal (Fine etal., 1988; Denk, Strickler, and Webb, 1990;DodtandZieglgansberger, 1994).
We cannot do justice to this gargantuan literature. Instead, we follow the excellent survey
article by Mainen and Sejnowski (1998) and provide this brief synopsis. We will expand
upon this, as necessary, further below.
1. Ionic channels from all major families of sodium, calcium, and potassium channels have
been identified in dendrites. This includes both a very rapid and a sustained sodium
current, low- and high-voltage activated calcium currents as well as sustained and
transient potassium currents (Johnston et al., 1996; Hoffman et al., 1997).
2. Some types of channels are confined to specific compartments, such as the soma, initial
segment, dendritic shaft, or even spines (Westenbroek, Merrick, and Catterall, 1989;
Westenbroek, Ahlijanian, and Catterall, 1990; Westenbroek et al., 1992; Turner et al.,
1994; Denk, Sugimori, and Llinás, 1995).
3. Voltage-gated channel densities estimated by patch-clamp recording in dendrites gen-
erally are less than 10 channels per square micrometer of membrane. This should be
contrasted with the 1000-2000 fast sodium channels per square micrometer found at
the axonal node of Ranvier (Ritchie, 1995). A possible exception appear to be A-like
transient potassium channels in the distal dendritic tree of pyramidal cells (Hoffman et
al., 1997).
19.1.1 Fast Dendritic Spikes
The earliest evidence for rapid all-or-none events in the dendrites comes from hippocampal
pyramidal and cerebellar Purkinje cells (Spencer and Kandel, 1961; Llinás et al., 1968;
Llinás and Nicholson, 1971). The later observations were particularly convincing and
conjured up a view of the Purkinje cell where the somatic membrane produces conventional
fast sodium spikes, while the extended dendritic tree can generate fast sodium spikes,
slower calcium spikes (see Fig. 6.1G), as well as so-called plateau potentials, long-lasting
and graded depolarizations (Llinaás and Sugimori, 1980, 1992; Regehr, Konnerth, and
Armstrong, 1992).
Of great interest has been the question of whether conventional action potentials,
triggered at or near the cell body, propagate not only forward along the axon but also
backward, into the dendritic tree. It was Ramón y Cajal (1909, 1991) who postulated
the law of dynamic polarization, which stipulates that dendrites and cell bodies are the
receptive areas for the synaptic input, and that the resulting output pulses are transmitted
unidirectionally along the axon to its targets.
The classical description of spiking in a neuron derives from motoneurons (Coombs,
Curtis, and Eccles, 1957; Fatt, 1957; Fuortes, Frank, and Becker, 1957). Here, action
potential initiation normally occurs in a proximal segment of the axon, in a specialized
region between the soma and the axon proper, called axon hillock or initial segment, that is


===== Page 2 =====
430
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
also the target of a particular type of inhibitory synapse (Farinas and DeFelipe, 1991). Yet
when the motoneuron is strongly stimulated, spikes can be initiated in the dendrites.
Both orthodromic, that is, from the dendrites into the soma and axon, and antidromic
spike propagation, from the cell body back into the dendrite has been inferred in pyramidal
cells (e.g., Turner et al., 1991). Unambiguous observation of antidromic spike invasion
had to await dual somatic-dendritic recordings in neocortical and hippocampal pyramidal
cells from mammalian brain slices (Stuart and Háusser, 1994; Stuart and Sakmann, 1994;
Spruston et al., 1995; reviewed in Stuart etal., 1997;Fig. 19.1 and discussed further below).
These findings clearly violate Ramón y Cajal's law of dynamic polarization. Spike
initiation in the dendrite has been observed in several in vitro preparations under frequently
unphysiological conditions (e.g., clamping Vsoma to between —90 and —100 mV, blocking
all inhibition, and so on; Regehr et al., 1993; Turner, Meyers, and Barker, 1993). Whether
or not anti- or orthodromic dendritic spikes can be observed under more natural conditions,
in particular in response to sensory or motor stimuli in an intact animal remains an open
issue (Svoboda et al., 1997).
19.2 Action Potential Initiation in Cable Structures
A full grasp of the interplay between synaptic and voltage-gated currents on the one hand
and the neuronal geometry on the other requires a detailed understanding of the nature of
spike initiation. What determines the conditions under which an action potential can be
triggered in excitable cable structures? The intuitive answer is to look to the properties
Fig. 19.1 ACTION POTENTIAL INITIATION IN A PYRAMIDAL CELL Drawing of a layer 5 neo-
cortical pyramidal cell from a 4-week-old rat slice preparation. The approximative locations of the
sites of the dendritic, somatic, and axonal recordings are indicated. (A), (B) Simultaneous patch-
pipette recordings of action potentials elicited by threshold synaptic stimulations (Stuart et al., 1997).
Dendritic and axonal recordings (heavy lines) are 270 μηι and 17 /xm, respectively, from the soma and
are from different cells. Υ± at the soma is 13 mV (A) and 15 mV (B) relative to the resting potential.
The vertical line corresponds to the occurrence of the peak of the somatic membrane potential. Here,
the action potential is always triggered in the axon, subsequently propagating back through the soma
into the dendritic tree. This is termed antidromic spike invasion. Reprinted by permission from Stuart
etal., (1997).


===== Page 3 =====
19.2 Action Potential Initiation in Cable Structures 
· 431
(density, kinetics, and type) of the excitable channels at the site of spike initiation. In this
view, the membrane voltage needs to exceed a critical value Vth at which point the net
ionic current becomes inward (Sec. 17.3.3). This inward current will further depolarize
the membrane, thereby starting the regenerative process that underlies the initiation of the
action potential, as covered in considerable detail in Chap. 6 (recall, in particular, Fig. 6.6).
However, these considerations hold only for isopotential structures where the ionic
current can only flow across the membrane. What effect do cable properties have upon
Vth (Rushton, 1937; Noble and Stein, 1966; Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Regehr and
Armstrong, 1994)? In the following, we will first dwell on the theoretical issue of how Vth
for rapid Hodgkin-Huxley-like spikes depends on the local cable geometry before we treat
detailed biophysical modeling studies that reproduce antidromic spike invasion.
19.2.1 Effect of Dendritic Geometry on Spike Initiation
A significant portion of the excitable current in a cable that is generated at the site of
current injection flows longitudinally away from this site, rather than depolarizing the local
membrane. To compensate for this current loss, the voltage threshold in the cable must
exceed Vt¡¡mform, the voltage threshold in the corresponding isopotential structure. (For an
early discussion of this, see Hodgkin and Rushton, 1946; Noble and Stein, 1966.) Indeed,
the geometry of the neuron strongly affects the condition for spike initiation and, as we
shall show below, there are cases where excitation can never be realized in cable structures
while spikes could be obtained in the corresponding uniform case (see also Chap. 9 in Jack,
Noble, and Tsien, 1975).
Figure 19.2A illustrates that Vth does, indeed, strongly depend on cable properties, as
well as on the site of input application. Using the standard Hodgkin-Huxley equations at
20° C, vtjjnlform is approximately 8 mV. In the other extreme of an infinitely long cylinder,
the voltage threshold V¿nfimte is about 17.5 mV (independent of the diameter d), more than
twice that of the isopotential case. For cylinders of finite length L, Vth lies between these
two extremes. As expected, Va, is closer to the uniform isopotential case when L is small
and it approaches Vtji
nfimte jn cylinders with large L values.
In any finite cable structure, Va, will always depend on the site of polarization X, and
sometimes quite strongly. For short cylinders (e.g., L = 0.5 or 1), the lowest Vth, closest
to Vt™lform
! is at the center of the cylinder. In other words, in these cylinders the midpoint
is, effectively, the most isopotential site. For exactly the same reason, the local delay £>,·,· at
the center of these cylinders is the largest (Agmon-Snir and Segev, 1993; see also Sec. 2.4).
When one moves toward the ends of the cylinder, Vih increases monotonically to reach
a maximum at the sealed-end boundaries. The situation changes for electrically longer
cylinders (e.g., L = 2 or 4) where the lowest Vth is near (but not at) the terminals rather
than at the center, as was the case for shorter cylinders. The effect of the sealed-end terminals
causes current to be discharged more slowly near the boundaries compared to other sites,
lowering Vth. The same result holds also for the site where the local delay is maximal;
in long cylinders DH is maximal near both ends rather than at the center of the cylinder
(Agmon-Snir and Segev, 1993).
Observing Vth at the midpoint of a cable with L = 4 (or at the ends of the cable with
L = 2), one notices that the voltage threshold is essentially equal to v^"6""6. This implies
that for spike initiation in a Hodgkin-Huxley cable, being two space constants away from
the sealed-end boundary approximates an infinitely long cylinder. One may conclude that,
for neurons with cable lengths of approximately L = 1, Vth is the lowest at (or very near) the


===== Page 4 =====
432
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.2 SPIKE INITIATION IN
A SINGLE CYLINDER 
(A) Volt-
age, (B) current, and (C) con-
ductance thresholds for spike ini-
tiation in four different uniform
cables of electrotonic length L
endowed with Hodgkin-Huxley-
like membrane as a function of
the normalized location X of the
input. (A) The input is a cur-
rent stimulus of 0.5-msec duration
(one-third of the passive mem-
brane time constant) that was ap-
plied to different sites along the
cable. The minimal voltage above
rest at which a spike is initiated
is defined to be Va,. The voltage
threshold in any one cable can
vary by up to 33% with X. (B) /th
is defined as the minimal ampli-
tude of a sustained current able to
initiate a spike. The dependency
of the current threshold on the
location of the stimulus is quite
distinct from the dependency of
Vth on X. For cables around L =
1, 7th only depends weakly on X.
(C) The peak conductance of a
single fast excitatory synaptic in-
put was varied at different loca-
tions until a spike was initiated.
This corresponds to a more phys-
iological condition than the two
previous panels. Qualitatively, go,
behaves as /th(ipeak = 0.3 msec;
Ee = 0 mV). All parameters
of the Hodgkin-Huxley equations
are as in Chap. 6, except that
the temperature was set to 20° C.
The cylinders have sealed end
boundaries and a 2 μπι diame-
ter. Reprinted by permission from
Rapp(1997).
midpoint of the structure. For neurons with a radial geometry, such as alpha motoneurons,
cortical pyramidal neurons, spiny stellate cells, and so on (where the soma is situated near
the "center of gravity" of the neuron), the geometry per se implies that the voltage threshold
is lowest near the soma.
We argued in Sec. 17.3.4 that for slowly varying inputs, spike initiation occurs whenever
a minimal current amplitude 7th (rather than a voltage threshold) is exceeded. How does this
quantity vary with the length of the cylinder and the location of current injection? Based
on Ohm's law and the fact that the input impedance in a finite cylinder is always lowest at


===== Page 5 =====
19.2 Action Potential Initiation in Cable Structures 
· 433
the center, Ι&(Χ) is expected to behave differently from Vth(X). Figure 19.2B shows that
this is indeed the case. Unlike Vth> which is always maximal at the ends of the cylinder,
/th is always minimal at these sites and peaks in the middle of the cable. And unlike V¡h,
which does not depend on the diameter of the fiber, but only on X, L, and the nature of
the membrane itself, /a, is proportional to the total membrane area and thus scales with the
diameter of the fiber. We conclude that in a finite-length segment of squid axon, the site for
minimal threshold current for spike initiation is at the terminals.
As an aside, note that certain symmetry conditions are evident in Fig. 19.2. While Vth at
the midpoint of cable of length L is always equal to Vth at the ends of the cable of length
L/2, /a, at the center of the cable of length L is exactly twice that at the end of the cable of
length L/2. This is the direct result of the symmetry of current flow when injected to the
center of the cable (see also Rail, 1977).
Finally, Fig. 19.2C covers the more physiological situation of determining the minimal
amplitude of a fast excitatory synaptic input sufficient to trigger a spike. The dependency
of gth on X and L parallels that of the current threshold.
Figure 19.3 treats spike initiation in a weakly excitable branched cable, corresponding to
the situation prevalent in the apical dendrites of in vitro pyramidal cells (Stuart and Sakmann,
1994; Regehr and Armstrong, 1994; Magee and Johnston, 1995a,b; Spruston et al., 1995;
Mainen et al., 1995; Rapp, Yarom, and Segev, 1996; Stuart et al., 1997). In particular, a low
but uniform density of rapidly inactivating voltage-dependent Na+ channels was reported
along the apical dendrite up to at least 200 μηι away from the cell body, channels that were
no different from those found at the soma. The density is equivalent to about 4 mS/cm
2, or
1/30 its value in the squid giant axon (hence the attribute weakly excitable).
To illustrate the general principle involved, we chose an excitable cable whose total
length is L = 1 and which branches at its midpoint (at X = 0.5) into two cylinders of
unequal diameter (Fig. 19.3) such that Rail's (1959) d
3/2 rule holds.
1 Since the boundary
condition is identical for both dendrites (sealed end) and their electrotonic length is also
the same (0.5), the entire three-part cable can be reduced to a single equivalent cylinder
(Sec. 3.2). This explains why Vth as a function of X should be symmetrical around the
midpoint of the cable (lower curve in Fig. 19.3). Qualitatively, this curve looks similar to
those seen in Fig. 19.2A except that, because of the much lower channel density, Vth is
much higher than for a Hodgkin-Huxley cable and the points of lowest voltage threshold
are at X = 0.3 and 0.7 (when delivering input simultaneously to both daughter branches).
Things change from the case of a strongly excitable cable when input is only delivered
to a single daughter, say, the thick one (of 1.7 μπι diameter). Now Vm diverges to infinity
near the terminal of the cable. No input to the distal portion of the thick daughter branch
can trigger an action potential (see the striped portion of the schematic in Fig. 19.3)
because most of the—already small—excitable current generated locally flows within the
cable and not across the membrane encasing the cable, and the regenerative process of
the spike fails to start. This failure is much more dramatic in the thin (d — 0.72 /urn)
daughter branch where action potentials can only be triggered near the branch point.
The large impedance load imposed by the rest of the dendritic tree onto thin branches
implies that such arbors are unfavorable sites for spike initiation. In contrast, thicker (more
proximal) branches in the same tree are more likely to be excited above threshold by local
polarization.
1. One complication that we will not treat here is that the exact definition of what is meant by an action potential is rather
involved for weakly excitable cables, given the smooth and continuous transition between a subthreshold and a suprathreshold
response (see Rapp, 1997).


===== Page 6 =====
434 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.3 SPIKE INITIATION IN A WEAKLY EXCITABLE BRANCHED DENDRITE Threshold condi-
tions for spike initiation in a weakly excitable branched cable, mimicking the conditions believed to
occur in the apical dendrite of neocortical pyramidal cells (Rapp, Yarom, and Segev, 1996). The parent
dendrite splits into two O.SA-long cylinders of different diameters (see inset). The entire membrane
is covered with sodium (and potassium) channels whose density is 1/15 of those of the standard
Hodgkin-Huxley squid axon density. The voltage threshold (relative to Vrest) required to initiate a
spike, is plotted as a function of the relative location of the stimulating electrode. The stimulus is a
15.3-msec-long current pulse delivered into the parent dendrite (left portion of the curve), into one or
the other daughter branches, or into both branches simultaneously (right portion of both curves). No
spikes can be initiated in the^dashed portion of _the two daughter branches in the inset. The membrane
time constant is 46 msec. Gfja = 8 mS/cm2, GK = 2.4 mS/cm2. The kinetics of the conductances
were adapted to mimick neocortical pyramidal cells. Reprinted by permission from Rapp (1997).
As pointed out above, this situation changes when the stimulus is delivered simulta-
neously to both daughter branches. The lower right limb in Fig. 19.3 represents the case
where the input current is applied simultaneously to the two daughter branches at sites with
equal X values. The total current 7stjm injected into each cable is split in proportion to their
relative input conductances, that is, the current injected into the branch of diameter d\ is
equal to /stim¿i3/2/(¿i3/2 + ¿2
3/2)-
The result is striking (although directly expected from cable theory) in that a spike is
now initiated in both branches, even at the distal sites of the thin branch. The reason for
this improved efficiency of spike initiation is that the cable structure becomes effectively
more isopotential, that is, less current flows longitudinally and more via the membrane. As
we saw in Fig. 19.2, the excitation threshold is reduced for isopotential conditions. Finally,
when receiving a distributed input as in Fig. 19.3, the threshold conditions in the branched
cable are identical to those of the associated equivalent cylinder.
79.2.2 Biophysical Modeling of Antidromic Spike Invasion
To better understand these principles and to develop our intuition concerning ami- and
orthodromic spike propagation, let us spend some time with Rapp, Yarom, and Segev
(1996; see also Mainen et al., 1995, who come to much the same conclusions).


===== Page 7 =====
19.2 Action Potential Initiation in Cable Structures 
· 435
This study aims to reproduce the electrical events occurring in large layer 5 pyramidal
cells recovered from the young rat cortex on the basis of a compartmental model. The apical
tree extends by about 1 mm from the soma. Importantly, a large fraction of the associated
axon is incorporated into the model: near the soma the axon's diameter is 2.8 μιη, thinning
to 0.5 /xm in its fine collaterals.
What active currents need to be incorporated into this model? Pharmacological block-
age of all calcium currents shows that they affect fast action potential propagation only
minimally (Markram, Helm, and Sakmann, 1995), as does the sustained sodium current.
The principal actor is a very rapid sodium current that peaks and inactivates within 1 msec
following a voltage step (Stuart and Sakmann, 1994). Its kinetics, as well as that of a delayed
rectifying potassium current, is modeled by an appropriately modified Hodgkin-Huxley
scheme.
In a first step, Rapp, Yarom, and Segev (1996) homogeneously spread the Na
+ current
throughout the dendrites, soma, and axon. At the low densities reported from the dendrites
(3—4 channels per square micrometer, corresponding to 4.5-6 mS/cm
2; see Table 8.1) no
full-blown action potentials can be generated at either dendritic or somatic sites. Increasing
this density to an effective value of 12 mS/cm
2 enables a strong somatic input to generate a
spike. This spike propagates back into the dendrites without any decrement, contrary to the
experimental observation. Furthermore, dendritic stimulation leads to a local regenerative
response that strongly attenuates on its way to the soma, failing to trigger a somatic spike.
This asymmetric behavior can be explained by recalling the asymmetry inherent in the
voltage attenuation in a dendritic tree (Sec. 3.5.2 and Fig. 3.7): the voltage attenuates much
more strongly when moving from a high- to a low-impedance site (that is, from the dendritic
tree to the soma) than the other way around.
From the early motoneuron work cited above, it was known that action potentials can
be trigged at lower voltages in the axon than in the soma. Dual intracellular recordings
in hippocampal cells suggest that the normal site of initiation of fast action potentials is
neither the soma nor the initial segment but the axon itself, possibly at the first node of
Ranvier well away from the cell body (Colbert and Johnston, 1996). Indeed, the number
of sodium channels measured in this study at the initial segment and soma is similar to
that reported in the apical dendrites, around 3 to 4 per square micrometer. This not only
suggests that the densities of sodium channels are substantially higher in the axon than at
the soma (up to 2000 channels per square micrometer have been reported at the nodes of
myelinated fibers; see Sec. 6.6) but also that their activation curve is shifted to more negative
membrane potentials. Accordingly, Rapp, Yarom, and Segev (1996) use a low value for the
sodium channels in the dendrites and a high value for the axon as well as shifting the sodium
activation curve for the axonal sodium channels moo by 10 mV to the left (see legend to
Fig. 19.4). An alternative to the latter is to employ the same activation curves for dendrite
and axon but a much, much higher axonal density (Mainen et al., 1995).
In order for a dendritic input to trigger a spike at the soma, the difference between V^ in
the dendrite (which can be substantial; recall Fig. 19.3) and Vth in the axon needs to exceed
the voltage attenuation between these two sites. This will allow dendritic input to trigger
an axonal spike while remaining subthreshold within the dendritic tree, as demonstrated in
Fig. 19.4. Panel A illustrates that the spike is initiated in the axon, subsequently propagating
back through the soma into the apical dendrite at a speed of 150 μηι/msec. In agreement with
the data, the back-propagating spike is attenuated by a factor of 2 in amplitude as well as
becoming broader in time. The former is due to the low density of sodium channels while the
latter is caused by the distributed dendritic capacitance. Blocking the dendritic sodium chan-
nels does reveal, however, their boosting action on the back-propagating signal (Fig. 19.4C).


===== Page 8 =====
436 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.4 SIMULATING ANTIDROMIC SPIKE INVASION 
Compartmental model of a layer 5 pyrami-
dal cell from rat somatosensory cortex (shown at right; the vertical extent from the soma to the dendrite
at the top is 1 mm) by Rapp, Yarom, and Segev (1996) with weakly excitable dendrites and cell body
but a highly excitable axon. (A) Application of a 150-pA, 40-msec current pulse to the soma triggers
an action potential at the axon (axon trace recorded 50 μτη away from the soma). Within 0.5 msec it
reaches the cell body and is propagating back into the dendrites (recorded 550 μτα from the soma).
Blocking the sodium current along the apical dendrite (dashed trace labeled "Passive") reveals the
active nature of the back-propagating response. (B) Delivering a 300-pA, 40-msec current pulse to the
apical dendrite causes a spike to be triggered at the axon and not locally, in the dendrite. This is due
to (1) the passive load imposed by the dendritic arbor, (2) the lowered spiking threshold in the axon
(moo is shifted by 10 mV to more negative values compared to the dendritic sodium activation curve),
and (3) the high sodium channel density at the axon (GNa = 140 mS/cm
2). (C) Peak amplitude of
the spike propagating back along the apical dendrite as a function of the distance from the soma. The
dashed line corresponds to the experimental data of Stuart and Sakmann (1994) and is superimposed
onto the output of the model (dots). When dendritic sodium channels are blocked ("Passive Model"),
the active nature of the back-propagating response is revealed. GNI ranges from 8 mS/cm
2 in the soma
to 4 mS/cm
2 in the distal dendrites. Reprinted by permission from Rapp, Yarom, and Segev (1996).
The passive electrical load imposed by the dendrites and cell body, in combination with
a weakly excitable dendritic tree and highly excitable axon, explains why spikes are always
triggered in the axon and propagate back into the tree. How much the spike propagates
back into the tree is controlled by a number of factors, such as the presence of transient
potassium currents in the dendrites (Hoffman et al., 1997), inactivation of the sodium
current by previous spikes (Migliore, 1996), and synaptic inhibition (Buzsaki et al., 1996;
Tsubokawa and Ross, 1996).
Before we proceed further, it needs to be pointed out that most of the data upon which the
modeling discussed in this section was based was obtained from pyramidal cells in relatively
young rat slices. Developmental changes in channel densities and distribution (Huguenard,


===== Page 9 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations 
· 437
Hamill, and Prince, 1988), local "hot spots" of sodium or calcium channels, the presence of
neuromodulators, and other factors could well allow synaptic input to locally trigger action
potentials in the dendritic tree.
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites:
Functional Considerations
From a computational point of view, passive dendrites can only instantiate a few elementary
operations: (1) low-pass filtering, (2) saturation, and (3) multiplicative-like interactions
among synaptic inputs. A much richer repertoire of nonlinear and nonstationary operations
is possible if voltage-dependent membrane conductances are present in the dendritic tree.
In the remainder of this chapter, we discuss a number of specific operations that have been
postulated to occur in excitable dendrites. The first one very briefly deals with the possible
functional role of back-propagating spikes. The next two exploit precise coincidence
detection using rapid and locally generated action potentials in spines and dendrites. The last
two, involving graded amplification of distal synaptic input and multiplication with active
conductances, consider dendritic all-or-none events as epiphenomena, focusing instead on
the underlying voltage-dependent currents.
19.3.1 Back-Propagating Spike as Acknowledgment Signal
The role of back-propagating action potentials is puzzling if considered within the context of
information processing, but makes more sense as an "acknowledgment signal" for synaptic
plasticity and learning. We reviewed in Sec. 13.5.2 evidence by Markram et al., (1997)
and earlier studies in favor of this hypothesis. By controlling the spike generation times in
a pair of excitatory coupled neurons, the amplitude and time course of synaptic coupling
between the neurons can be up or down regulated. If the presynaptic spike precedes the
postsynaptic one, as should occur if the presynaptic one participates in triggering a spike in
the postsynaptic cell, long-term potentiation occurs, that is, the synaptic weight increases.
If the temporal order of arrival times is reversed (e.g., from +10 to -10 msec), long-term
depression results. This provides the biophysical substrate for a novel class of powerful
dynamic Hebbian synaptic learning rules for learning associations over time (e.g., Montague
et al., 1995; Abbott and Blum, 1996; Gerstner et al., 1996).
19.3.2 Implementing Logic Computations with Spikes in Spines
In the chapter on dendritic spines (Sec. 12.4) we treated the idea of "spiking spines," that
is dendritic spines that are endowed with a sufficient density of either sodium or calcium
channels to be able to trigger all-or-none electrical events in the spine in response to a fast
synaptic input (Segev and Rail, 1988). As summarized in Fig. 12.11, there exists a range of
spine neck resistance values /?„, for which the induced EPSP in the passive dendrite just
below the spine V¿ is greatly amplified over the EPSP that would have been obtained if the
spine had been passive. If Rn is too small, the high load of the dendritic tree increases Vth
beyond the point at which synaptic input can trigger a spike. If Rn is too high, a spike is
triggered but is highly attenuated by the time it reaches the dendrite.
Section 12.6.2 dealt with the experimental evidence using fluorescent dyes for all-
or-none calcium events in individual spines (reviewed in Denk et al., 1996). Given the
great difficulty in recording the membrane potential in spines and very thin dendrites, it


===== Page 10 =====
438 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
will be very demanding to verify directly the existence of fast sodium-mediated spikes in
dendritic spines.
In Chap. 12 we restricted ourselves to treating single spines. More interesting from the
point of view of neuronal computation are the combinatorial possibilities for nonlinear
interactions among multiple active spines. As demonstrated by compartmental modeling
(Shepherd et al., 1985; Shepherd and Brayton, 1987; Rail and Segev, 1987; Shepherd,
Woolf, and Carnevale, 1989; see also Baer and Rinzel, 1991), one or a small number of
simultaneous inputs to active spines can trigger action potentials in neighboring spines,
providing a rich substrate for computations.
Zador, Claiborne, and Brown (1992) and Fromherz and Gaede (1993) have explored
similar ideas relating to the implementation of the exclusive OR (XOR) operation using
voltage-dependent currents in dendrites rather than in spines.
Active spines can interact with each other as long as the dendritic membrane potential V¿
in response to synaptic input to some active spines is sufficient to trigger an action potential
in those spines that did not receive any input. Recall that the voltage attenuation from the
dendrite into the spine is basically nonexisting (Fig. 12.13). Thus V¿ only needs to be large
enough to exceed Vth in the spine (which decreases monotonically as /?„ increases; Segev
and Rail, 1988). A large value of V¿ can be more easily obtained in the distal dendritic tree
with its associated high input impedance.
Given the very high density of spines (up to 10 spines per micrometer; Sec. 12.1.1),
what type of interactions might occur on distal dendrites? Rail and Segev (1987) explore
this issue on the basis of an idealized neuron modeled by an equivalent cable with a trunk
and five levels of symmetrical branches. The two most distal levels of dendrites are each
endowed with 45 passive and 5 active spines. The parameters are chosen in such a way that
a fast (ipeak = 0.2 msec) AMPA input to the spine triggers a local action potential, giving
rise to a dendritic EPSP of 8.5 mV and a somatic EPSP of 24 μΥ (Fig. 19.5A; the somatic
EPSP for an identical input to a passive spine is half of this amplitude). The local V¿ is not
sufficient to bring the other four active spines on this branch to threshold. However, two
simultaneous inputs to two active spines will do the job, firing off the other three active
spines that did not receive synaptic input (Fig. 19.5B). With an appropriately set threshold,
this branch implements a logic OR, such that any two inputs to active spines will generate
the same amplified output response (the peak somatic response in Β is about 84 μΥ).
Triggering all five active spines simultaneously depolarizes the neighboring sibling
branch sufficiently to trigger all of its active spines (Fig. 19.5C). It typically takes a
millisecond or less for the spines that did not receive any direct synaptic input to trigger
action potentials. In Fig. 19.5D, any two inputs to active spines on one branch and input to
any three passive spines are sufficient to trigger all active spines on the two distal spines.
Because the firing is more synchronous than in Fig. 19.5C, it sets off—with a delay—the
active spines in the parent branch. Finally, Fig. 19.5E illustrates what could occur with
inhibition targeting specific active spines, preventing a local action potential from being
generated.
In principle, very specific higher order logical interactions could be implemented by
active spine clusters. In practice, though, it is unclear whether the brain possesses specific
enough developmental and learning rules that would guide an axon to form a synapse on one
specific spine on one specific branch. The demanding requirements of which spine needs
to be activated at what point in time in order to obtain a specific interaction renders them
possibly not robust enough to be implemented in the nervous system. Further below we
will deal with a much more robust mechanism, which exploits voltage-dependent inward


===== Page 11 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations 
· 439
Activated excitable
Input conditions 
spine heads
Fig. 19.5 INTERACTING ACTIVE SPINES IN THE DISTAL DENDRITIC TREE 
Clusters of highly
excitable dendritic spines can implement very specific interactions. Rail and Segev (1987) simulate
an idealized dendritic tree with five levels of symmetrical branching, of which only the last two are
shown. Each of the three branches carries five spines that include sufficient sodium and potassium
channels to give rise to a rapid action potential and 45 passive spines. (A) Rapid synaptic input to a
single active spine is sufficient to trigger a local action potential (see Fig. 12.10) that depolarizes the
soma by 24 μΥ, while input to a passive spine would only depolarize the soma by 12 μΥ (Β) Two
simultaneous inputs to two active spines raise the dendritic membrane potential sufficiently to trigger
spikes in the remaining three active spines in this branch, but not in its sibling. (C) This can be
accomplished by exciting all five active spines. (D) Two synaptic inputs to active spines on one
branch and three to passive spines on the other will give rise to a wave of depolarization that is
synchronous enough (compared to C) to trigger the active spines in its parent branch. (E) If fast
inhibition is paired with fast excitation, no spikes are triggered, demonstrating the potentially large
number of very specific interactions that can be implemented with active groups of spines. The open
question is whether this mechanism is robust enough to be implemented within the central nervous
system. The excitable membrane uses standard Hodgkin-Huxley-type Na
+ and K
+ conductances at
five times their densities and adjusted for 20 C°. Reprinted by permission from Rail and Segev (1987).
currents—but not dendritic spiking—to implement a form of multiplication in spirit related
to the computations presented here.
19.3.3 Coincidence Detection with Dendritic Spikes
One of the guiding themes of Chap. 15 has been the question to what extent individual
nerve cells can be treated as "integrators," adding up many small synaptic inputs over tens
of milliseconds, or as "coincidence detectors," firing in response to the exact temporal


===== Page 12 =====
440 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
relationship at the millisecond scale (see, in particular, Sec. 15.3.2). This issue is intimately
connected to how much information (in terms of bits per spike or the reconstruction error;
Gabbiani and Koch, 1998) single neurons can convey about a stimulus in the world. For
stimuli varying on a time scale of a few milliseconds, submillisecond resolution at the single
cell level should be superior in terms of efficiency of information encoding compared to
representing the same information in the firing rate of a population of units that integrate
over 20, 50, or more msec (Knight, 1972a; Softky, 1995). Of course, high-fidelity neurons
place substantial demands on developmental mechanisms to arrange for the required precise
interneuronal wiring. The advantage of a simple code carried by a population of integrator
unit lies in their robustness to noise and in their simpler self-assembly requirements.
As investigated already by Segev and Rail (1988; see the preceding section), dendritic
spikes provide a convenient biophysical mechanism for high-fidelity coincidence detection
(Softky and Koch, 1993; Softky, 1994). We here discuss a recent model of a pyramidal cell
discriminating spikes with a resolution in the 0.5 msec range (see also Sec. 5.2.3).
Softky (1995) endows the layer 5 pyramidal cell's dendrites with weakly excitable
Hodgkin-Huxley conductances that are barely sufficient to sustain local regenerative events
in the basal dendrites. This amounts to choosing G^a to be 6 mS/cm2, a twentyfold reduction
of the maximal conductance in the squid axon and about one standard deviation above the
mean value of 4 mS/cm2 reported in rat neonatal apical dendrites (Stuart and Sakmann,
1994). Potassium conductances (with GK = 1.8 mS/cm2) and time constants are chosen
such that a single excitatory AMPA synaptic input (with t^^ = 0.24 msec) to the center of
each thin terminal basal dendritic branch (Fig. 19.6A) yields a subthreshold response, while
two simultaneous inputs are sufficient to trigger a very rapid all-or-none dendritic event of
40 mV or more amplitude. This signal is attenuated fiftyfold at the soma (Fig. 19.6B). If
the same two EPSPs are separated by a mere 2 msec, the peak somatic EPSP is three times
smaller. That the local potential in the basal dendrites can be exquisitely sensitive to the
arrival times of synaptic input was already evident in the small value of the local delay
£),·,· = 1 msec (Fig. 3.13), which is much less than xm = 20 msec.
This small time window for significant interaction among synaptic input is put to
use by Softky by adding a third, inhibitory synaptic input (of the GABA¿ type with
ipeak = 0.4 msec) to the same basal branch. Conjoint activation of all three inputs more or
less nulls out the membrane potential, while a mere 1 msec delay between the simultaneous
onset of the pair of excitatory inputs and inhibition fails to prevent the dendritic spike
(Fig. 19.6C).
Softky (1995) simulates a triplet of synaptic inputs, with both fast excitatory inputs
arriving simultaneously, followed 1 msec later by fast inhibition, placed at the midpoint of
each of the terminals of the basal tree. Each triplet occurs independently of the others and
is activated at a rate of 25 Hz. The result is that the pyramidal cell fires vigorously at about
55 Hz (Fig. 19.7A). What happens if the arrival times of all three elements is jittered in
time (using a Gaussian distribution of standard deviation σ and assuming that on average
the two excitatory inputs coincided and are followed 1 msec later by inhibition)? One such
trial run with σ = 0.5 msec jitter is illustrated in Fig. 19.7B. The cell's firing is greatly
reduced since dendritic spikes are absent. Figure 19.7C reports the average firing rate of
the cell to repeated trials for a range of values of σ. The cell's response drops steeply with
increasing σ, with a half-width at half-height of about 0.27 msec.
There is little indication in the somatic voltage record (Fig. 19.7A and B) of the very
strong and transient dendritic signals that give rise to this temporal sensitivity.


===== Page 13 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations 
· 441
Fig. 19.6 COINCIDENCE DETECTION WITH DENDRITIC SPIKES Dendritic spikes initiated in
response to local synaptic input can implement submillisecond temporal discrimination (Softky,
1994, 1995; see also Segev and Rail, 1988). (A) The standard layer 5 pyramidal cell is outfitted
with weakly excitable dendrites and a strongly excitable cell body. Two fast excitatory synapses and
one fast inhibitory synapse are placed along the center of each distal basal dendritic compartment.
(B) The conductances are adjusted such that activation of a fast excitatory input to a basal dendrite,
followed 2 msec later by a second such input, gives rise to a small local EPSP, while simultaneous
activation of both triggers a very rapid all-or-none event, three times stronger than if the same synaptic
events were separated by 2 msec. (C) If inhibition follows the two excitatory inputs by a mere
1 msec, it has little effect on the peak EPSP. Yet when all three synaptic elements are activated
simultaneously, Vm remains close to rest. The voltage-dependent membrane conductances are of
the Hodgkin-Huxley type with G^a = 6 mS/cm2 in the dendrites. Reprinted by permission from
Softky (1995).
The reason we discuss this study is that it demonstrates how, on the basis of a bio-
physically plausible parameter range, temporal coincidence detection with submillisecond
resolution might occur. This mechanism could be exploited by the nervous system to
implement a temporal code in which the exact (to within 0.5 msec or less) time of spiking
relative to other neurons carries all of the relevant information (Softky, 1994). Such a
temporal encoding strategy appears to be used in the insect olfactory system (Laurent, 1996;
Wehr and Laurent, 1996). Given the combinatorial possibilities for expressing messages
by shifting spike times around, it is considerably more powerful than a firing rate code that
averages spiking from a population of cells over 50 msec or more.
As pointed out above, this does place a premium on the nervous system having learned
how to compensate for axonal propagation and other delays in the system. The study
by Markram et al., (1997) provides hope for the existence of such a mechanism at the
level of an individual synapse, opening the door to learning rules that explicitly deal
with delays.


===== Page 14 =====
442 
. 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.7 SUBMILLISECOND COINCIDENCE DETECTION 
The model of Softky (1995) responds
sensitively to jitter in the arrival times of synaptic input. This mechanism could be exploited to encode
information in the relative spiking times of a group of neurons. (A) If all basal dendrites are endowed
with weak Hodgkin-Huxley conductances and with the three synaptic elements illustrated in Fig. 19.6
that are activated independently of each other at 25 Hz, the somatic EPSPs due to the dendritic spikes
summate, causing the cell to fire vigorously at 55 Hz. Note that one "synaptic event" here implies two
simultaneously activated excitatory inputs followed 1 msec later by inhibition. (B) Adding jitter to the
activation times of all synapses (the jitter is drawn from a Gaussian distribution centered at zero and with
a standard deviation of σ) eliminates dendritic spikes, causing the cell to fire only weakly (illustrated
here for σ = 0.5 msec). (C) Output firing rate as a function of σ; an average jitter of 0.27 msec in
all three synaptic activation times causes the output to drop twofold. Reprinted by permission from
Softky (1995).
19.3.4 Nonlinear Spatial Synaptic Interactions Using Active Currents
While the previous section dealt with temporal interaction among synaptic inputs in an
active dendritic tree, let us now turn toward spatial interactions.
Chapter 5 treated nonlinear interaction among synaptic inputs. Due to the dependency
of the NMDA membrane conductance on the postsynaptic membrane potential (Eq. 4.6),
the EPSP in response to the simultaneous (or near-simultaneous) activation of two or more
NMDA synapses can be much larger than the sum of the EPSPs due to the activation
of each input by itself. The closer these synapses are spaced to each other, the larger
the EPSP (Fig. 19.8B). Cooperativity among NMDA synapses needs to be contrasted to


===== Page 15 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations
443
the suppressive interactions among neighboring voltage-independent synapses in a passive
dendritic tree. Due to the reduction in the driving potential and the absence of any mitigating
increases in the synaptic-induced conductance change, the resultant EPSP will always be
less than the sum of the individual synapses (Fig. 19.8A). Mel (1992, 1993) shows how
this sensitivity to synaptic placement can be exploited to implement a robust multiplicative
operation in the dendritic tree.
How does the addition of voltage-dependent dendritic calcium and sodium conductances
impact the neuron's sensitivity to spatial clustering of synapses? Mel (1993) investigates
this problem by randomly distributing a total of 100 synapses in clusters of k synapses each
over the dendritic tree, where k ranges from 1 to 15 (see also Sec. 5.2.1). Each synapse is
activated independently by a 100 Hz Poisson point process using one of several different
postsynaptic scenarios. In one, all synaptic input is of the AMPA type, which is voltage
independent, but the dendritic tree of the layer 5 pyramidal cell (Fig. 5.6) is endowed with
Fig. 19.8 SPATIAL CLUSTERING OF SYNAPSES IN AN ACTIVE DENDRITIC ARBOR 
Effect of spatial
proximity of synaptic input on the cellular response in the presence of voltage-dependent dendritic
membrane conductances. Mel (1993) distributes 100 synapses in 100/fc clusters of k synapses each
throughout the layer 5 pyramidal cell (Fig. 5.6) and activates each of them independently with a
100-Hz presynaptic train of spikes. The cellular response, expressed as the number of somatic action
potentials within 100 msec, is averaged over 100 different random synaptic distributions. (A) For
a passive dendritic tree and voltage-independent synaptic input, synaptic saturation dictates that
spreading the synapses as far away from each other will maximize the cell's response. (B) Shifting
90% of the synaptic conductance to NMDA receptors favors activating spatially adjacent synapses.
(C) In the presence of gca and #AHP in the distal portion of the tree, a similar cluster sensitivity results
(here for AMPA input only). (D) This synaptic input frequently triggers a slow all-or-none dendritic
event as portrayed here. (E) Replacing the slow dendritic gca with fast Hodgkin-Huxley-like sodium
spikes makes little difference as does the scenario summarized in (F), a combination of calcium
conductances in the distal dendritic tree with sodium spikes at dendritic branch points in the presence
of strong synaptic input of the NMDA type. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Mel
(1993).


===== Page 16 =====
444 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
a L-type high-threshold, noninactivating calcium conductance gca m conjunction with a
calcium- and voltage-dependent potassium conductance #AHP (as well as radial diffusion
and calcium buffering). These conductances are evenly distributed throughout the tree with
the exception of the most proximal 60 μιη stretch of each basal dendrite and the first 450 μπι
long section of the apical shaft, which are devoid of any such conductances. Under these
circumstances, a sufficiently strong synaptic input can trigger a slow all-or-none dendritic
event (Fig. 19.8D).
This gives rise to a very pronounced cluster sensitivity (Fig. 19.8C). Arranging the
synaptic input into 20 clusters of five synapses each quadruples the cell's spiking response
at the soma compared to clustering the same synapses in 33 groups of three synapses each.
Replacing the dendritic gca by a rapidly activating sodium conductance in conjunction
with a delayed-rectifier potassium conductance yields fast dendritic spikes that lead to an
inverted U-form cluster dependency (Fig. 19.8E). Finally, a last block of trials consists
of the slow and distal calcium-conductance scenario, coupled with fast Hodgkin-Huxley
membrane conductances at all dendritic branch points (distal 40 μιη segment of each distal
apical branch and the distal 40 μιη of each apical and basal dendritic tip) and NMDA
synaptic input (Fig. 19.8F). These and many more permutations of parameters (different
conductances with different voltage dependencies, different patterns of synaptic input, and
so on) always yield the same robust sensitivity of the cell's response to the spatial patterning
of synaptic input.
Mel, Ruderman, and Archie (1998) demonstrate in a convincing manner how this
nonlinear synaptic interaction can implement a crucial operation found throughout sensory
systems. The best characterized neurons in the mammalian visual cortex are simple cells,
whose distinguishing feature is that they respond optimally to visual stimuli (such as a
bar) having a particular orientation (e.g., horizontal) at some position within their narrow
receptive field (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962). A complex cell differs in a number of ways from
a simple cell, chiefly in that it shows orientation tuning at many locations throughout its
receptive field, which is much larger than the optimal bar stimulus. The transition from
simple to complex cells is common to many systems and occurs anytime some selectivity,
be it for disparity, face detection, and so on, must be generalized across space.
The original Hubel and Wiesel (1962) model as well as subsequent models (Movshon,
Thompson, and Tolhurst, 1978; Heeger, 1992) posit that this tuning across space is accom-
plished by pooling the output of a set of simple cells with different receptive field positions.
However, much evidence has accumulated challenging the notion of a purely hierarchical
processing. In particular, complex cells receive direct, monosynaptic input from the lateral
geniculate nucleus (LeVay and Gilbert, 1976; Ferster and Lindstrom, 1983; see also Malpeli
et al., 1981; Ghose, Freeman, and Ohzawa, 1994). Mel and colleagues (1998) show how
the center-surround receptive field of geniculate cells can be transformed in a single step
into oriented complex cells using intradendritic computations.
The principal idea is similar to Mel's (1993) study of pattern discrimination using
synaptic clustering (Sec. 5.2.2 and Fig. 5.9). As before, the layer 5 pyramidal cell receives
mixed AMPA/NMDA excitatory synaptic input from a number of geniculate cells (either
100 or 1000). The dendritic membrane of the cell incorporates the standard g^a and £κ
Hodgkin-Huxley conductances, whose density is one quarter of the somatic density, in
qualitative agreement with Stuart and Sakmann's (1994) findings discussed above. Mel,
Ruderman, and Archie (1998) mimic a developmental learning rule that preferentially
encourages the growth of geniculo-cortical synapses into the neighborhood of those patches
of dendritic membrane that already show strong depolarization (Shatz, 1990; Cline, 1991).


===== Page 17 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendritas: Functional Considerations
445
Fig. 19.9 ORIENTATION TUNING IN A COMPLEX CELL IN VISUAL CORTEX 
The sensitivity of
the firing rate to the exact spatial arrangement of synapses in the dendritic tree is exploited by
Mel, Ruderman, and Archie (1998) to implement nonlinear superposition. This is exemplified by
replicating orientation selectivity at multiple locations in the receptive field of a complex cell in the
primary visual cortex directly excited by neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus. The dendritic tree
of the pyramidal cell includes sodium- and potassium-dependent Hodgkin-Huxley conductances.
(A) Input is provided by 1024 randomly sampled geniculate cells that activate mixed—NMDA and
AMPA—synapses (white squares; the black squares indicate inhibited cells). (B) A developmental
rule for mapping these inputs onto the cortical cell assures that geniculate input activated by a vertical
bar anywhere in the receptive field is organized in spatial clusters along the dendrites, while the
synapses activated by an obliquely oriented input activate an equal number of synapses that are
spread homogeneously throughout the dendritic tree (the 150 most active synapses are shown here).
This local activity could be caused, for instance, by simultaneous active synapses on a
neighboring patch of dendrite. An outcome of learning rules of this type is that strongly
correlated inputs are more likely to form synapses at nearby sites in the dendritic tree.
In the case of Fig. 19.9, geniculate input is correlated with respect to an ensemble of
vertically oriented bars form neighboring synapses (within less than 100 μηι of each other
along the dendrite) while geniculate inputs triggered by diagonally oriented bars are spread
throughout the dendritic tree. This results in the formation of clusters corresponding to a
set of geniculate afferents aligned in such a way as to be maximally activated by a vertical
bar and least by a horizontal one.
With many such clusters, the cell shows orientation selectivity throughout its receptive
field (Fig. 19.9D). The bar stimulus will always activate roughly the same number of
synapses; but for nonoptimal orientations these are spread diffusely throughout the cell
and their postsynaptic response is reduced. That orientation tuning is mediated by cluster


===== Page 18 =====
446 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.9 CONTINUED (C) The spatial correlation function for synaptic input as a function of
distance along the dendrite bears this out: for a vertical bar, synaptic input to the tree is correlated
in space (up to approximately 100 μηι). This spatial clustering leads to an optimal activation of
NMDA and voltage-dependent inward currents. Very little such correlation is evident for the oblique
input. (D) Averaging the spiking response of the cell for bars of different orientations presented at six
different spatial positions yields a tuning curve very similar to those recorded in the cat visual cortex
(Orban, 1984). Spatially scrambling the synapses or blocking the NMDA input and the dendritic
gNa (in this latter passive scenario, the AMPA conductances were amplified thirtyfold to compensate
for the loss of current) eliminates orientation tuning. Reprinted in modified form by permission from
Mel, Ruderman, and Archie (1998).
sensitivity caused by voltage-dependent conductances can be demonstrated in two ways:
scrambling the spatial location of all synapses (that is, the mapping from the geniculate to
the cortical cell is randomized) or blocking both the NMDA and dendritic gNa conductances,
which eliminates orientation selectivity (Fig. 19.9D). Mel, Ruderman, and Archie (1998)
conclude that the position independence of orientation tuning of complex cells in the primary
visual cortex could originate within the dendritic tree of a single cell, rather than by the
convergence of the output of many cortical simple cells as usually assumed. Functionally,
such a neuron corresponds to a polynomial threshold unit, computationally more powerful
than the standard linear threshold unit (Sec. 14.4.2).
Note that this sort of nonlinear superposition might well be commonplace. Take as an
example neurons in the most anterior portion of the inferotemporal cortex that strongly fire to
a unique view of a three-dimensional object, such as a paperclip or a face, almost anywhere
within the monkey's visual field (Logothetis and Pauls, 1995). They could achieve this
feat by exploiting the same biophysical mechanism: nonlinear interaction among adjacent
synapses in an active dendritic tree.
19.3.5 Graded Amplification of Distal Synaptic Input
In the previous chapter, we derived an analytical relationship between synaptic input to
one end of a single finite cable and the current necessary to clamp the membrane potential
at the other terminal (Eq. 18.18). As illustrated in Fig. 18.8, this current saturates once
the synaptic input is large enough to depolarize the local membrane potential close to
the synaptic reversal potential. This insight was extended to synaptic input into the distal
apical tuft of the layer 5 pyramidal cell (Fig. 18. IOC). The total somatic current that can be


===== Page 19 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations 
· 447
delivered by 500 AMPA synapses distributed throughout layers 1,2, and 3 (all the dendrites
past the first major branch point along the apical tree; see Fig. 18.6) saturates at 0.65 nA,
which is not enough to generate more than a handful of spikes per second at the soma. The
culprit is the high axial resistance of the apical trunk, causing Vm in the distal dendrite to
quickly approach the synaptic reversal potential. And this in a cell whose apical trunk is
quite thick (4.4 μιη diameter in the middle of layer 5; see Fig. 3.7) and has relatively low
input impedances (see Table 3.1). The thinner dendrites in a rat pyramidal cell (Larkman
and Mason, 1990) would give rise to even smaller values of /syn,s·
It seems odd that a large fraction of the dendrite would be dedicated to synaptic input (in
this case, originating to a large extent in higher cortical areas) that only has a minor effect on
the output of the cell. Following earlier suggestions by Spencer and Kandel (1961) and more
recent authors, Bernander, Douglas, and Koch (1994) investigated how voltage-dependent
membrane conductances in the dendrites could be used to amplify distal synaptic input in
a continuous manner.
Let us first consider the principle of the idea with the aid of a highly simplified model
of a neuron (Fig. 19.10A). The three compartments crudely mimic the distal synaptic
input (at right), the intervening apical tree (middle compartment), and the cell body, whose
membrane potential is clamped to the average potential (Vm) during spiking (Fig. 17.10B).
In the absence of any voltage-dependent membrane conductance, 7syniS will saturate (as in
Eq. 18.18).
Because such saturation reduces the dynamic bandwidth of the input, Bernander, Dou-
glas, and Koch (1994) argue that a voltage-dependent potassium conductance #κ needs to
be introduced within the synaptic compartment in order to counteract saturation. The current
does this by providing a hyperpolarizing current proportional to the degree of membrane
depolarization. We can derive the voltage dependency of this current by demanding that
(19.1)
In the absence of #κ, ¿syn.s equals /syn, the current flowing through the synapse (Fig. 19.10B).
Kirchhoff 's current conservation law demands that the current supplied by g& must equal
the difference between these two currents, that is, /κ = /Syn,s — Ayn-
From Fig. 19.10B this difference current has a parabolic shape: in the absence of synaptic
input ¿>K = 0; likewise around gsyn — 180 nS, when the curves overlap again. At
intermediate values of gsyn, activation of gK makes up for the discrepancy between the two
curves. Combining these equations, we find that the closed-form solution for the voltage
dependency of gn is a simple fractional polynomial (Fig. 19.IOC),
(19.2)
As the membrane potential depolarizes, gn activates and opposes this increase. At large
values of V, §κ inactivates, similar to the transient inactivating A type potassium current
(Sec. 9.2.1), leading to an overall linear relationship between input and output, with κ\ =
5 mV (Fig. 19.10B). Amplification of this "linearized" current, that is,
(19.3)
can be achieved by an inward current between the synaptic site and the soma. Depending
on the local membrane potential, it will generate additional current across the membrane.
The derivation of the voltage dependency of the associated noninactivating conductance
gca is tedious but straightforward (done in Fig. 19. IOC for ΚΊ = 2). Note that different


===== Page 20 =====
448 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 19.10 PRINCIPLE OF DEN-
DRITIC AMPLIFICATION Lin-
earization and amplification in
the three-compartment 
model
shown in (A) with Vsoma 
=
—50 mV. All capacitances have
been neglected. (B) "Somatic"
current /soma flowing across the
conductance g in response to
a sustained synaptic input gsyn.
Due to synaptic saturation in the
rightmost compartment, the cur-
rent is sublinear (dashed "Pas-
sive" curve). The introduction of
an inactivating potassium con-
ductance gK with the voltage de-
pendency shown in (C) linearizes
Ayn.s as a function of gsyn (dotted
"Linearized" curve). Positioning
an inward current (here gca) be-
tween the synaptic input site and
the soma amplifies the synap-
tic response (thin "Linearized
and amplified" curve). Reprinted
by permission from Bernander,
Douglas, and Koch (1994).
combinations of κ\ and KI in Eq. 19.3 give rise to different voltage dependencies for the
potassium and calcium currents, but to the same current as long as the product κ\ ΚΊ remains
constant.
By analogy with this simple model, the saturating behavior of synaptic input into the
apical tuft for the pyramidal cell of Fig. 3.7 can be eliminated by evenly spreading a
noninactivating potassium conductance throughout layers 1,2, and 3. The determination of
its exact voltage dependency is carried out using an iterative learning scheme that modifies
gvi(Vm), recomputes /syn,s, and changes its activation curve proportional to the difference
between the actual somatic current and the desired linear one (Bernander, 1993). For reasons
of stability, potassium inactivation was not considered here (unlike the simple model of
Fig. 19. IOC). Subsequently, an inward current is inserted into the membrane around the
first branch point of the apical dendrite (close to the layer 3 to layer 4 transition) and


===== Page 21 =====
19.3 Synaptic Input into Active Dendrites: Functional Considerations
449
its activation curve is derived (Fig. 19.1 IB); it resembles a noninactivating high-threshold
calcium conductance. Imaging experiments have visualized such a localized band of calcium
activity 500 μηι away from the cell body in neocortical pyramidal cells (Yuste, Delaney,
and Tank, 1994).
In the presence of these two dendritic currents, distal synaptic input into the model cell
delivers up to 1 nA of current to the soma (Fig. 19.11 A), triggering 40 spikes per second in
the absence of any other input (Fig. 19.11C). This sizable contribution is specific to apical
tuft input (Bernander, Douglas, and Koch, 1994). Basal input will not be amplified since
the calcium conductance is too far removed from the soma. The effect of the linearizing
and amplifying currents remains hidden from the cell body and does not show up in the
cell's /-/ curve.
Fig. 19.11 DENDRITIC AMPLIFICATION IN A
PYRAMIDAL CELL 
The dynamic output range
of the synaptic input into the apical tuft of
the layer 5 pyramidal cell can be expanded via
noninactivating voltage-dependent calcium and
potassium conductances (Bernander, Douglas,
and Koch, 1994). (A) The total somatic current
delivered by 500 voltage-independent synaptic
inputs into layers 1, 2, and 3 saturates quickly
(see also Fig. 18.10). Spreading a potassium con-
ductance gn into all compartments in the api-
cal tuft (beyond the major branching point of
the apical dendrite in Figs. 3.7 and 18.6) and
adding a hot spot of calcium conductances gca at
this branch point (with the voltage dependency
shown in B) linearizes and amplifies the somatic
current /soma (dashed line in A). The final input-
output relationship of the cell in (C) (computed
by either clamping the soma to the mean so-
matic membrane potential or without restraining
Vsoma in any way) reveals that the distal input
can modulate the cell's output firing rate in a sig-
nificant manner. The function of these dendritic
outward and inward currents is to linearize and
amplify distal synaptic input. In this view, all-or-
none calcium spikes are a mere epiphenomenon.
Reprinted by permission from Bernander, Dou-
glas, and Koch (1994).


===== Page 22 =====
450 
· 
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT EVENTS IN THE DENDRITIC TREE
The model treated here is quite simple and neglects many important aspects, such
as calcium current inactivation, the detailed dynamics of the conductances, the effect of
multiple calcium and potassium or other conductances, and so on. Furthermore, the exact
distribution and voltage dependency of the two currents are only derived in a heuristic
ad hoc manner. Yet the conclusion is similar to that of a biophysically more sophisticated
simulation of active currents in cerebellar Purkinje cells (DeSchutter and Bower, 1994a,b):
voltage-dependent inward dendritic currents can counteract the attenuation of distal synaptic
inputs. In the Purkinje cell, this renders the somatic EPSP independent of the position of
the synaptic input.
In this view, any all-or-none voltage events mediated by the amplifying inward current
in the dendrites reflect a mere exuberance, an epiphenomenon. What is relevant is that the
limited range of the current delivered to the soma is expanded by linearization and amplified
in a graded manner.
A much more elegant and principled way of introducing a multitude of voltage-dependent
dendritic currents is based on local, unsupervised learning rules that adjust the dynamics
and the voltage dependency of the conductances. Such algorithms are related to the synaptic
learning rules treated in Chap. 13 and achieve homeostasis by keeping the average calcium
concentration at some setpoint (LeMasson, Marder, and Abbott, 1993) or by maximizing a
quantity such as the mutual information between synaptic input and the output of the cell
(Bell, 1992). Such learning schemes can operate continuously throughout the lifetime of
the cell.
19.4 Recapitulation
It was held for a long time that voltage-dependent membrane conductances were restricted
to the cell body and axon. Given the overwhelming evidence for the presence of a variety
of sodium, calcium, and potassium conductances in the dendritic tree it is imperative that
such active membranes be included into biophysically realistic compartmental models. We
must also understand the functional role of such conductances.
Because of the great diversity of voltage-dependent currents found in so many different
cell types throughout the animal kingdom, it is difficult to summarize the experimental
data. The dendritic membrane of many neurons, in particular pyramidal cells, contains a
relatively low but homogeneous distribution of ionic channels. This is enough to support
the propagation of spikes from the axon and soma back into the dendritic arbor. That the
spike is initiated in the axon and not locally in the dendrite can be explained by the fact that
the difference in voltage threshold for spike initiation in the dendrite and Vih in the axon
(due to much higher densities of active channels and/or intrinsic activation curves that are
shifted toward more hyperpolarized values) is less than the voltage attenuation from the
dendrite to the site of spike initiation
Under certain conditions, both rapid (1 msec) all-or-none sodium spikes and slower (10-
50 msec) calcium-based action potentials can be observed in the dendritic tree. These may
or may not propagate to the soma. The extent to which faster or slower spikes are initiated
under physiological conditions in the dendrites and propagate to the soma remains unclear.
Numerous specific functions have been ascribed to active dendritic conductances, some
dependent on dendritic spikes while others work in the absence of action potentials. Among
the former resides the hypothesis that the timing of the back-propagated spike relative to the
timing of any near-simultaneous presynaptic input is a crucial variable controlling whether


===== Page 23 =====
19.4 Recapitulation · 451
the weight of the associated synapse decreases or increases. A number of researchers
simulated the ability of locally generated spikes in dendrites and spines to instantiate various
logical operations as well as temporal coincidence detection.
Two quite plausible proposals for the functional role of active inward currents in the den-
drites see them as providing the biophysical substrate either to implement a multiplicative-
like operation in a distributed fashion among spatially clustered groups of synapses (the
neuron as a sigma-pi element) or to linearize and amplify distal synaptic input selectively
so that this input can modulate the cell's discharge more effectively (dendritic amplifier).
Any such proposal raises many more questions than it answers, one of the most pertinent
one being the question of the necessary developmental and learning rules that can assemble
all of this hardware with the required temporal and spatial specificity (that is, inserting a
certain number of channels of a specific type into a specific location at some subneuronal
site). While a passive dendritic tree would require much less specificity to "wire up," its
computational abilities are far less than those of an active dendritic arbor.


