===== Page 1 =====
SYNAPTIC INPUT
How information circulates in the brain was the subject of a heated debate lasting a decade or
more among anatomists in the closing years of the last century. One camp argued that neural
tissue consisted of a continuum, a syncytium, with no discernible functional units while the
opposing view held that the brain consisted of discrete units, the nerve cells, communicating
through point-to-point contacts that Sherrington dubbed synapses. Although in principle
both views can be supported, in practice the majority of rapid communication occurs
via specific point-to-point contacts, at either chemical and electrical synapses. Ephaptic
transmission refers to nonsynaptic, electrical interactions between neurons. While such
interactions do occur, for instance, among adjacent, parallel axons across the extracellular
space, they are, by their very nature, neither very strong among any one pair of processes
nor very specific. Their functional significance—if any—is currently not known, and we
will not discuss them here (Traub and Miles, 1991; Jefferys, 1995).
In the beginning chapter, we introduced the action of fast, chemical synapses. Given
their importance, we will now return to this topic in greater depth. We first overview the
pertinent biophysical events underlying chemical synaptic transmission and some of the
vital statistics of synapses before we come to the mathematical treatment of synaptic input.
In the last section, we will summarize our knowledge of electrical synapses and their
computational role.
Most typically, a synapse consists of a presynaptic axonal terminal and a postsynaptic
process that can be located on a dendritic spine, on the trunk of a dendrite, or on the cell
body. Figure 4.1 shows some examples of synapses among cortical cells as seen through a
high-powered electron microscope. It is not easy at first to identify the synapses amid all the
curved, irregular, and densely packed structures making up the neuronal tissue. In a number
of locations, such as the retina or the thalamus, a synaptic connection is made between two
dendrites, rather than between an axon and a dendrite. These synapses are called dendro-
dendritic synapses; they are believed to be relatively rare in the adult cortex (see Sec. 5.3).
Most synapses are small and highly specialized features of the nervous system. As we will
see, a chemical synapse converts a presynaptic electrical signal into a chemical signal and
back into a postsynaptic electrical signal.
Occasionally, an axon makes a synaptic connection, called an autapse, onto its own
dendritic tree (van der Loos and Glaser, 1972; Karabelas and Purpura, 1980; Liibke et al.,
85
4


===== Page 2 =====
86 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
Fig. 4.1 ANATOMY OF CORTICAL SYNAPSES Electron micrographs of spines and synapses on
a dendrite of a spiny stellate neuron in layer 4 of the visual cortex of an adult cat. Around 300
million synapses are packed into a single cubic millimeter of this tissue, providing the substrate for
an extraordinary degree of neuronal interconnectivity. (A) 625 ultrathin sections of part of a proximal
dendrite of the neuron are shown here in this computer-assisted view. The lower end is close to the
soma. The letters and arrows correspond to the electron-microscopic views shown in the adjacent five
photographic panels. (B) The dendrite (d) gives rise to a spine neck (sn) and spine head (sp). The latter
receives an asymmetric, that is, excitatory synaptic profile at the solid arrow. These arrows always
point from the unstained presynaptic toward the postsynaptic site. (C) Two asymmetric synapses on
the dendritic shaft. (D) A symmetric, that is, inhibitory synapse (open arrow) at the branch point
shown in A. (E) A single presynaptic element makes two asymmetric synapses with a spine and a
dendrite of the cell. (F) An asymmetric synapse with the dendritic shaft. Scale bars equal 2 fim in A
and 0.5 /urn in B-F. Reprinted by permission from Anderson et al., (1994).
1996). Autapses appear to be identical to normal chemical synapses. While autapses are rare
on pyramidal cells, they are found more frequently on two subclasses of cortical inhibitory
interneurons, raising the possibility that they might have a functional role and are not just the
unfortunate consequence of an imprecise developmental rule (Tamas, Buhl, and Somogyi,
1997; Bekkers, 1998).
The literature on the properties of synaptic transmission and its molecular nature is
gargantuan and keeps growing (Kandel, Schwartz, and Jessell, 1991; Jessell and Kandel,


===== Page 3 =====
4.2 Synaptic Transmission Is Stochastic 
• 
87
1993; Stevens, 1993; for a historical overview, see Shepherd, and Erulkar, 1997). We
recommend Hille (1992) and Johnston and Wu (1995).
4.1 Neuronal and Synaptic Packing Densities
From the anatomical point of view, synapses in the central nervous system can be conve-
niently classified according to the detailed morphology of the synaptic profiles in electron-
microscopic images into one of two classes, Gray type I and Gray type II synapses (Gray,
1959). Using a combination of electrophysiological, pharmacological, and anatomical
criteria, type I synapses, also known as asymmetrical synapses, have been found to be
excitatory, while type II synapses, also known as symmetrical synapses, act in an inhibitory
manner (White, 1989; Braitenberg and Schiiz, 1991; Douglas and Martin, 1998; see Fig. 4.1).
Synapses are small. The area of contact between pre- and postsynaptic processes has a
diameter of 0.5-1.0 /zm, while the presynaptic terminal is only slightly larger. This implies
very high synaptic packing densities of around 7.2 x 108 synapses per cubic millimeter in
the mouse (Braitenberg and Schiiz, 1991). In the cat, the density has been estimated around
3x 108 per cubic millimeter (Beaulieu and Colonnier, 1985). If the synapses were located
on a three-dimensional lattice, they would be spaced a mere 1.1 /nm apart. Braitenberg and
Schiiz (1991) estimate the extent of neuronal processes in a 1-mm3-cube of cortical tissue,
coming up with the staggering amount of 4.1 km total length of axonal processes (at an
average diameter of 0.3 /u,m) and 456 m total length of dendrites (with a diameter of 0.9 /am)
in this volume. In other words, the "average" nerve cell in the mouse cortex receives input
from 7800 synapses along its 4 mm of dendrites and is connected with 4 cm of "axonal
wire" to other cells.
In higher mammals (e.g., mouse, cat, monkey, humans) the total number of neurons in
a column of unit area that reaches across all cortical layers is constant, irrespective of what
cortical area this column is taken from (the sole exception is the primary visual cortex with
2.5 times more cells). Thus, while the cortical sheet thickened by a factor of 2-3 in its
evolution from mouse to human, the number of cells below 1 mm2 of neocortex remained
fixed, in the neighborhood of around 100,000 cells below a square millimeter of cortex
(Rockel, Hiorns and Powell, 1980).
Given an approximate density of 100,000 cells per mm3 in the primate, a synaptic density
of 6 x 108 per mm3, a total surface area of about 100,000 mm2 for one hemisphere, and an
average thickness of about 2 mm, the average human cortex contains on the order of 20
billion neurons and 240 trillion synapses (2.4 x 1014), quite impressive numbers given the
current count of about 10n transistors in the memory and central processing unit (CPU) of
a modern parallel supercomputer.1
4.2 Synaptic Transmission Is Stochastic
Our view of the synapse is based upon the influential work of Katz and his collaborators
(Katz, 1969). Working on the frog neuromuscular junction, they described the basic features
1. Of course, the connectivity among the components in the CPU is three to four orders of magnitude lower than the connectivity
of a cortical cell. On the other hand, the cycle time of such machines, in the low nanosecond range, compares very favorably with
neuronal time constants in the millisecond range.


===== Page 4 =====
88
SYNAPTIC INPUT
of synaptic transmission upon which every further model has been based (Salpeter, 1987).
This canonical view is outlined in Fig. 4.2.
The neurotransmitter is prepackaged in numerous small (30-40-nm-diameter) spheres or
vesicles which reside in the presynaptic terminal. Invasion of the presynaptic axonal terminal
by an action potential causes a inrush of calcium ions (via voltage-dependent calcium
channels in the presynaptic terminal). These calcium ions—through a complex chain of
events—cause one or more synaptic vesicle to fuse with the membrane at special sites. Here,
the vesicle now releases its "quantum" of transmitter into the narrow synaptic cleft between
the pre- and postsynaptic cell membranes (Fig. 4.2), a process termed exocytosis. Calcium is
necessary for synaptic transmission. Reducing the extracellular calcium concentration can
drastically lower the efficiency of the synapse (Mintz, Sabatini, and Regehr, 1995; Borst
and Sakmann, 1996). This might have important functional consequences (Sec. 20.3).
The neurotransmitter rapidly diffuses across the 20-nm-wide synaptic cleft and binds
to postsynaptic receptors, usually ionic channels. These receptors are then responsible for
the great diversity of postsynaptic events that cause the postsynaptic membrane potential
to change. Each quantum of transmitter is released probabilistically and independently of
the others, and their postsynaptic effects add linearly. One reason for the success of Katz's
theory is that its predictions have been evaluated quantitatively (Kate, 1969). If n sites exist,
and each such site independently releases either no or only a single packet or quantum of
transmitter with an associated amplitude q and with probability p, then the probability of
k quanta being released at the entire synapse is given by the binominal distribution
(4.1)
At the frog's neuromuscular junction, where the theory was developed and the critical
experiments were performed, the probability of release can be quite low. Yet because there
exist on the order of 100 to 1000 release sites, overall synaptic transmission from the
Fig. 4.2 ELEMENTS OF SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION 
Standard model of synaptic transmission at a
chemical synapse, as elucidated by Katz for the neuromuscular junction. An action potential (far
upper left) invades the presynaptic terminal (A) and—mediated by the resultant influx of calcium
ions—causes the vesicles to fuse with the membrane and release the neurotransmitter inside the
vesicle into the synaptic cleft separating the presynaptic membrane from the postsynaptic one (B).
The neurotransmitter molecules rapidly diffuse across the cleft and bind to the receptors there. In this
illustration, they cause the opening of Na+ selective channels (C), leading to an excitatory postsynaptic
potential (far bottom left). At central synapses, a similar chain of events occurs, except that the entire
process of synaptic transmission appears to be highly stochastic. Reprinted by permission from Jessell
and Kandel (1993).


===== Page 5 =====
4.2 Synaptic Transmission Is Stochastic 
• 
89
nerve onto the muscle is very reliable. In a somewhat more general version of this model,
spontaneous release of vesicles, that is, the spontaneous postsynaptic potentials, can be
accounted for by making the probability of release time dependent such that it is very
small, but nonzero, in the absence of any input and much larger following a nerve impulse
arrival (Katz and Miledi, 1965; Barrett and Stevens, 1972).
While many of the same principles elucidated by Katz also appear to apply to more
central synapses, several crucial differences have emerged (Walmsley, Edwards, and Tracey,
1987; Redman, 1990; Stevens, 1993). The most important one concerns the reliability
and variability of synaptic transmission. At central synapses, it appears that each synaptic
bouton contains only one or a few active release zones, rather than the hundreds found
at the neuromuscular junction (Korn and Faber, 1991). In other words, upon arrival of an
action potential at an individual anatomically identified synapse, typically none or only
one vesicle is released (one-vesicle hypothesis; Korn and Faber, 1993). Because only one
vesicle is released at each synapse, the probability of release p looms large in whether or
not a presynaptic action potential results in a postsynaptic signal.
We know from in vitro studies that the probability of release at an individual synapse in
vertebrates as well as in invertebrate systems can be highly variable and is usually in the
range of between 0.1 to 0.9 (Korn, Faber, and Triller, 1986; Bekkers and Stevens, 1989;
Redman, 1990; Edwards, Konnerth, and Sakmann, 1990; Raastad, Storm, and Andersen,
1992; Laurent and Sivaramakrishnan, 1992; Hessler, Shirke and Malinow, 1993; Gulyas
etal.,1994).
The molecular origin of the probabilistic release is not yet clear. However, it is likely to
relate to the fact that exocytosis depends on a very high local calcium concentration inside
the synaptic terminal and that this depends on the vagaries of the exact spatial relationship
between calcium channels in the membrane and the location of the vesicle (Borst and
Sakmann, 1996; Bennett, 1997).
4.2.1 Probability of Synaptic Release p
Failure of synaptic transmission is vividly demonstrated in Fig. 4.3 (see also Bekkers,
Richerson, and Stevens, 1990). Using a so-called minimal stimulation paradigm, only a
single Schaffer collateral axon is stimulated. These axons typically make only a single
excitatory synapse onto CA1 pyramidal cells (Sorra and Harris, 1993). If the presynaptic -
postsynaptic connection were secure, each presynaptic stimulus generated by the electrode
should evoke a postsynaptic event. In this case, the membrane potential in the pyramidal
cells is clamped to its resting potential and the resultant excitatory postsynaptic current
(EPSC) is recorded. The five records in the left column and the four top records in the
right column in Fig. 4.3 show nine trials, of which only three lead to a postsynaptic event.
The bottom right record corresponds to the average postsynaptic event (averaged over the
nine records).
As we will discuss in Chap. 13, the probability of synaptic release p is itself subject
to change, depending on the recent history of the presynaptic terminal. Depending on the
number and timing of presynaptic action potentials, p can either decrease, as in long-term
depression, or increase, as in long-term potentiation. p also varies from one synapse to
the next. This behavior might well be different from one synaptic type to the next (e.g.,
thalamo-cortical versus intracortical synapses; Stratford et al., 1996). Understanding the
dynamics of p and its relationship to synaptic plasticity has been a hot research topic of the
last few years.


===== Page 6 =====
90 
• 
SYNAPT1C INPUT
Fig. 4.3 SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION Is VERY UNRELIABLE 
Synaptic transmission among central
neurons can be highly unreliable and should be thought of as a binary event with a probability of
success p, which can be as low as 0.1. This is exemplified by this recording of the excitatory inward
current caused by a single synapse, made by a Schaffer collateral ax on onto a CA1 pyramidal cell in
the mammalian hippocampal slice. The five records on the left and the top four records on the right
(30 msec long) show the postsynaptic current in response to nine stimulations of the presynaptic axon
using an electrode. Only in three trials does the presynaptic spike lead to the release of a vesicle filled
with neurotransmitter that causes a postsynaptic current to flow. The amplitude of this postsynaptic
event, if it occurs, is also highly variable. The average postsynaptic EPSC (computed over these
nine trials) is indicated on the lower right. It is not clear how the brain deals with the unreliability
present at its elementary computational units. Unpublished data from Y. Wang and C. Stevens, printed
with permission.
In the example of Fig. 4.3, the probability of release is about 0.3. This is quite remarkable,
since it implies that the connecting elements among neurons are binary but highly unreliable
circuit elements, transmitting only one out of three events. Imagine a transistor that only
conducts, that is, switches, one out of three times that a charge is dumped onto its gate.
Synapses made onto pyramidal cells in slices from sensory and motor cortex appear to
behave in an identical fashion (Smetters and Nelson, 1993; Thompson, Deuchars, and West,
1993a,b). An important caveat is that these results were not obtained under physiological
conditions in intact animals but in slices or other isolated preparations. It is possible that in
a behaving animal, various neuromodulators can significantly boost or reduce p.


===== Page 7 =====
4.2 Synaptic Transmission Is Stochastic 
• 
91
The lack of reliability of synapses should be compared to a reliability of transmission
among electronic circuits, which is many, many orders of magnitude higher.2 In principle, the
nervous system could compensate for such unreliable components by exploiting redundancy
(Moore and Shannon, 1956; von Neumann, 1956), that is, by using many parallel synapses.
Yet, it is common for a cortical axon to make only one or two synaptic contacts onto its target
cell (Gulyas et al., 1993; Sorra and Harris, 1993). The brain must have found a different
way in which it deals with such unreliable synaptic components.
The reliability of synaptic transmission in the central nervous system is further compro-
mised by the fact that the variability in the amplitude of the postsynaptic response to the
release of a single packet of neurotransmitters is much larger than at peripheral synapses.
Thus, even if a packet of neurotransmitters is released, a number of factors, such as the
variation in the size of the vesicle and the number of postsynaptic receptors, cause the
postsynaptic response to this presynaptic event to vary from one trial to the next (see
the three successful instances of transmission in Fig. 4.3; Bekkers, Richerson, and Stevens,
1990; Larkman, Stratford, and Jack, 1991). In the study by Mason, Nicoll, and Stratford
(1991), the variance in the size of the EPSP—evoked in one rat neocortical pyramidal cell
by electrically activating a nearby pyramidal cell —is as large as its mean (Fig. 4.4), with
the largest EPSP (2.08 mV) about 40 times larger than the smallest (0.05 mV). In these
experiments, the number of synapses between the pair of cells recorded from is not known
(see also Stratford et al., 1996).
We defer a discussion of the possible functional role of the stochastic nature of synaptic
transmission to Sec. 13.5.5.
4.2.2 What Is the Synaptic Weight?
Let us briefly address the thorny issue of what exactly constitutes synaptic weight or synaptic
strength. In the neural network literature, this is a single scalar, usually labeled wtj or Ttj
(see Sec. 14.4). However, synapses are very complicated devices, which are characterized
by numerous parameters. Traditionally—as expressed by Eq. 4.1—biophysicists have used
three scalar variables to describe a synapse: the number of quantal release sites n, the
probability of synaptic release per site p, some measure of the postsynaptic effect of the
synapse q. Depending on the experiment, q can be the peak conductance, the maximal
synaptic current at some potential, or the peak EPSP. Of course, in real life, n is drawn from
some probability distribution (usually binominal or Poisson), p depends on the previous
spiking history, and q itself is a function of time (such as the time-dependent conductance
change of Eq. 1.21).
One possible relationship between these state-dependent functions and the synaptic
weight is the expected or mean postsynaptic action, computed by averaging over a Poisson
distributed presynaptic spike distribution with
(4.2)
We shall return to this in Chap. 13. However, one should never forget that the averaging
assumptions used to compute this weight might not be relevant to the brain under its normal
operating conditions (for instance, since the input is oscillatory or tends to fire in bursts or
because its stochastic nature is critical).
2. Indeed, in digital CMOS technology, where the signal gain at an inverter, the elementary computational unit, is in the
neighborhood of 15 to 20, the thermal fluctuations—on the order of 0.65 mV at room temperatures—are so much less than the
switching voltage, that the probability of switching is about 1 — 10~14. Given that each inverter restores the input signal, the
effect of thermal noise does not accumulate along a cascade of inverters.


===== Page 8 =====
92 . 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
Fig. 4.4 POSTSYNAPTIC AMPLITUDE Is HIGHLY
VARIABLE Fluctuations in the amplitude of EP-
SPs observed in a pyramidal cell by evoking an
action potential in a nearby pyramidal cell. Both
pairs of neurons are located in layer 2/3 of brain
slices taken from rat visual cortex. (A) Four indi-
vidual sweeps from the same synaptic connection.
The EPSP amplitude over the entire population of
cell pairs is 0.55 ± 0.49 mV. (B) Average of 2008
such sweeps, together with the presynaptic record,
showing that the EPSP in the postsynaptic cell is
caused by the presynaptic spike. Due to technical
reasons, no events less than 0.03 mV—and, in par-
ticular, no failures as in Fig. 4.3—can be recorded.
Reprinted by permission from Mason, Nicoll, and
Stratford (1991).
In summary, because of the highly probabilistic nature of the release of neurotransmitter,
compounded by the variability in the size of the postsynaptic responses to this neurotrans-
mitter, a basic and unavoidable feature of interneuronal communications using chemical
synapses is their lack of reliability and consistency. As pointed out by Stevens (1994), it
is crucial that any theory of the brain account for this fundamental property of neuronal
hardware. We will return to the theme of stochastic computations in the brain in Chap. 15.
4.3 Neurotransmitters
The plethora of time courses, amplitudes, and types of actions seen in synaptic transmission
is the result of the interplay between different neurotransmitters, stored in vesicles at
the presynaptic terminal, and different synaptic receptors, inserted in the postsynaptic
membrane.
There exist three major chemical classes of neurotransmitters, amino acids, biogenic
amines, and neuropeptides (Table 4.1). Fast synaptic transmission in the central nervous


===== Page 9 =====
4.3 Neurotransmitters 
• 
93
system of vertebrates is mainly mediated by amino acids, the major excitatory neuro-
transmitters being glutamate and aspartate, and the major inhibitory neurotransmitters
being y-amino-butyric acid (GAB A) and glycine. The onset of the associated excitatory
or inhibitory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs or IPSCs), forming the principal substrate of
neural computation, is rapid (< 1 msec) and their durations are relatively short (<20 msec).
All these neurotransmitters also have slow effects.
The list of biogenic amines that can modulate the response of the cell to synaptic
input includes acetylcholine (ACh), norepinephrine (also referred to as nor adrenaline),
dopamine, serotonin and histamine. Usually, their actions have a much slower onset than the
action of amino acids and may persist hundreds of milliseconds to seconds. However, some
neuroactive substances, such as acetylcholine, cause fast (e.g., nicotinic-receptor-mediated
fast synaptic transmission at the vertebrate neuromuscular junction) as well as slow (e.g.,
muscarinic-receptor-mediated changes in potassium conductances) effects, depending on
which receptor is present in the postsynaptic membrane.
A long and ever-growing list ofpeptides, that is, short chains of amino acids, modulates
the response of neurons over very long time scales (that is, minutes). Hormones, that is
substances that are transported via the bloodstream (in vertebrates) or the hemolymph (in
invertebrates), also affect neuronal responses, with the distinction between the actions of
neuropeptides and hormones being a gradual one. These neuroactive substances, frequently
also termed neuromodulators, are usually colocalizedwith conventional fast neurotransmit-
ters in individual neurons. Indeed, sometimes two or more neuropeptides can be colocalized
within a conventional terminal in different vesicles (Kupfermann, 1991). Release can be
differential, in the sense that the release of the vesicles containing the modulators requires a
higher presynaptic firing rate than release of the vesicles harboring the fast neurotransmitter.
Dozens of peptides and hormones have been identified in small invertebrate ganglia that
are accessible to neurochemical methods (Marder, Christie, and Kilman, 1995; see also
Fig. 20.5), and it is unlikely that the situation in the cortex will be much simpler.
The concentration of these substances can be thought of as the closest equivalent to a
global variable in the brain. While a global variable within a computer program is defined
for the entire program (rather than for any particular procedure), similarly, release of a long-
lasting neuromodulatory substance will affect all neurons within a given distance from the
site of release. As we will see in the next section, neurons possess receptors for a variety
of different neurotransmitters and modulators, giving rise to a very complex and possibly
redundant system for modulating the electrical responses of neurons over a great variety

{
  "table_name": "TABLE 4.1",
  "description": "Principal Neurotransmitters",
  "columns": ["Amino Acids", "Biogenic Amines", "Neuropeptides"],
  "rows": [
    {"Amino Acids": "Glutamate", "Biogenic Amines": "ACh", "Neuropeptides": "Substance P"},
    {"Amino Acids": "Aspartate", "Biogenic Amines": "Dopamine", "Neuropeptides": "Somatostatin"},
    {"Amino Acids": "GABA", "Biogenic Amines": "Noradrenaline", "Neuropeptides": "Proctolin"},
    {"Amino Acids": "Glycine", "Biogenic Amines": "Serotonin", "Neuropeptides": "Neurotensin"},
    {"Amino Acids": null, "Biogenic Amines": "Histamine", "Neuropeptides": "Luteinizing-hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH)"}
  ]
}

Three main chemical classes of neurotransmitters found in the nervous systems of all animals. Amino acids are usually involved
in fast (glutamate/aspartate) excitatory or inhibitory (GABA/glycine) synaptic traffic. Many substances, such as glutamate or
acetylcholine (ACh), have fast and transient as well as slow and long-lasting effects, depending on the postsynaptic receptor. The
very large number of neurnpeptidef;, of which only a handful are listed, act on the time scale of seconds to minutes.


===== Page 10 =====
94
SYNAPTIC INPUT
of different spatial and temporal scales (for reviews see Nicoll, 1988; Kupfermann, 1991;
Hille, 1992; Bourne and Nicoll, 1993; McCormick, 1998). This implies that cells can be
"addressed" using a unique bar-code-like combination of neuromodulators and receptors
(see Sec. 20.5).
4.4 Synaptic Receptors
Postsynaptic receptors come in two different flavors (Fig. 4.5). lonotropic receptors are
directly coupled to ionic channels, which open and permit certain types of ions to cross
the postsynaptic membrane. Such channels, also called ligand-gated channels, include
the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor in the peripheral nervous system of vertebrates and
many invertebrates, the GAB AA receptor complex, and the ubiquitous glutamate W-methyl-
D-aspartate (NMDA) and non-NMDA channel complexes (Table 4.2). Given the close
point-to-point connection between the presynaptic release zone and the postsynaptic re-
ceptor (Fig. 4.1) and the direct coupling between the receptor and the channel (Figs. 4.2
A) Channel Using Intrinsic Sensor
B) Channel Using Remote Sensor
Fig. 4.5 IONOTROPIC AND METABOTROPic SYNAPTIC ACTION 
(A) Fast excitatory and inhibitory
input mediated by a tightly linked ionotropic receptor-channel complex. Binding of the neurotrans-
mitter leads to a rapid opening of the associated ionic channel. (B) In the case of a metabotropic
receptor, binding of the neurotransmitter leads to activation of a second messenger substance (such as
Ca2+ ions). This messenger molecule, possibly after diffusing to its site of action, binds to a particular
ionic channel and will modulate its properties. While the action of the ionotropic receptor is point
to point and rapid, both the onset and the duration of the metabotropic mediated synaptic input are
usually slow and its action can extend over larger distances. Both receptor types can be colocalized.
Reprinted by permission from Hille (1992).


===== Page 11 =====
4.4 Synaptic Receptors
95
{
  "table_name": "TABLE 4.2",
  "description": "Synaptic Receptor Types",
  "columns": ["Neurotransmitter", "Receptor", "Esyn (mV)", "Type", "Comments"],
  "rows": [
    {"Neurotransmitter": "Glutamate", "Receptor": "Non-NMDA", "Esyn (mV)": 0, "Type": "I", "Comments": "Very fast"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "Glutamate", "Receptor": "NMDA", "Esyn (mV)": 0, "Type": "I", "Comments": "Voltage dependent"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "GABA", "Receptor": "GABA_A", "Esyn (mV)": -70, "Type": "I", "Comments": "Fast inhibition"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "GABA", "Receptor": "GABA_B", "Esyn (mV)": -100, "Type": "M", "Comments": "Slow inhibition"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "ACh", "Receptor": "Nicotinic", "Esyn (mV)": -5, "Type": "I", "Comments": "Neuromuscular junction"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "ACh", "Receptor": "Muscarinic", "Esyn (mV)": -90, "Type": "M", "Comments": "Decreases K conductance"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "Noradrenaline", "Receptor": "α1", "Esyn (mV)": -100, "Type": "M", "Comments": "Increases K conductance"},
    {"Neurotransmitter": "Noradrenaline", "Receptor": "β1", "Esyn (mV)": -100, "Type": "M", "Comments": "Decreases K conductance"}
  ]
}


List of major types of synaptic receptors and the associated neurotransmitters. The four top listings are the dominant transmitters
used for fast communication in the vertebrate central nervous system. The synaptic reversal potential Esyn is specified in millivolts
absolute potential. The type corresponds to either ionotropic (T) or metabotropic (M) receptors.
and 4.5A), the action of ionotropic receptors is rapid and transient. They implement the
computations underlying rapid perception and motor control.
Binding of neurotransmitter to metabotropic receptors, on the other hand, leads to the
activation of some intracellular molecules, termed second messengers, which in turn may
induce a conformational change in some ionic channel and therefore in its kinetic behavior.
It has been estimated that the mammalian genome has devoted about 1000 of its 105
genes to these receptors. They could encode for a truly staggering number of different
metabotropic receptors. At the molecular level, all of these receptors span the cell membrane
in a snakelike fashion, crossing the bilipid membrane seven times (Chap. 8). These receptors
connect with so-called G proteins just inside the cell membrane. G proteins, named
because they bind guanosine triphosphate (GTP), include at least 20 different proteins
and are among the most versatile nanomachines in biology (Clapham, 1996). Acting on
perhaps 100 different receptors throughout the brain, the muscles, the glands, and other
organs, they recognize photons (rhodopsin) and odor molecules as well as conventional
neurotransmitters, such as glutamate, GABA, and ACh (Ross, 1989; Hille, 1992). Activation
of these receptors is linked via a cascade of biochemical reactions to the ionic channel that is
modulated (Fig. 4.5B). Functionally, these multiple intracellular steps can greatly amplify
the signal. Thus, a single occupied receptor might activate many G proteins, each one
of which can, in turn, activate many other proteins, and so on. Second messengers can
act to increase or to decrease the postsynaptic membrane conductance, in particular for
potassium.
An important distinction between ionotropic and metabotropic receptors is their time
scale. While members of the former class act rapidly, terminating within a very small fraction
of a second, the speed of the latter class is limited by diffusion. Biochemical reactions can
happen nearly instantaneously at the neuronal time scale. However, if a synaptic input to a
metabotropic receptor induces the release of some messenger, such as calcium ions, which
have to diffuse to the cell body in order to "do their thing," the time scale is extended to
seconds or longer. Section 9.3 details the involvement of one such metabotropic receptor
type in the control of firing frequency adaptation.
It is difficult to overemphasize the importance of modulatory effects involving complex
intracellular biochemical pathways. The sound of stealthy footsteps at night can set our heart
to pound, sweat to be released, and all our senses to be at a maximum level of alertness,


===== Page 12 =====
96 • 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
all actions that are caused by second messengers. They underlie the difference in sleep-
wake behavior, in affective moods, and in arousal, and they mediate the induction of long-
term memories. It is difficult to conceptualize what this amazing adaptability of neuronal
hardware implies in terms of the dominant Turing machine paradigm of computation.
Because of the indirect coupling between receptor and effector—in particular if the
second messengers involved have to diffuse within the postsynaptic cell—the onset of their
effects is usually slow but long-lasting and is not restricted to a single site. They modulate
the properties of groups of neurons over long time scales, that is, hundreds of milliseconds
to seconds, minutes, and longer. Yet, this view does not do justice to the overlapping time
scales of ionotropic and metabotropic receptors. If receptor and effector are spatially close
to each other, both can act at the same time scale. For instance, a ligand-gated event such
as a glutamate-induced NMDA depolarization lasts for 50-100 msec, approximately the
same duration as a second-messenger-mediated hyperpolarization caused by activation of
GABAg receptors.
4.5 Synaptic Input as Conductance Change
Activation of an ionotropic receptor permits the associated ionic channel in the postsynaptic
channel to change its configuration, thereby allowing the passage of ions across the
membrane. Given the small diameter of the open channel, about 3-7 A, channels are highly
selective for certain ions that diffuse through the open channel down their electrochemical
gradient, leading to a change in postsynaptic potential. Chapter 8 will treat ionic channels
in more detail. At this point, all we need to know is that individual channels act as binary
elements, having zero conductance in their closed state and a fixed, nonzero conductance
value in their open state (ranging between 5 and 50 pS, depending on the channel type).3
The graded nature of the observed postsynaptic conductance change comes from the
simultaneous openings of tens to hundreds of these binary elements. How long these
channels stay open—the determinant of the duration of synaptic input—depends on two
factors: (1) the presence of active uptake systems in the synaptic cleft that can remove the
neurotransmitter and degrade or recycle it, and (2) the internal kinetics of the channel.
4.5.1 Synaptic Reversal Potential in Series with an Increase in Conductance
Given the distribution of ions in the intracellular and extracellular cytoplasm and the
specificity of the ionic channels, each type of synaptic input has an associated Nernst
potential, also referred to as the ionic battery, or ionic reversal potential, £syn. The origin
of this potential—crucial to neuronal excitability— relates to the equilibrium established
between the concentration gradient of the different ions across the neuronal membrane
and the electrical force opposing this gradient. Using the Boltzmann equation of classical
statistical mechanics, the value of the synaptic potential at body temperature for a channel
permeable to a single ionic species is given by the Nernst equation
(43)
where E&yn is measured in millivolts, z is the valence of the ions involved (positive
for Ca2+, Na+ and K+ ions, negative for Cl~ ions) and [S]0 is the extra- and [5],- the
3. We here neglect the fact that many channels have more than one open state; this is usually described by saying that a
channel has conductance sublevels.


===== Page 13 =====
4.5 Synaptic Input as Conductance Change 
• 
97
intracellular concentration of the ionic species considered. The meaning of Esyn becomes
clearer if one considers that in the absence of any other ionic species, the membrane potential
across the open channel would stabilize at £"syn. At this potential, the ions on both sides of the
membrane are in a dynamic equilibrium, with no net flux of ions through the channel. Many
channels are permeable to a mixture of two or more ionic species, requiring a more complex
expression, such as the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz (GHK) voltage equation (Goldman, 1943;
Hodgkin and Katz, 1949; Hille, 1992).
As we saw in the first chapter, the opening of a synaptic channel corresponds, from
an electrical point of view, to an increase in the membrane conductance in series with
the ionic reversal battery £syn (Fig. 1.7A). The key insight, namely that the binding of
neurotransmitters causes an increase in the conductance of the membrane, came from
research carried out by Fatt, Katz, and Eccles in the 1950s as they were working on the
neuromuscular junction (Eccles, 1964,1990).
The lumped effect of many ionic channels opening in response to the binding of the
transmitter molecules to the receptor is treated as a time-varying change in the membrane
conductance gsyn(0 in series with the synaptic reversal potential Esyn. This conductance
change gives rise to a transient ionic current through the open channels, transporting charge
across the membrane. How does the synaptic current relate to the conductance of the channel
and to the membrane potential?
In general, this relationship is a complex one. One such description is referred to as
the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz current equation (Goldman, 1943; Hodgkin and Katz, 1949;
Hille, 1992; see Eq. 9.1). Assuming that ions cross the membrane without interacting with
each other and that the potential drops linearly across the membrane, the GHK current
equation expresses a nonlinear dependency between the ionic current and the membrane
voltage. This nonlinearity, referred to as rectification since current passes more easily in
one direction than in the other, is caused by the nonhomogeneous distribution of ions across
the membrane and increases with increasing concentration gradient.
However, in general, a linear relationship is observed between synaptic current and
the membrane potential (with the important exception of the NMDA receptor discussed
below). In fact, once the reversal potential has been accounted for, Ohm's law appears as a
satisfactory first-order description of the synaptic current, and this is the one we adopted at
the beginning of this book (e.g., Eq. 1.18),
(4-4)
It is important to realize that the synaptic current depends on Vm. Only under certain
conditions can a synaptic input be approximated as a constant current source (Fig. 1.7B).
This seemingly trivial observation has a number of important consequences, outlined
further below as well as in Chaps. 5 and 18. Equation 4.4 is a purely phenomenological
description of the current as a function of the membrane potential and is not derived
from first principles. Experimentally, linearity is not necessarily assured and needs to be
experimentally confirmed (as, for instance, in Hestrin et al., 1990a, for the fast, non-NMDA
input onto hippocampal pyramidal cells).
A synapse is excitatory if the synaptic current /syn depolarizes thepostsynaptic membrane
by giving rise to an EPSP. Activation of an inhibitory synapse, on the other hand, can either
clamp the potential to remain around Vrest or cause an outward current to flow, thereby giving
rise to an IPSP that hyperpolarizes the cell. In the language of the electrophysiologist, an
excitatory synapse injects current into the cell; such inward currents are represented, by
convention, as negative currents. For synapses with gsyn > 0, an excitatory synapse has a


===== Page 14 =====
98 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
reversal potential more positive than the resting potential, while an inhibitory synapse has
a reversal potential close to or negative to the resting potential.4
Figure 4.6 illustrates the typical sequence of a fast EPSP followed by a fast and a slow
IPSP seen in a cortical pyramidal cell upon electrical stimulation of the fibers projecting
into cortex. The hyperpolarizing potentials are caused by inhibition acting on two separate
inhibitory receptors (GABA^ and GABAg) discussed further below.
4.5.2 Conductance Decreasing Synapses
In general, the release of neurotransmitters at an ionotropic synapse increases the postsy-
naptic membrane conductance, that is, gsyn (t) > 0. At metabotropic receptors, this need not
be the case. A well-known example is the loss of firing rate adaptation seen in hippocampal
neurons following the stimulation of fibers releasing noradrenaline. This input leads to
the reduction of a calcium-dependent potassium conductance (Fig. 9.9). Another example
is the change occurring in the responsivity of thalamic relay cells when mammals wake
Fig. 
4.6 SYNAPTIC POTENTIALS
GENERATED IN A CORTICAL CELL
(A) Electrical stimulation of axons
ascending into the cerebral cortex
generates a very rapid EPSP, termi-
nating within 10 msec, followed by
two IPSPs, an early fast one and a late
slow one. This sequence of events is
common to most cortical cells upon
stimulation of their extracortical af-
ferents (Douglas, Martin, and Whit-
teridge, 1991; Tseng and Haberly,
1988). (B) and (D) The inhibition
is caused by recruitment of cortical
interneurons, which release GABA
acting on two distinct synaptic recep-
tors. The early IPSP is due to activa-
tion of the ionotropic GABA/i recep-
tors, causing an increase in a chlo-
ride membrane conductance, while
the late IPSP is due to GABAB re-
ceptor activation. This metabotropic
synapse causes a hyperpolarizing
potassium conductance to open. (C)
Applying the substance phaclofen to
the slice blocks the GABAs recep-
tors while not affecting the GABA^-
mediated IPSP. The constant current
pulse at the beginning of the trace
(see B) assesses the extent to which
the input resistance changes during
application of phaclofen (it does not).
Reprinted by permission from Mc-
Cormick(1998).
4. However, under certain circumstances inhibitory input can act functionally as if it were exciting a cell and vice versa
(Lytton and Sejnowski, 1991).


===== Page 15 =====
4.6 Excitatory NMDA and Non-NMDA Synaptic Input 
• 
99
up (that is, the switch from slow-wave sleep to awake, attentive state). Activation of a
variety of different metabotropic receptors (e.g., muscarinic ACh receptors, receptors for
adrenaline and histamine; McCormick, 1992) causes a 10-mV or greater increase in the
resting potential. This sustained depolarization, triggered by the reduction of a potassium
"leak" conductance (that is, g < 0), is sufficient to switch the cell from a bursting into a
single action potential firing mode with important consequences for information processing
(Steriade and McCarley, 1990; McCormick, 1992).
In summary, the postsynaptic effect of a chemical synapse involves a transient change
gsynCO in the membrane conductance in series with a synaptic battery Esyn. Before we
discuss the biophysical consequences of this further, let us summarize the key properties of
the most common forms of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic input.
4.6 Excitatory NMDA and Non-NMDA Synaptic Input
The predominant fast, excitatory neurotransmitter of the vertebrate central nervous system is
the amino acid glutamate, activating synaptic receptor channels on nearly every nerve cell as
well as on many of the supporting glia cells. In the peripheral nervous system of vertebrates, 
glutamate synapses are nearly unknown. Here the dominant fast neurotransmitter is ACh.
Invertebrates use ACh as well as glutamate for fast transmission of information throughout
their nervous systems.
Applying glutamate or its close relative aspartate onto central neurons causes a fast
depolarizing event, providing the substrate for the fast excitatory traffic in the central
nervous system. However, receptors sensitive to glutamate turn out to be a diverse lot and
their various subtypes are now being expressed using molecular techniques (Sommer and
Seeburg, 1992; Westbrook, 1994). About two dozen glutamate receptor subunits have been
cloned from the rat brain, some of which are ionotropic and some metabotropic receptors
(Dingledine and Bennett, 1995). These are expressed in different locations throughout
the brain and differ in their kinetics, degree of voltage dependency, and so on. Thus, quite
different from commercial analog and digital CMOS highly integrated silicon circuits, where
the degree of specialization of transistors and circuit types across the chip is minimal, each
circuit in an animal may use a slightly different synaptic subtype (possibly also depending
on the history of the animal as well as on its developmental stage).
The study of glutamate receptors and their associated synaptic properties is currently in
a very active phase. We summarize here the pertinent facts of this unfolding story (Ascher
and Nowak, 1988; Thomson, Girdlestone, and West, 1988; Bekkers and Stevens, 1989;
Hestrin et al, 1990a,b; Mason, Nicoll, and Stratford, 1991; Williams and Johnston, 1991;
Stern, Edwards, and Sakmann, 1992; Jonas and Spruston, 1994; Destexhe, Mainen, and
Sejnowski, 1994a).
The most important distinction among excitatory glutamate synapses is based on apply-
ing various pharmacological substances to the receptor and measuring their action. One set
of these agents, called generically agonists, activates one subclass of glutamate receptors,
with different chemical substances binding to different receptors, like keys fitting into locks.
The different receptors are usually identified by the name of their agonists.
In the case of the glutamate-sensitive receptor, two major functional subclasses exist
(as mentioned above, many more molecular subtypes have been cloned, but their specific
functions are not yet known). One receptor binds kainate, quisqualate, and a-amino-
3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxalone propionic acid (AMPA). The other class of glutamate


===== Page 16 =====
100 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
receptors can be selectively activated by NMDA. In other words, dumping NMDA onto
the synapse causes it to bind to the NMDA receptor and the associated synapse to open.
It is important to realize that NMDA, AMPA, and the other agonists do not exist within
the nervous system but are pharmacological substances used by biophysicists to identify
the receptors. In the brain, all glutamate synapses, regardless of their receptor types, are
activated by the presynaptic release of glutamate. Because we are not interested in the
various subtypes and the proper nomenclature is still being debated, we simply refer
throughout this book to NMDA and non-NMDA synapses.
Other pharmacological agents, so-called antagonists, very specifically block the various
subclasses of glutamate receptors, allowing us to isolate the contributions of the non-NMDA
and the NMDA receptors to EPSPs. For instance, the substance 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-
2,3-dione (CNQX) blocks the fast, non-NMDA synapse without interfering with the NMDA
synapse, while DL-2-amino-5-phosphono-valeric acid (APV) blocks the slower NMDA
component without blocking the non-NMDA component. Again, antagonists do not occur
naturally in the brain but are used as a tool to investigate synaptic transmission.
Once glutamate binds to the AMPA receptor the associated channel opens, allowing
monovalent cations, mainly Na+ and K+, to flow across the membrane. The synaptic
reversal potential of this synapse is about 0 mV (absolute potential). At a non-NMDA
receptor, the postsynaptic channels activate very rapidly. The synaptic current peaks within
a few hundred microseconds, with an exponential decay whose time constant varies between
0.5 and 3 msec (Hestrin, Sah, and Nicoll, 1990b; Hestrin, 1992; Trussel, Zhang, and Raman,
1993; Jonas, Major, and Sakmann, 1993).
The time course of the synaptic conductance increase can in general be described by an
nth-state Markov process with n(n — 1) time constants (Destexhe, Mainen, and Sejnowski,
1994a; Johnston and Wu, 1995). Although efficient implementations for these schemes are
known (Destexhe, Mainen and Sejnowksi, 1994b), in general simplified expressions are
used, the most common being the a function of Eq. 1.21 (Rail, 1967; Jack, Noble, and
Tsien, 1975),
(4-5)
The constant is chosen such that gsyn(tpeak) — gpeak> that is, const = gpeak^Apeak- The
function g(t) decays to 1% of its peak value at about t — 7.64fpeak. Using fpeak — 0.5 msec
with a conductance change of between 0.25 and 1 nS reproduces well the observed time
course of the non-NMDA input (Fig. 4.7).
Different from the non-NMDA receptor, with whom it usually appears to be colocalized,
the amplitude of the conductance change associated with the NMDA synapse depends on
the membrane potential. Figures 4.8A and 4.9A illustrate the nonlinear instantaneous /-
V relationship. What is apparent is the negative slope-conductance region between —70
and —40 mV. This negative slope is conferred upon the NMDA current by the action of
Mg2+ ions, which are naturally present in the extracellular environment. If the postsynaptic
potential is at rest and glutamate is bound to the NMDA receptor, the channel opens but is
physically obstructed by Mg2+ ions. As the membrane is depolarized, the Mg2+ ions move
out, and the channel becomes permeable for a mixture of Na+, K+ and a small number of
Ca2+ ions. The fraction of the current carried by Ca2+ ions through the NMDA channel
is about 7% (at negative potentials), five times the fractional calcium current through the
voltage-independent glutamate channel (Schneggenburger et al., 1993). If the Mg2+ ions
are removed from the saline solution bathing the neurons in an experimental slice setup,
the synapse looses its nonlinearity and becomes purely ohmic (solid line in Fig. 4.8A).
The synapse has a reversal potential close to zero. Another difference compared to the


===== Page 17 =====
4.6 Excitatory NMDA and Non-NMDA Synaptic Input 
• 
101
Fig. 4.7 TIME COURSE OF EXCITATORY SYNAPTIC INPUT Time course of the non-NMDA and
NMDA excitatory inputs recorded from cells in hippocampal slices. (A) The excitatory postsynaptic
current, obtained by clamping the cell to —40 mV and applying glutamate, is shown in the absence
(Cont) and presence of the non-NMDA channel blocker CNQX. The remaining current is mediated via
NMDA receptors. By convention, depolarizing inward currents are represented as negative currents.
(B) Closeup of the time course of the NMDA current (labeled CNQX) and the non-NMDA current,
obtained by clamping the EPSC to -100 mV and thereby blocking all NMDA channels. The NMDA
component continues to rise as the non-NMDA component has started to decay already. (C) A
semilogarithmic plot of the NMDA-mediated current demonstrates that the decay of the NMDA
current is not well fitted by a single exponential (at 31 ° C). (D) The decay of the non-NMDA current
(from the curve labeled "—100 mV" in B) is well fitted by a single exponential with a time constant
of 7.2 msec (at 24° C). Reprinted by permission from Hestrin, Sah, and Nicoll (1990b)
non-NMDA input is the much slower time course of the NMDA-mediated conductance
change due to the intrinsic kinetics of the receptor. Both rise and decay times are at least
a factor of 10 times slower, with rise times on the order of 10 msec. Indeed, maximum
NMDA receptor activation occurs when the non-NMDA conductance change has almost
subsided (Fig. 4.7C).
The NMDA conductance can be derived from a model in which the binding rate constant
of Mg2+ varies as an exponential function of voltage (Ascher and Nowak, 1988; Jahr and
Stevens, 1990). Modeling the time dependency by the difference between two exponentials,
we have
(4.6)
with n — 80 and T2 = 0.67 msec, i] — 0.33/mM, y = 0.06/mV and gn «a 0.2 to
0.4 nS (at 35° C). The physiological concentration of Mg2+ ions is around 1 mM.
The synaptic current is obtained by multiplying this conductance by the membrane
potential (since the associated Esyn ~ 0). Figure 4.8B shows the time course of an
experimentally measured NMDA current as compared with this model.5 Better fits can
be obtained by using more complex models (Clements and Westbrook, 1991).
5. The temperature at which electrophysiological experiments occur has a significant impact on the dynamics of neuronal
processes. Experiments on brain slices and cultured neurons are generally carried out around 22-25° C, significantly below the


===== Page 18 =====
102
SYNAPTIC INPUT
Fig. 4.8 VOLTAGE DEPENDENCY OF THE NMDA CURRENT Current-voltage relationship asso-
ciated with the NMDA receptor. Because of the action of Mg2+ ions in blocking the underlying
channel, the associated postsynaptic conductance increase is voltage dependent, different from other
fast sy naptic inputs. (A) Current-voltage relationship of the NMDA current in the absence and presence
of 0.5 mM magnesium. While the current behaves relatively ohmic in the absence of magnesium,
under physiological concentrations of Mg2+ a strong voltage dependency is revealed. Reprinted
by permission from Nowak et al. (1984). (B) Experimentally recorded normalized NMDA current
in a brain slice kept at room temperature (Hessler, Shirke, and Malinow, 1993; heavy jagged line).
Superimposed is the current computed from Eq. 4.6, with zj = 145.5 and 12 = 4.1 msec. Unpublished
data from A. Destexhe, printed with permission.
(continued) 37° C baseline in mammals. In general, the absolute conductances associated with ionic channels vary little with
the temperature. However, the rates with which these channels change conformation (Chap. 8) speed up considerably at higher
temperatures. The extent of this sensitivity is characterized by the temperature coefficient Qig, defined as the increase in rate as
the temperature changes by 10° C. Hestrin, Sah, and Nicoll (1990b) report an average temperature coefficient associated with the
decay time constant of the fast non-NMDA current of Qio = 2.7± 0.8, with a decay equal to 7.9 msec at 26.5° C. This implies
a much faster decay of 7.9 G10 
= 2.78 msec at 37° C in the animal, which explains why the NMDA current plotted
in Fig. 4.9B, obtained at 23° C, has larger values of T\ and TI than those indicated here.


===== Page 19 =====
4.6 Excitatory MMDA and Non-NMDA Synaptic Input 
• 
103
Fig. 4.9 EXCITATORY POSTSYNAPTIC CURRENTS 
Excitatory postsynaptic current recorded at the soma
of inhibitory stellate cells in slices of rat visual cortex in response to the synaptic input, recorded by
clamping the membrane potential to three different values (Stern, Edwards, and Sakmann, 1992). The
EPSCs are measured at three different clamp potentials. (A) As discussed in the text, the EPSC mainly
reflects the time course of the underlying synaptic channels, while the time course of the EPSP is dictated by
the electrotonic structure of the postsynaptic site. (B) Pharmacological dissection of the two components of
a stimulus-evoked EPSC. Here, the fast component is blocked by application of the non-NMDA antagonist
CNQX, while in (C) the slow NMDA-mediated component is blocked by APV. Because the experiments
were performed at room temperatures, EPSCs in the living animal will be faster. Reprinted by permission
from Stern, Edwards, and Sakmann (1992).
As discussed in Sec. 1.4, the voltage-clamp paradigm allows the physiologist to measure
the current needed to keep the membrane at a fixed potential (the clamp potential Vciamp)-
This technique was developed by Marmont (1949), Cole (1949), and Hodgkin, Huxley, and
Katz (1949) to record accurately the membrane current flowing across the axonal membrane.
Using a high-gain feedback amplifier, enough current is supplied to the membrane to
stabilize the potential at Vciamp» even if the membrane conductance is changing rapidly (as
during an action potential; see Chap. 6). The basic circuit is presented in an highly idealized
form in Fig. 4.10. For a primer on the theory of voltage clamping, consult Appendix A in
Johnston and Wu (1995).
When voltage clamping is applied to a cell receiving synaptic input, the clamp current
7ciamp needed to keep the membrane at Vciamp is usually termed excitatory postsynaptic
current (EPSC) or inhibitory postsynaptic current (IPSC), depending on whether the current
is negative or positive. If the synaptic input is at, or close to, the location of the electrode,
cable properties can be neglected and the synaptic current can be estimated via the use of
the voltage-clamp technique by fixing the somatic potential to the resting potential,


===== Page 20 =====
104 . 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
Fig. 4.10 VOLTAGE-CLAMP SETUP The technique of clamping the membrane potential to a
particular value and measuring the resultant current constitutes a key technological advance in cellular
biophysics. We here illustrate the vanilla flavored two-electrode voltage-clamp circuit schematically.
The voltage recording electrode at the bottom connects to a high impedance follower circuit that acts
as a buffer, drawing only minimal current from the cell. Its output voltage Vb « Vm. This output is
connected to the negative input of an amplifier with gain A. Its output voltage V\ = A^damp — Vb)-
The associated current /ciamp flows across the access resistance Ra into or out of the cell. In the limit
of a very large gain A, the membrane potential across the cell Vm is "clamped" to Vdamp.
(4.7)
with Vciamp = 
Vrest- P°r synaptic inputs that only give rise to a small postsynaptic
potential at the soma, the driving potential is not much changed and /ciamp constitutes a
fair approximation to the actual postsynaptic current, defined via Eq. 4.4.
If the site of the synapse does not coincide with the site at which the membrane potential
is clamped—common to most situations when one is recording from the cell body and the
synaptic input is located somewhere in the dendritic tree—cable properties intervene and
one no longer measures the pure synaptic current (the synapse is said to be improperly
space clamped). Establishing whether or not voltage clamping is complete is a challenging
problem with no cut and dry answers (see Smith et al., 1985).
In many inhibitory interneurons, excitatory input makes frequent contacts directly onto
the cell bodies, allowing them to be easily voltage clamped. Stern, Edwards, and Sakmann
(1992) exploit this fact to record excitatory postsynaptic currents in inhibitory stellate cells
in rat visual cortex (given their small size, the associated high input resistances are very
high, between 0.5 and 2 G£2). Stimulating neighboring cells leads to the small unitary
EPSCs shown in Fig. 4.9 (unitary in the sense that below a certain stimulus threshold
no EPSC can be seen, while the peak amplitude of the EPSC remains constant once
the threshold has been exceeded). Making judicious use of CNQX and APV, the specific
blockers of the non-NMDA and the NMDA receptors, Stern and his colleagues separate the
two components. Clamping the membrane to near its resting potential, it can be seen that
the fast and large component is due to non-NMDA input, while the slow and late component
is NMDA mediated. Clamping at progressively more depolarizing currents increases the
component remaining after application of CNQX, that is, the NMDA component, while
the APV-insensitive component is decreased. Because the synaptic driving potential is


===== Page 21 =====
4.7 Inhibitory GABAergic Synaptic Input 
• 
105
progressively reduced as Vciamp is increased, the non-NMDA-mediated current decreases,
while the NMDA current increases, the decrease in driving potential being compensated for
by the increase in the conductance in the negative slope-conductance region. Glutamate-
mediated synaptic input usually has both NMDA and non-NMDA components, arguing for
colocalization of both receptors in the postsynaptic membrane (as in Fig. 4.9).
NMDA channels are in a sense a theoretician's dream come true, since they implement
within a single protein complex a molecular AND gate: a significant depolarizing current
can only be obtained in the presence of presynaptic neurotransmitters and postsynaptic de-
polarization. This action is only possible because of the fact that, different from non-NMDA
excitation and GABAergic inhibition, the amplitude of the postsynaptic conductance change
depends on the postsynaptic potential. NMDA receptors have been experimentally impli-
cated as contributing toward the conjunctive nonlinearities required for Hebb's learning
rule (Chap. 13).
Before finishing this section, we need to point out a crucial difference between the EPSC
and the resultant EPSP (the same applies for the relationship between IPSC and IPSP): the
postsynaptic current always leads the postsynaptic voltage. Since the current flowing across
a pure capacitance is proportional to the derivative of the voltage, the voltage response to a
sinuosidal current will also be sinusoidal but with a phase shift of 90°; the voltage lags the
current by this phase angle. No such phase shift is observed for a pure resistance. For any
distributed, mixed resistive and capacitive system, the current will always lead the voltage
by a phase angle somewhere between 0° and 90°. While the EPSC is not equal to the current
flowing during an EPSP (since in the former case the voltage is clamped to some value while
it changes in the latter) it usually is similar if the voltage is clamped to the resting potential
of the cell (since the voltage excursion away from Vrest is usually small relative to £syn).
The dynamics of the current flowing at the synapse is only limited by how fast the un-
derlying channels can switch—in the submillisecond range for fast excitatory or inhibitory
input—while the evoked potential change is constrained by postsynaptic parameters (such
as the intracellular resistance, the membrane capacity, and, to a much lesser extent, the
membrane resistance) as discussed at length in Sec. 3.6.3.
One functional reason to stress EPSCs over EPSPs is that the current flowing at the soma
in response to synaptic input is a much more meaningful measure of synaptic efficiency
than the peak postsynaptic potential (see Chaps. 17 and 18).
4.7 Inhibitory GABAergic Synaptic Input
The most common inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system of both
invertebrates and vertebrates appears to be GABA. In the thalamus and cortex, about a
quarter of all cells utilize GABA. (For the recent physiological literature on GABA see
McCormick, 1990; Edwards, Konnerth, and Sakmann, 1990; LaCaille, 1991; Berman,
Douglas, and Martin, 1992.) The second important inhibitory neurotransmitter, glycine,
appears to mediate IPSP in the spinal cord onto motoneurons (Young and MacDonald,
1983) and in the brainstem.
There are two major forms of postsynaptic receptors associated with GABA releasing
terminals, termed A and B receptors. They are quite distinct from each other, with their
main commonality being that they both bind GABA. As in the case for the excitatory
neurotransmitters, our knowledge about these different receptor classes derives from the
existence of specific blockers (antagonists): the pharmacological agents bicuculline and


===== Page 22 =====
106 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
picrotoxin reversibly block GABA^ receptors while phaclofen blocks the B type (see
Fig. 4.6).
The GABA^ receptor is an ionotropic one, with binding of GABA leading to the direct
opening of channels selective to chloride ions (as with the glutamate receptor, more than
a dozen subreceptor types are known). The current through these channels reverses at the
equilibrium potential for chloride ions, in the neighborhood of —70 mV. In many cells,
only chloride conductances are open at rest, implying that their resting potential is close
to £syn for GABA^ synapses, an important fact to which we will return. The associated
postsynaptic conductance change rises very rapidly, that is, within 1 msec or less, and decays
within 10-20 msec.
GABA can also bind to a metabotropic receptor, the GAB AB receptor. With the help of a
second messenger (a G protein), activation of this receptor type leads to the opening of chan-
nels selective to potassium ions. This makes the associated synaptic battery considerably
more hyperpolarized than the reversal potential of the GABA^ receptor: it is between —90
and —100 mV. Due to the indirect coupling between the release of GABA and the opening
of the associated K+ channels, the onset and the duration of the postsynaptic conductance
change are much slower, with the peak not occurring until 10 msec or more after transmitter
release, the total duration being on the order of 100 msec or longer.
Different from the non-NMDA and the NMDA receptors, GABAyi and GABAg do not
appear to be colocalized. In fact, pharmacological evidence argues for a segregation of these
two receptor classes, with GAB A^ occurring at or close to the soma and the hyperpolarizing
GABAg type farther away, out on the dendrites (Tseng and Haberly, 1988; Douglas and
Martin, 1998). As we will see in the following chapter, GABA^ synapses can implement a
multiplication, albeit a "dirty" one, while the hyperpolarizing action of a GABAg synapse
has more similarity to a linear subtraction.
4.8 Postsynaptic Potential
Section 1.4 dealt with a synapse embedded within a simple RC circuit. Let us now treat
the more general case of synaptic input to some postsynaptic site i, characterized by the
time-dependent input impedance KH (t). The voltage change Vt (t) in response to a synaptic
current (Eq. 4.4) is given by Ohm's law (with all potentials relative to the resting potential
and the sign of the synaptic current—following the convention of physiologists— inverted
to account for the flow of electric charge),
(4.8)
where * represents convolution. Equation 4.8 is just a shorthand way of writing
(4.9)
The last transformation follows from our assumption that K*;(0 and gsyD(t) are. zero for
negative times. Equation 4.9 is a Volterm integral equation of the second type, characterized
by the fact that the membrane potential appears both on the left-hand and on the right-hand
side of the equation (Poggio and Torre, 1978).


===== Page 23 =====
4.8 Postsynaptic Potential 
• 
107
Following Eq. 3.16, we can express the voltage at location j caused by the synaptic
input at i in terms of the transfer impedance K,-7- (t),
(4.10)
Because the expression for V,- depends on V,-, finding Vj necessitates the solution of a
system of coupled integral equations (Eqs. 4.9 and 4.10).
4.8.1 Stationary Synaptic Input
In order to develop some intuitions about these equations, let us first treat the stationary
case, that is, the case in which a fixed increase in synaptic conductance gsyn leads to some
fixed change in the voltage. The convolution in Eqs. 4.9 and 4.10 is then reduced to a simple
multiplication, and the time-dependent input impedance K,-,-(0 is replaced by the dc part
of the Fourier transform, that is, by the input resistance Kn(f — 0) = KU,
(4.11)
or,
(4.12)
This nonlinear equation implies that the postsynaptic potential V/ does not increase indefi-
nitely with gsyn, but saturates. Figure 4.11 demonstrates this in the case of transient synaptic
input. The reason for the sublinear behavior is the fact that the synaptic current pushes the
membrane potential toward E^^, reducing the driving potential Esyn — VJ-. As this becomes
smaller, the synaptic current will also become smaller. At Esyn — Vj, the current ceases,
no matter how large the conductance change, since no potential difference exists across the
synaptic conductance gsyn.
The determinant of whether the synaptic input excites or inhibits the cell is primarily its
reversal potential Esyn. If the battery is above the resting potential, an increase in gsyn(t)
causes an EPSP; if the converse is true, a hyperpolarizing IPSP results. In the remainder
of this chapter, we only treat excitatory inputs. However, the same principles apply for
inhibitory synaptic inputs.
Let us consider the membrane potential for a small synaptic input (Rinzel and Rail, 1974).
"Small" is defined here relative to the input resistance. If the dimensionless product of the
dc input resistance and the conductance change is much less than one, that is, gsyn • KU <SC 1,
the input is considered small. For instance, relative to a 500 MS2 dendritic input site, a 0.2 nS
synaptic input is small, because 5 x 108 x 2 x 10~10 = 0.1. Under these circumstances
we can approximate Eq. 4.12 by
(4.13)
In other words, if the synaptic input is small enough, the membrane potential changes only
little (that is, EsyD — V; ^ Esyn), and the synaptic input can be approximated by a constant
current source, /syn = Esyngsyn, independent of the membrane potential. If synaptic input
can be treated as a current source, then doubling the amplitude of the current source will
simply double the postsynaptic potential change, no bothersome saturating behavior exists,
and the output is linear in the input.
We discussed in Sees. 4.6 and 4.7 evidence for conductance increases at single glutamate
and GABA synapses of 1 nS or less. This implies that as long as the postsynaptic site has


===== Page 24 =====
108 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
Fig. 4.11 SYNAPTIC SATURATION Relationship between the postsynaptic conductance change and
the peak somatic EPSP on a log-log plot. A single fast (fpeak = 0.5 msec) synapse of variable amplitude
gpeak is activated at one of three different locations—the soma and at two dendritic sites (a3 and
bl; Fig. 3.7)—and the peak somatic EPSP is shown. Given the relatively high input conductance
at the cell body, the somatic input does not saturate within the range shown here, while the two
dendritic synapses are saturating for inputs above 10 nS. The simultaneous or near-simultaneous
activation of many synapses can easily increase the membrane conductance by this amount or
more. Synaptic saturation has important consequences for the cell during massive synaptic input.
Rm = 20, 000 S • cm2, yrest = -65 mV and Esyn = 0 mV.
an input resistance of less than several hundred megaohms, individual inputs can be treated
as current injection. This is frequently the case for cortical pyramidal cells, where a single
synaptic input can often be treated as a current source. Only in the distal dendrites and thin
and elongated spines will the "current" approximation be invalid. However, in the presence
of massive synaptic input, as would occur under physiological conditions when hundreds
of inputs can be active simultaneously, saturation occurs and has important functional
consequences (Chap. 18).
If the product of gsyn and KU becomes larger, but still less than 1, we can use the Taylor
series expansion of l/(l+;t) = 1— x+x2+O(x3) and express the postsynaptic potential as
(4.14)
where O((.. .)3) is a shorthand notation for cubic and higher order terms. Intuitively,
we can think of this series expansion in terms of adding higher order correction terms to
the linear current term: first the synapse opens and the current 7syn = EsyngSyn flows into
the cell, causing a change in membrane potential (given by KnESyagsyn; see Eq. 4.13).
This variation in membrane potential changes in turn the driving potential from Esyn to
£Syn(l — gsynKn), which will decrease the potential by Esyn(gSynKn)2, which again leads
to a change in the driving potential, and so on. Adding up all these terms leads to the above
equation. Effectively, we approximate the conductance input gsyn by a current input plus a
number of "correction" terms: V| = Kn(I^ + /$ + /$ H 
)-
In the other extreme case, when the product of the synaptic conductance change and the
input resistance is very large, that is, gsynKa 5J> 1, we have
(4.15)
The synapse is saturated (Fig. 4.11). As we have seen already in Fig. 1.11 and will
discuss further on in more detail, this nonlinear behavior of synapses can be exploited


===== Page 25 =====
4.8 Postsynaptic Potential 
• 
109
to implement a number of nonlinear neuronal operations, in particular multiplication. The
nonlinear transduction process between conductance change and membrane potential was
fully recognized by Rail (1964), although usually disregarded by him and other early
modelers, both because the nonlinearity involved usually precludes analytical treatment
and because the input resistance in the dendritic tree was thought to be relatively small.
The steady-state potential at any other location j in response to a constant synaptic input
at location i (Eq. 4.10) is given by
(4.16)
The denominator of this expression is identical to the one describing the potential at location
i (Eq. 4.12). Therefore, the saturation behavior (e.g., whether or not the synaptic input can
be treated as a current) only depends on the electrical properties at the synapse i and not on
the transfer resistance Ktj. Indeed, the potential at j is given by the voltage at i divided by
the voltage attenuation,
(4.17)
4.8.2 Transient Synaptic Input
In the previous section, we assumed for the sake of mathematical convenience that the
synaptic input is so slow that it can be treated as a sustained dc input. Under most
physiological conditions, though, fast excitatory synaptic input is anything but stationary
but can be over in a time interval less than rm.
Solving analytically for the voltage in response to transient conductance inputs is difficult.
Numerical evaluations can be carried out in one of two different manners. Either one can
first compute the appropriate input and transfer impedances using the cable equation and
then solve Eqs. 4.8 and 4.10, or one can directly integrate the cable equation. The first
method suffers from the disadvantage that computing the potential in response to n spatially
distributed inputs requires the evaluation of about «2/2 input and transfer impedances
and only works for a linear membrane, while the second method does not depend on the
number of inputs and can be extended in a straightforward manner to deal with membrane
nonlinearities.
For a single synaptic input gsyn(0 at location XQ onto a single passive dendrite, the
modified cable equation (Eq. 2.7) has the form
(4.18)
with the appropriate boundary conditions.
Historically, it was Rail and his collaborators who first studied solutions to this equation
for a variety of different dendritic tree geometries (Rail and Rinzel, 1973; Rinzel and
Rail, 1974; Segev et al., 1985). This equation is difficult to solve in closed form and
we will not attempt to do so. Rather, the course we follow throughout the book is to
integrate the cable equation numerically. Because of their generality, simple numerical
integration algorithms are the methods of choice today for solving these partial differential
equations (see Appendix C). We made use of the very efficient and freely distributed single-
cell simulator program package called NEURON for generating most of the figures in this
book. NEURON was developed by Mines (1984, 1989, 1998) and is widely used in the


===== Page 26 =====
110
SYNAPTIC INPUT
computational neuroscience community. An even more powerful tool is the single cell
and neuronal network simulation package GENESIS, developed by Bower and his group
(DeSchutter, 1992; Bower and Beeman, 1998).
Figure 4.12 shows the dendritic and somatic EPSPs due to a single non-NMDA excitatory
synaptic input located in the basal tree of our layer 5 pyramidal cell. Notice the small size
of the somatic EPSP, requiring summation of many excitatory inputs before the membrane
potential reaches the firing threshold. If the same input is located at more distal locations (not
shown; see, however, Fig. 18.1), the somatic EPSP is even smaller and its peak occurs later
in time. Rail has derived in the case of a single equivalent cylinder a relationship between
the time of peak potential and the location of synaptic input (Rail et al., 1967), which
has been used to infer synaptic location in the case of la synaptic input to a motoneurons
(Smith, Wuerker, and Frank, 1967). Because pyramidal cells do not fulfill the conditions for
reduction to an equivalent cable (Sec. 3.2), no simple analytical relationship between time
to peak and location exists. Furthermore, because of the low-pass action of the dendritic
tree, the peak potential becomes more and more smeared out as the synaptic input moves
away from the soma, making the time at which the peak potential occurs more and more
difficult to define.
4.8.3 Infinitely Fast Synaptic Input
What occurs when we consider the other extreme, that of a conductance change that occurs
infinitely fast or, in practice, much faster than the neuronal time constant rml Because the
conductance change is so rapid, it does not have time to change the membrane potential,
Fig. 4.12 EXCITATORY SYNAPTIC INPUT 
Simulated synaptic input in response to activation of a
single, fast non-NMDA excitatory input in the basal tree of our pyramidal cell (at location b\ in
Fig. 3.7). We here show the synaptic conductance change gsyn(t) (activated at 1 msec and peaking
0.5 msec later) and the local as well as the somatic EPSP (the 5-mV scale bar applies to V,-, while
the 0.5-mV scale applies to Vsoma). Notice the small amplitude of the somatic EPSP, in agreement
with experiments (Fig. 4.4). The bottom trace shows the clamp current in response to this input, when
the soma is clamped to —65 mV. This approximates the current at the soma when the synaptic input
is activated.


===== Page 27 =====
4.9 Visibility of Synaptic Inputs 
• 
111
and therefore the driving potential, appreciably before it is over. Thus, we expect a very fast
conductance input to act like a current input. This can be shown quite easily by assuming
gsyn(t) = gpeak<5(0- Replacing this into the convolution Eq. 4.9 yields
(4.19)
assuming that Vt(t = 0) = 0 (relative to Vrest). The resulting EPSP faithfully follows the
impulse response function K;,-(£)- From this we expect that very fast synaptic inputs will
show little evidence of conductance changes, even if they are large.
4.9 Visibility of Synaptic Inputs
A question of experimental interest is to what extent a synaptic conductance change can be
detected at the cell body using an intracellular electrode. This issue is of paramount concern
when trying to resolve the question of the existence and strength of conductance changes,
in particular those associated with inhibition, during visual stimulation of neurons in both
retinal ganglion cells (Marchiafava, 1979; Watanabe and Murakami, 1984) and cortical
neurons (Douglas, Martin, and Whitteridge, 1988; Pei et al., 1991; Ferster and Jagadeesh,
1992; Borg-Graham, Monier, and Fregnac, 1998).
It has been proposed that shunting or silent inhibition vetoes the response of the cell when
the visual stimulus, usually a spot or bar of light, moves in the cell's null direction (Torre and
Poggio, 1978; Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1982; Koch and Poggio, 1985b; Sec. 5.1). These
theoretical ideas can be tested experimentally by inferring the existence of synaptically
mediated shunting inhibition, raising the general issue of the conditions under which a
synaptic input somewhere in the dendritic tree can be seen by an electrode at the cell body
(Rail, 1967).
One problem is that an intracellular electrode cannot record conductance inputs directly;
rather they have to be inferred from their shunting effect on the voltage. A sustained
conductance change is measured by injecting a steady-state current Is at the soma and
recording the resultant stationary voltage Vs; the ratio of these two corresponds to the input
conductance Gss = l/Kss. The same procedure is repeated during synaptic stimulation.
The difference between the old and the new values of the somatic input conductance then
corresponds to the change in input conductance AG^ due to the synaptic input gsyn. The
voltage at the postsynaptic site i is the sum of the synaptic contribution and the current
spread from the somatic current injection,
(4.20)
The somatic EPSP in the presence of both synaptic input and injected current is
(4.21)
It is now straightforward to show (Koch, Douglas, and Wehmeier, 1990) that the change in
somatic input resistance AKSS is given by
(4.22)
As expected for any input with gsya > 0, AA^j is always negative; physically, this
corresponds to the input resistance decreasing in response to an increase in the membrane


===== Page 28 =====
112 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
conductance. Furthermore, it can be proven that the change in input conductance AGSS is
always bound by the total synaptic change, that is, 0 < AGSS < gsyn.
The equation itself is simple to understand. The current injected at the soma Is induces
a voltage change K{SIS at the location of the synapse. This voltage provides a synaptic
driving force, which converts the synaptic conductance input gsyn into a voltage change at
location /, that is, (KisIs)KiigSyn/(l + gsynKa)- This is propagated to the soma, causing
a voltage change gsyaKfs!s/(l 
+ gsynKn). Dividing this voltage by the current Is leaves
the resistance change.
The higher the input resistance KU at the synapse, or the further removed the synapse
is from the cell body (Kjs —> 0), the less visible the synaptic input becomes. Even if the
synaptic conductance change is very large, its effect on the soma will always be limited
(as gsyn —>• oo, the change in input resistance will converge to —K?s/Kn), except if the
input is located directly at the soma, since in that case AKSS —>• —Kss and the new input
conductance goes to zero.
Notice that AKSS does not depend on the synaptic battery. In principle, this implies
that hyperpolarizing, shunting, or excitatory synaptic inputs are all equally visible from
the recording electrode. Due to the capacitive nature of the neuronal membrane, transient
conductance changes are more difficult to see from the soma than sustained ones (since
additional charge between the synapse and the soma flows onto the distributed capacitances).
Therefore, Eq. 4.22 represents an upper bound on what can be seen of a conductance change
at the cell body.
4.9.1 Input Impedance in the Presence of Synaptic Input
In the previous chapter, we defined the input impedance in a quiescent system without any
synaptic input. If a sustained synaptic input occurs at i, the new value of the somatic input
resistance
(4.23)
follows simply from Eq. 4.22.
In the presence of a time-dependent conductance change, the system is a nonstationary
one and the new input conductance is not simply the sum of the time-varying conductance
change gsyn (t) and the old conductance change. In the case of a patch of membrane without
spatial extent characterized by the input impedance K (t), the new input impedance K'(t,t')
is a two-dimensional function depending on the time the synaptic input arrived,
(4.24)
The exact value of the conductance change depends on the relative timing between the onset
of the synaptic input and the onset of the current pulse used to measure the input impedance.
For stationary input, we obtain the familiar l/K' = gsyn + I/A".
4.10 Electrical Gap Junctions
As we mentioned, neurons are also coupled using direct electrical connections (Dermietzel
and Spray, 1993). This point-to-point coupling occurs at specialized channels spanning
the pre- and postsynaptic membranes called gap junctions. Such a junction provides a


===== Page 29 =====
4.10 Electrical Gap Junctions 
• 
113
direct, high-conductance pathway between between neurons and eliminates the possibility
that the gap junction current would be shunted by the extracellular space. The strength
of the coupling can be modulated by a number of factors, such as high internal calcium
concentration (a feature thought to protect the surrounding tissue from the death of any one
cell) or intracellular pH (Bennett and Spray, 1987).
Many cells are coupled by gap junctions, giving rise to a syncytium of two- or three-
dimensional cellular networks. The most dramatic example is the cardiac muscle. Gap
junctions allow single action potentials, originating in a group of pacemaker cells, to sweep
through all cells in a wavelike manner, generating the rhythmic squeeze and relaxation that
is the stuff of life (Noble, 1979).
Glial cells are another example. These cells, thought to play mainly a supporting,
metabolic role in the nervous system—such as maintaining the ionic distributions and
gradients necessary to homeostasis—lack conventional chemical synapses. They commu-
nicate instead via an extensive grid of electrical gap junctions with each other (Giaume and
McCarthy, 1996).
One way to study gap junctions is to record from two coupled cells using pipettes,
and measuring the current flow between the two as a function of the voltage gradient
(Fig. 4.13A). In general, one observes a linear I-V curve, whose slope depends on the
number of gap junction channels among the pair of cells (Fig. 4.13B). Typically, each
channel contributes about 100 pS of conductance. Gap junctions are usually symmetrical,
with a depolarization in one cell leading to a depolarization in the other one, albeit of
less value, and a hyperpolarization leading to a less pronounced hyperpolarization in the
other cell. From an electrical point of view, this situation can be mimicked by postulating
a coupling conductance gc among the two cells (Fig. 4.13C).
When current is injected into cell 1, as shown in the figure, the application of Kirchhoff's
current law to the two nodes and the neglect of all transient behavior leads to the following
expression for the transfer resistance:
(4.25)
where gi and g2 correspond to the input conductance of each cell. The inverse of the slope
of the I—V curve in Fig. 4.13B corresponds to this coupling resistance. The input resistance
of cell 1 is
(4.26)
Equation 4.25 implies that injecting some current into cell 1 induces the same voltage in
cell 2 as injecting the current in cell 2 and measuring the voltage in cell 1. In order to see
the asymmetry inherent in direct electrical coupling, we compute the voltage attenuation
experienced by going from cell 1 to cell 2,
- 
(4.27)
and in the opposite direction,
(4.28)
Let us assume a coupling conductance of gc = InS and an input conductance of g2 = lOnS
for the second cell. If the first cell has the same input conductance, A \2 = A|j = 1.1, that


===== Page 30 =====
114 
• 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
(A) MEASURING COUPLING
(B) OHMIC COUPLING
Fig. 4.13 ELECTRICAL COUPLING A second type of specific cell-to-cell coupling occurs via gap
junctions or electrical synapses. (A) They can be studied by applying a membrane potential across
two adjacent cells and measuring the junctional current. Different from a chemical synapse, the
current flows instantaneously, with no delay. The inset provides a graphical rendition of the molecular
nature of the voltage-independent channels underlying this coupling. Reprinted by permission from
Hille (1992). (B) The resultant I—V curve, here taken from the gap junction among axons in the
crayfish motor system (Watanabe and Grundfest, 1961). The inverse of the slope corresponds to the
transfer resistance K\i of Eq. 4.25. (C) The majority of such junctions can be modeled by a coupling
conductance gc. Current flows from one cell to the next without being shunted by the extracellular
cytoplasm. The capacitive nature of the pre- and postsynaptic membranes has been neglected.
is, anEPSP would be attenuated by about 10% in either direction. However, if cell 1 is much
smaller, with a tenfold lower conductance of g\ = 1 nS, then the voltage attenuates by a
factor of 2 when going from the low-input to the high-input conductance cell, while it still
only attenuates by 10% in the opposite direction. Attenuation is symmetrical when the two
input conductances g\ and g2 are identical. It should be pointed out that attenuation across
an electrical synapse is in marked contrast to the high degree of amplification possible at
chemical synapses.
Electrical coupling has been studied in detail in the outer layers of the vertebrate retina.
Gap junctions among rods as well as among horizontal cells give rise to extended two-
dimensional sheets of cells (Kaneko, 1976; Copenhagen and Owen, 1976; Attwell and
Wilson, 1980). Theoretical calculations show that a spatio-temporal filter can be ascribed
to this syncytium (Torre, Owen, and Sandini, 1983; Torre and Owen, 1983). Indeed, the
experimental data suggest that the high-pass filtering properties of the rod network serve to
optimize the signal-to-noise ratio by integrating visually evoked signals over a large area


===== Page 31 =====
4.11 Recapitulation 
• 115
for rapid signals and over a small area for slowly changing ones (Detwiler, Hodgkin, and
McNaughton, 1980).
In the adult thalamus and cortex, gap junctions have only occasionally been reported. At
this point in time it is safe to say that the mere existence as well as any possible functional
role of electrical synapses in cortex and associated structures remain unknown.
Electrical synapses do not have any intrinsic delay, unlike chemical ones. Thus, one
frequently finds them in time-critical pathways. The classical example is electrical synapses
made by presynaptic fibers onto axons of giant motor neurons that mediate the emergency
tail flips in the crayfish, the basis of its escape reaction during danger (Furshpan and Potter,
1959). Interestingly, here the connection is rectifying, with a diode-like relationship between
the voltage across and the current flowing through this junction.
A further example is the part of the electrosensory system in weakly electric fish that
conveys information about the time of occurrence of the zero crossing of the electrical wave
signal that the fish can send out and also sense (Heiligenberg, 1991). At multiple locations
in this pathway, electric synapses mediate cell-to-cell coupling. For instance, spikes in the
so-called T afferents from the periphery carry temporal information in action potentials
with a time jitter of 30 ± 25 /zsec. A number of these afferents make gap junctions with a
spherical cell in the electrosensory lateral line lobe, such that a randomly occurring input in
any one input fiber does not bring the cell to threshold. Using this conjunctive logic together
with synapses that do not introduce any additional temporal smear, reduces the temporal
jitter of the output spikes to 11 ± 3 /usec (Carr, Heiligenberg, and Rose, 1986).
One functional role of gap junctions most certainly has to do with the fact that small
molecules, such as cAMP (or intracellular dye in an experiment), can pass through these
channels, enabling them to diffuse across many cells. This might explain the more wide-
spread distribution of gap junctions during early development (DeHaan and Chen, 1990).
4.11 Recapitulation
Fast communication among nerve cells occurs at specialized junctions called synapses. They
are very compact: between several hundred million and one billion synapses can be packed
into one cubic millimeter of neuronal tissue. Of the two types, chemical and electrical, we
focus on the former since they are much more frequent and make very specific point-to-point
connections.
It is useful to distinguish fast ionotropic chemical synapses, acting on a millisecond time
scale, from metabotropic chemical synapses, acting on a time scale of a fraction of a second
to minutes. Conceptually and cum grano sails, ionotropic synapses are of the essence in
the rapid forms of neuronal communication and computations underlying perception and
motor control.
In response to a presynaptic change in membrane potential at a synapse, neurotransmitters
are released and diffuses within a fraction of a millisecond across the cleft separating pre-
and postsynaptic terminal. At the postsynaptic terminal, neurotransmitter molecules bind to
specific receptors, which usually—either directly or indirectly, via involvement of a second-
messenger system—open specific ionic channels. Depending on the neurotransmitter-
receptor kinetics, these channels remain open for some time and a synaptic current flows
across the membrane. Synaptic transmission at central synapses appears to be stochastic.
A presynaptic action potential has a probability p of causing a release of a vesicle and a
postsynaptic response, where p can be as small as a few percent and depends on the spiking


===== Page 32 =====
116 . 
SYNAPTIC INPUT
history of the synapse. The amplitude of the postsynaptic signal is variable as well. These
factors need to be taken into consideration when thinking about neural computation.
An electrical engineer would be justified in treating a chemical synapse (at the time
scale of tens of milliseconds) as a nonreciprocal, two-port device (see the introduction to
Sec. 3.4). A two-port description is necessary, since a pair of equations (for both the pre-
and the postsynaptic current and voltage changes) is required to completely characterize
its behavior; it is non-reciprocal since changes at the postsynaptic side have no (fast) effect
on the presynaptic side. Synapses serve to decouple neuronal elements that can each have
very different electrical impedances, rather like a follower-amplifier circuit.
At the macroscopic and phenomenological level, a fast synaptic input induces a time-
dependent increase in conductance gsyn(0 in series with a battery Esya. The sign of Esyn
relative to the membrane potential at the postsynaptic terminal determines whether synaptic
input causes an EPSP (excitatory synapse), an IPSP (inhibitory synapse), or no change in
membrane potential (silent or shunting inhibition). The five dominant types of fast synaptic
inputs are (1) non-NMDA or AMPA voltage-independent excitation; (2) ACh-mediated
excitation; (3) the voltage-dependent and slower NMDA excitatory input that is thought to
be crucially involved in synaptic plasticity; (4) the GABA^ type of silent inhibition; and
(5) the slower GABAg hyperpolarizing inhibition. The fact that synaptic input increases the
postsynaptic membrane conductance in series with a battery has important consequences.
In particular, synaptic inputs can saturate, will influence the input conductance of the cell,
and can interact with each other nonlinearly. Only if the amplitude of the synaptic input
conductance change is small relative to the local input impedance can synaptic input be
treated as a constant current source.
The immense variety of neurotransmitiers and postsynaptic receptors gives rise to a
staggering combination of possible pairings that act on all possible time scales, and across
different spatial scales, from a single synapse to a single ganglion or an entire neural system,
such as the thalamus. Synapses are responsible for the most salient difference between
nervous systems and even our most advanced digital computers: while the former adapt
and learn—a subject we will cover in depth in Chap. 13—the latter do not.
Electrical synapses allow for direct current flow among adjacent neurons. A gap junction
can usually be modeled by a fixed conductance. Different from chemical synapses where
amplification between the pre- and postsynaptic sites can occur, here the signal is always
attenuated. One advantage of this mode of cellular communication is speed, since no
synaptic delay occurs. Thus, electrical synapses are frequently found in neuronal pathways,
which subserve information that needs to be communicated very rapidly and faithfully. In
the retina, gap junctions among photoreceptors and horizontal cells create vast, electrically
interconnected networks that filter the incoming visual signal.


