===== Page 1 =====
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
In the previous chapter, we briefly met some of the key actors of this book. In particular, we
introduced the RC model of a patch of neuronal membrane and showed an instance where
such a "trivial" model accounts reasonably well for the input-output properties of a neuron,
as measured at its cell body (Fig. 1.4). However, almost none of the excitatory synapses are
made onto the cell body, contacting instead the very extensive dendritic arbor. As we will
discuss in detail in Chap. 3 (see Fig. 3.1), dendritic trees can be quite large, containing up
to 98% of the entire neuronal surface area. We therefore need to understand the behavior
of these extended systems having a cablelike structure (Fig. 2.1).
Fig. 2.1 CLOSEUP VIEW OF DENDRITES Two
reconstructed dendrites of a spiny stellate cell in the
visual cortex of the cat. The reconstructions were
carried out by a very laborious serial electron mi-
croscopic procedure. Notice the thin elongated,
thomlike structures, dendritic spines. The vast
majority of neuronal processes, whether axons or
dendrites, possess such an elongated, cylindrical
geometry. Studying the spread of electrical cur-
rent in these structures is the subject of cable the-
ory. (A) Cross section of a branching dendrite.
(B) Three-dimensional view of another dendrite.
The black blobs are excitatory synapses and the
three clear blobs are inhibitory synapses. Reprinted
by permission from Anderson et al. (1994).
25
2


===== Page 2 =====
26 • 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
The basic equation governing the dynamics of the membrane potential in thin and
elongated neuronal processes, such as axons or dendrites, is the cable equation. It originated
in the middle of the last century in the context of calculations carried out by Lord Kelvin,
who described the spread of potential along the submarine telegraph cable linking Great
Britain and America. Around the turn of the century, Herman and others formulated the
concept of Kemleitermodel, or core conductor model, to understand the flow of current
in nerve axons. Such a core conductor can be visualized as a thin membrane or sheath
surrounding a cylindrical and electrically conducting core of constant cross section placed
in a solution of electrolytes (see Fig. 2.2).
The study of the partial differential equations describing the evolution of the electrical
potential in these structures gave rise to a body of theoretical knowledge termed cable
theory. In the 1930s and 1940s concepts from cable theory were being applied to axonal
fibers, in particular to the giant axon of the squid (Hodgkin and Rushton, 1946; Davis
and Lorente de No, 1947).1 The application of cable theory to passive, spatially extended
dendrites started in the late 1950s and blossomed in the 1960s and 1970s, primarily due to
the work of Rail (1989). In an appropriate gesture acknowledging his role in the genesis
of quantitative modeling of single neurons, Segev, Rinzel, and Shepherd (1995) edited an
annotated collection of his papers, to which we refer the interested reader. It also contains
personal recollections from many of Rail's colleagues as well as historical accounts of the
early history of this field.
We restrict ourselves in this chapter to studying linear cable theory, involving neuronal
processes that only contain voltage-independent components. In particular, we assume
that the membrane can be adequately described by resistances and capacitances (passive
membrane). Given the widespread existence of dendritic nonlinearities, it could be argued
that studying neurons under such constraints will fail to reveal their true nature. However,
it is also true that one cannot run before one can walk, and one cannot walk before one can
crawl. In order to understand the subtlety of massive synaptic input in spatially extended
passive and active cables, one first needs to study the concepts and limitations of linear
cable theory before advancing to nonlinear phenomena.
Cable theory, whether linear or nonlinear, is based on a number of assumptions concern-
ing the nature and geometry of neuronal tissue. Let us discuss these assumptions prior to
studying the behavior of the membrane potential in a single, unbranched, passive cable.
2.1 Basic Assumptions Underlying One-Dimensional Cable Theory
In a standard copper wire, electrons drift along the gradient of the electrical potential. In
axons or dendrites the charge carriers are not electrons but, in the main, one of two ionic
species, sodium and potassium, and, to a lesser extent, calcium and chloride. How can this
current be quantified?
1. Starting point for any complete description of electrical currents and fields must be
Maxwell's equations governing the dynamics of the electric field E(x, y,z,t) and the
magnetic field B(;c, y, z, t),2 supplemented by the principle of conservation of charge
1. For a detailed account of all the twists and turns of this story, see Cole (1972) and Hodgkin (1976). When reading these
down-to-earth monographs, one becomes painfully aware of the very limited amount of real knowledge and insight gained during
decades of intensive experimental and theoretical research. Most of one's effort is usually spent on pursuing details that turn out
to be irrelevant and in constructing and developing incorrect models.
2. We follow standard convention in using boldface variables for all vector quantities.


===== Page 3 =====
2.1 Basic Assumptions Underlying One-Dimensional Cable Theory
27
Fig. 2.2 ELECTRICAL STRUCTURE OF A CABLE 
(A) Idealized cylindrical axon or dendrite at the
heart of one-dimensional cable theory. Almost all of the current inside the cylinder is longitudional
due to geometrical (the radius is much smaller than the length of the cable) and electrical factors
(the membrane covering the axon or dendrite possesses a very high resistivity compared to the
intracellular cytoplasm). As a consequence, the radial and angular components of the current can
be neglected, and the problem of determining the potential in these structures can be reduced from
three spatial dimensions to a single one. On the basis of the bidomain approximation, gradients in the
extracellular potentials are neglected and the cable problem is expressed in terms of the transmembrane
potential Vm(x, t) = Vf(x, t) — Ve.(B) Equivalent electrical structure of an arbitrary neuronal process.
The intracellular cytoplasm is modeled by the purely ohmic resistance R. This tacitly assumes that
movement of carriers is exclusively due to drift along the voltage gradient and not to diffusion. Here and
in the following the extracellular resistance is assumed to be negligible and Ve is set to zero. The current
per unit length across the membrane, whether it is passive or contains voltage-dependent elements,
is described by im and the system is characterized by the second-order differential equation, Eq. 2.5.
(Feynman, Leighton, and Sands, 1964). As detailed in Rosenfalck's thesis (1969), the
magnetic vector potential associated with the movement of charges during an action
potential in biological tissues only has a negligible effect (10~9) on the electric field and
can therefore safely be neglected. Indeed, it took the technological development of very
sensitive quantum devices (SQUIDs) to be able to measure the magnetic field associated
with massive electrical activity in the brain. So the first simplification involves neglecting
the magnetic field.


===== Page 4 =====
28 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
2. This leaves us with three fundamental relationships governing electrodynamics in
neuronal structures.
a. Gauss's law, stating that the divergence of the field E is identical to the charge density
normalized by the electrical permittivity €. Equivalently, Poisson's equation, which
links the Laplacian of the electrical potential to the negative charge density normalized
by e, serves as well.
b. Charge conservation, that is, the sum of the flux of current through any closed surface
and the change of the charge over time inside this surface must be zero.
c. An equation linking the electrical current to the electric field. In general, charged
carriers can move either by drift along an electric field or by diffusion, from a volume
of high carrier concentration into one of lower concentration, and the total current flow
is the sum of these two independent components. The mathematical expression of
this fact constitutes the Nernst-Planck electrodiffusion equation, treated in Sec. 11.3.
As discussed there, for almost all cases of interest the changes in concentration of
the various ions (Na+, K+, Ca2+ and CP) are too small to measurably contribute to
current flow. Only in very thin fibers of less than 1 /um diameter does longitudinal
current flow due to concentration differences begin to play any role. In other words,
Ohm's law is perfectly adequate to describe the electrical current moving within an
axon or dendrite.3
3. This is the starting point for most derivations of cable theory (Lorente de No, 1947; Clark
and Plonsey, 1966,1968; Plonsey, 1969; Rail, 1969b; Eisenberg and Johnson, 1970).
a. The dominant fraction of current inside a neuronal process, such as a dendrite or
axon, flows parallel to its longitudinal axis. Only a very small fraction of the current
flows across the neuronal membrane. This is true both for geometrical reasons—the
diameter of axons and dendrites being much smaller than their longitudinal extent—
as well as for electrical ones. As detailed in Appendix A, the neuronal membrane is
all but impermeable to current flow. Charged carriers can only cross the membrane
through the ionic channels. The high transmembrane resisitivity stands in contrast to
the relatively small intracellular resistivity.
A major implication is that instead of having to solve for the voltage in three
dimensions, our problem is reduced to one of describing the voltage along a single
spatial dimension. In a careful comparison between the membrane potential derived
as the solution of Laplace's equation in a three-dimensional cylindrical coordinate
system and the solution of the one-dimensional cable equation, Rail (1969b) showed
that the radial and angular membrane potential terms typically decay 104 times faster
than the components of the membrane potential along the axis. Fortuitously, we can
safely neglect two out of three dimensions for all of the cases considered in this book.
b. Electrical charge in the cytoplasm, no matter whether inside or outside the cell,
relaxes in a matter of microseconds or less. In other words, any capacitive effects
of the cytoplasm itself can be totally ignored on the millisecond or longer time
scale (inductive effects can be completely neglected; Scott, 1971). Thus, from an
electrical point of view, the extracellular as well as the intracellular cytoplasm can
be approximated by ohmic resistances.
3. This is analogous to the situation prevalent in a copper wire, where the current flow due to drift down the gradient of the
electrical potential exceeds by many orders of magnitude the current flow due to differences in the local densities of electrons.


===== Page 5 =====
2.1 Basic Assumptions Underlying One-Dimensional Cable Theory 
• 
29
c. The solution of the equation for the electrical potential is still extremely complicated
if all the neuronal structures and membranes outside the dendrite or axon under
investigation are explicitly included. Fortuitously for modelers (but less so for
the electrophysiologist, who has to infer the neuronal activity of a cell from its
extracellular signature), the extracellular potential (1) usually is small (since the
small amount of current making it through the membrane encounters a relatively
large extracellular volume), and (2) decays over distances which are usually much
larger than the diameters of the fiber itself. This implies that the extracellular space
can be treated as a homogeneous dielectric, averaging over local inhomogeneities.
The problem of computing the membrane potential is therefore reduced to two
homogeneous domains, the extracellular and the intracellular ones.
The extracellular resistivity is often defined in the case when the external medium is
a shell of conducting cytoplasm surrounding the cable, a shell that can be characterized
by a resistance per unit length of cylinder re. For large external volumes (think of
the case of a single neuronal fiber placed in a bath solution) re is assumed to be
zero. In this case, no extracellular voltage gradients exist and the entire extracellular
space is isopotential, Ve(x, t) = const, which we set to zero. Including a uniform
extracellular resistivity complicates matters only slightly, and the solution of the cable
equation is qualitatively similar to the solution for re = 0. Therefore, the membrane
potential Vm(x,t), defined as the intracellular potential minus the extracellular
potential (Eq. 1.1), is identical to the intracellular potential. Indeed, throughout the
book, we use these two variables interchangeably. Yet it should always be kept in
mind that the membrane potential corresponds to the difference in voltage across the
membrane separating the inside from the outside.
A timely research topic of considerable interest is a detailed investigation of
electrical coupling of realistically modeled neurons via the extracellular potential.
Lengthy experimental and theoretical studies have been carried out for the case of
two parallel axons. For this geometry, any direct electrical coupling is slight (the
extracellular potential due to a spike is in the 10 //V range; Clark and Plonsey, 1968,
1971; Marks and Loeb, 1976; Scott and Luzader, 1979; Barr and Plonsey, 1992; Bose
and Jones, 1995; Struijk, 1997). However, extracellular potentials recorded close to
dendritic trees can be much larger (up to a few mV) than those next to axons. Given
the extremely tight packing among neurons, this type of ephaptic4 coupling could be
of functional relevance, yet almost no theoretical work has been carried out on this
subject (Lorente de No, 1953; Hubbard, Llinas and Quastel, 1969; Holt, 1998).
At this stage, we represent the neuronal tissue with the help of a series of discrete
electrical circuits of the type shown in Fig. 2.2B. Without making any specific assumption
concerning the detailed nature of the neuronal membrane, we express the current per unit
length flowing through the membrane at location x as im(x, t). We can write down Ohm's
law for the discrete circuit illustrated in Fig. 2.2B,
(2.1)
or, in the limit of an infinitesimal small interval A*, and with Vm = Vj,
(2.2)
4. Greek for "touching onto," rather than synoptic, "touching together."


===== Page 6 =====
30 . 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
where ra = R/Ax is the intracellular resistance per unit length of cable with dimensions
of ohms per centimeter. 7* is the intracellular core current flowing along the cable, assumed
to be positive when flowing toward the right, in the direction of increasing values of x.
Kirchhoff's law of current conservation stipulates that the sum of all currents flowing into
and out of any particular node must equal zero. Applied to the node at x in Fig. 2.2B,
we have
(2.3)
or, in differential form in the limit that AJE -> 0,
(2.4)
Inserting the spatial derivative of Eq. 2.2 into Eq. 2.4 leads to
(2.5)
This second-order ordinary differential equation, together with appropriate boundary condi-
tions, describes the membrane potential in an extended one-dimensional cable structure with
an ohmic intracellular cytoplasm, regardless of the exact nature of the neuronal membrane.
2.1.1 Linear Cable Equation
In Sec. 1.1, we discussed the nature of a patch of passive membrane and assumed that
the membrane current includes a capacitive (Eq. 1.3) and a resistive (Eq. 1.4) component
(Figs. 1.1 and 1.2). Including an external current term Iinj(x, t), the membrane current per
unit length of the cable, im, is given by
(2.6)
where rm is the membrane resistance of a unit length of fiber, measured in units of ohms-
centimeter. If the electrical nature of the membrane is constant along the length of the
passive fiber under investigation (Fig. 2.3), we can replace im(x, t) on the right-hand side
of Eq. 2.5 with Eq. 2.6 and multiply both sides with rm to arrive at
(2-7)
with the membrane time constant im = rmcm and the steady-state space constant A, =
(rm/ra)1^2- We will discuss their significance forthwith.
Equation 2.7 is the linear cable equation, a partial differential equation, first order in
time and second order in space. This type of parabolic differential equation is quite similar
to the heat and diffusion equations. The behavior of all three is characterized by dissipation
and the absence of any wavelike solution with constant velocity. Parabolic differential
equations have a well-specified and unique solution if appropriate initial conditions, such
as the voltage throughout the cable at t = 0 should be zero, or boundary conditions, such
as no current should leak out at either end of the cable, are specified. The cable equation is
fundamental to understanding the behavior of the membrane potential, the principal state
variable used for rapid intracellular communication in neurons. We will discuss its behavior
in both this chapter and the next.
As expressed in Eq. 2.7, a simple, unbranched cable has a nonzero resting potential Vrest
which does not vary with the position along the cable. For a homogeneous cable in the


===== Page 7 =====
2.1 Basic Assumptions Underlying One-Dimensional Cable Theory
31
Fig. 2.3 A SINGLE PASSIVE CABLE Equivalent lumped electrical circuit of an elongated neuronal
fiber with passive membrane. The intracellular cytoplasm is described by an ohmic resistance per unit
length ra and the membrane by a capacitance cm in parallel with a passive membrane resistance rm
and a battery Vrest. The latter two components are frequently referred to as leak resistance and leak
battery. An external current I\^(x, t) is injected into the cable. The associated linear cable equation
(Eq. 2.7) describes the dynamics of the electrical potential Vm = V; — Ve along the cable.
absence of any input lm](x, t), the membrane potential throughout the cable will be equal
to a constant. The amplitude of Vrest varies between —50 and —90 mV, depending on cell
type and other circumstances, with the inside of the neuron being at the negative potential.
Vrest need not always be constant throughout the dendritic tree (see Sec. 18.3.4).
Because the resting potential is simply an offset, it is often set to zero. This can be thought
of as defining the membrane potential Vm(x, t) as relative to this resting potential. Very
often the equations will be somewhat simplified when the potential is defined as relative to
Vrest- We use the convention that Vm(x, t) refers to the absolute membrane potential, while
V(x, t) refers to the potential relative to Vrest-
We should here also allude to the vexing question of units. The three voltage-independent
components of a passive cable are commonly specified in one of two ways. If they are
expressed as quantities per unit length, they are conventionally labeled
(2.8)
in units of £2/cm,
(2.9)
in units of fi-cm and
(2.10)
in units of F/cm. Using these variables has the advantage that the cable equation contains
no explicit terms depending on the diameter d of the cable.
The more common way, and the one we adopt throughout the book, is to specify these
quantities in units that are independent of the diameter of the fiber, using capital letters: the


===== Page 8 =====
32 . 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
intracellular resistivity /?;, the specific membrane resistance Rm and the specific membrane
capacitance Cm, with dimensions of £2-cm, £2 • cm2 and F/cm2, respectively. For more
details, consult Appendix A.
2.2 Steady-State Solutions
Let us investigate the behavior of the cable equation in response to a current 7jnj (x) injected
at location x via an intracellular microelectrode or a synapse. We assume that the current is
switched on at t =0 and remains on. One frequently encounters this situation in experiments
to investigate the cable properties of neurons and axons. After some initial transients, the
voltage will reach a steady-state value. To compute the steady-state membrane potential,
we set dV/dt — 0 and write the cable equation as
(2.11)
This reduces the original partial differential Eq. 2.7 to an ordinary second-order differential
equation depending solely on space. We now study its solutions for different neuronal
geometries.
2.2.1 Infinite Cable
We begin by assuming that a current 7jnj of constant amplitude is injected at the origin, x = 0,
of an infinite cable of diameter d. Mathematically, we describe this by setting /inj(jc) to
/o<$ (x), where S (x) is the Dirac delta or impulse distribution in space. As boundary condition
we assume that the voltage at the two infinitely distant terminals goes to zero as \x | —>• oo.
Using the theory of Fourier transforms (see Appendix B) we arrive at the solution
(2.12)
with VQ = /orm/(2A.). This solution can easily be verified by placing it into Eq. 2.11. The
stationary voltage distribution, sometimes referred to as the electrotonus, in the infinite
cable decays exponentially away from the site of injection. The parameter controlling this
decay is the space constant X. The voltage decreases to e~l, that is, to 37% of its original
value, at x = A and to e~2, or 13% of its original value, at x = 2A. In the derivation of the
cable equation, the steady-state space constant is defined as
(2.13)
The larger the membrane resistance Rm, the less current leaks across the membrane and the
larger the space constant A. Furthermore, a thick dendrite has a larger space constant than
a thin one, reflecting the fact that the spread of current is enhanced by a larger diameter.
Another way of deriving A involves computing the distance / over which the total resistance
to current flowing across the membrane is identical to the total longitudinal resistance.
Paying careful attention to the relevant units, we have rm/l — ral, or / = ^/rm/ra — A.
For a typical apical dendrite of a cortical cell with a 4 ju,m diameter, /?, = 200 S2-cm and
Rm — 20, 000 £2 • cm2, the space constant A comes out to be 1 mm. This large distance,
compared to the diameter of the dendrite, is the reason why we can neglect the radial
components of voltage along these cables.


===== Page 9 =====
2.2 Steady-State Solutions 
• 
33
Given the importance of A. for the electrotonic spread of the potential in a neuron, we
frequently normalize the spatial coordinate x with respect to A., expressing it in dimension-
less units: X = x/K. Any particular distance I can likewise be expressed in terms of the
associated dimensionless electrotonic distance L = t/K.
What is the input resistance of the infinite cable? Operationally, it is measured by inserting
an electrode that passes current and, at a distance that is small compared to A., an electrode
to record the voltage. In the limit that this distance shrinks to zero, we can write
(2.14)
The last equality holds because the input resistance at the location of the injecting electrode
is, by definition, equal to the ratio of the evoked potential to the injected current causing
this change. It follows that
(2.15)
The input resistance is-—as expected—constant throughout the infinite and homogeneous
cable. Confirming our intuition, increasing either the membrane resistance or the intracel-
lular resistivity will increase R-m.
Conceptually, we can think of an infinite cable as two semi-infinite cables, one going off
to the left and one to the right. The input resistance associated with a single semi-infinite
cable ROO must therefore be twice the resistance associated with the infinite cable (since
current can only flow in one direction); or
(2-16)
This variable, rather than the resistance associated with an infinite cable, is called R^,,
since it corresponds to the situation of a soma with a single dendrite extending into infinity
(Rail, 1959).
The input conductance of a semi-infinite cylinder is given by the inverse of Eq. 2.16,
(2.17)
The input conductance decreases as the square root of the membrane resistance Rm and
increases as the | power of the diameter of the fiber, a relationship that will be important
later on.
The input resistance of a patch of membrane is linearly related to the membrane resistance
Rm (with the constant of proportionality given by the total membrane area). In general, as
the dimensionality of the space increases, the dependency of the input resistance on Rm
lessens. Thus, Rm in an infinite! cable is proportional to the square root of Rm. For a
two-dimensional resistive sheet j/?in oc log(/?m). In a three dimensional syncytium (such
as muscle tissue) R-m oc e~lfRm 
(see Chap. 3 in Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Eisenberg
and Johnson, 1970). Given the area- or volume-filling geometry of the dendritic tree, the
dependency of its input resistance on Rm falls somewhere between that of an infinite cable
and that of the resistive sheet.
2.2.2 Finite Cable
Real neurons certainly do not possess infinitely long dendrites, so we need to consider
a finite piece of cable of total electrotonic length L = i/X. The general solution to the


===== Page 10 =====
34 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
linear second-order ordinary differential cable equation can be expressed in normalized
electrotonic units as
(2.18)
with cosh(jc) = (e* + e~x)/2 and sinh(^) = (ex - e~x)/2. The values of a and ft depend
on the type of boundary conditions imposed at the two terminals. (What happens at the end
of the finite cable influences the voltage throughout the fiber.) We distinguish three different
boundary conditions.
Sealed-End Boundary Condition
This is the boundary condition of most relevance to neurons embedded in the living tissue.
It assumes that the end of the fiber is covered with neuronal membrane with resistance Rm.
It follows that the resistance terminating the equivalent circuit in Fig. 2.3 has the value
4Rm/ird2. For d = 2 jitm and Rm = 10s £2 • cm2 this is about 3000 Gfi, a value so
high that for all intents and purposes we can consider it to be infinite. If the terminating
resistance is infinite, no axial current /, (X = L) will flow. And since the axial current is
given by the derivative of the voltage along the cable, this implies that
(2.19)
at the terminal. This zero-slope or von Neumann boundary condition is referred to as a
sealed-end boundary condition and is the one commonly adopted to model the terminals of
dendrites or other neuronal processes. Applying Eq. 2.19 to Eq. 2.18 leads to
(2.20)
Figure 2.4 illustrates the voltage profile in a short and a long cable with such a sealed-end
boundary condition. As expected from Eq. 2.19, the slope of both curves flattens out as the
terminal is approached. Furthermore, both curves lie above the voltage decay in a semi-
infinite cable. In other words, the voltage in a cable with a sealed end—regardless of its
length—decays less rapidly than the voltage in a semi-infinite cable.
We compute the input resistance R-m at the origin of the cable, looking into the cable
toward its terminal, using the same strategy as in the previous section,
(2.21)
with coth(^) = cosh(j«c)/sinh(jc). This is plotted in Fig. 2.5 (upper curve). This input
resistance is always higher than that of the semi-infinite cable, since the intra-axial current
/,• is prevented from leaving the cable at the endpoint of the cable.
Killed-End Boundary Condition
Another type of boundary condition is of relevance when the dendrite or axon is
physically cut open or otherwise short-circuited. Under these conditions the intracellular
potential at the terminal is identical to the extracellular potential, that is, the effective
potential is set to zero,
(2.22)
This Dirichlet type of boundary condition is also known as open- or killed-end boundary


===== Page 11 =====
2.2 Steady-State Solutions
35
Fig. 2.4 STEADY-STATE VOLTAGE ATTENUATION 
Steady-state voltage attenuation in a finite piece
of cable as a function of the normalized electrotonic distance X = x/k from the left terminal. The
potential at the left terminal is always held fixed at V = VQ, while the normalized potential throughout
the cable varies with the boundary condition at the right terminal. The bold continuous line corresponds
to the voltage in a semi-infinite cable, showing a pure exponential decay. The thin continuous lines
show the voltage decay for two cables that terminate in a sealed end (Eq. 2.20) at X = 1 or X = 2. This
is the type of boundary condition used most commonly in simulations. The two thin dashed curves
show the same two cables, but now terminating in a short circuit (killed-end boundary condition;
Eq. 2.23). Note that either the spatial derivative of voltage (sealed-end) or the voltage itself (killed-
end) is zero at the rightmost terminal. That the spatial voltage profile can be nonmonotonic in a passive
cable is witnessed by the topmost bold dashed Curve, where the voltage at X — 1 is clamped to 1.1
times the voltage at the origin. For the lower bold dashed curve, the voltage at the terminal is clamped
to 0.2Vb. Reprinted in modified form by permission from Rail (1989).
condition and corresponds to setting the terminating resistance to zero. It follows that the
voltage along the cable is
(2.23)
and the input resistance is
(2.24)
with tanh(x) = sinhC*)/ cosh(;c). The two thin dashed curves in Fig. 2.4 are the voltage
profiles along two cables of electrotonic length L = 1 and 2 with a killed-end boundary
condition. Their values are always less than the voltage at the corresponding location in a
semi-infinite cable. Correspondingly, the input resistance of these cables is always less than
that of the semi-infinite cable (Fig. 2.5). The input resistance at the origin X = 0 of the


===== Page 12 =====
36 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
Fig. 2.5 INPUT RESISTANCE OF A FINITE CABLE Input resistance Rin looking into a cable of
electrotonic length L toward the right terminal. The ordinate is normalized in terms of the input
resistance R-m of a semi-infinite cylinder (Eq. 2.16). The normalized input resistance for a sealed-end
boundary condition (upper curve) is always larger than Rx, while the input resistance of a cable
with killed-end boundary condition (lower curve) is always less. In the former case, the current is
prevented from leaving the cable at the endpoint, while the voltage is "shorted to ground" in the latter
case. For cables longer than two space constants, Rm «» Rx.
cable is inversely proportional (see Eq. 2.2) to the slope of V. The actual input resistance as
a function of the electrotonic length of a killed-end cable is shown in Fig. 2.5 (lower curve).
Arbitrary Boundary Condition
In general, the terminal has neither infinite (sealed-end) nor zero (killed-end) resistance,
but some finite value RL. This, for instance, is the case if the cable is connected to some
other cable or even to an entire dendritic tree. If we know the value of the voltage at this
boundary, that is, VL, we can express the voltage as
(2.25)
Notice how this expression takes on the value VQ at X = 0 and VL at X — L. In Fig. 2.4
we show two such cases in which VL is either clamped to 0.2 VQ or to 1.1 VQ (causing the
non-monotonic appearance). Note that this sagged appearance is a direct consequence of
the unusual boundary condition.
The leak current through the terminal follows from Ohm's law and Eq. 2.2 as
(2.26)


===== Page 13 =====
2.3 Time-Dependent Solutions 
• 
37
We can now rewrite Eq. 2.25 as
(2.27)
resulting in a general expression for the voltage in a finite piece of cable.
With the help of Eq. 2.3 and the above equation, we can derive an expression for the
input resistance of a cable of length L with a terminating resistance RL,
(2.28)
The previous two equations allow us to obtain the values for the voltage and the input
resistance for the sealed-end and the killed-end boundary conditions by setting RI to either
oo or 0. Furthermore we recover /?jn = 7?oo for an infinite cable (since tanh(L) goes to 1
as L -> oo).
2.3 Time-Dependent Solutions
So far, we have only been concerned with the behavior of the voltage in a cable in response
to a stationary current injection, a situation where the voltage settles to a constant value. In
general though, we need to consider the voltage trajectory in response to some time-varying
current input. Since the time-dependent solution of the cable equation is substantially more
complex than the steady-state solution treated above, we will only discuss the solution to
two special cases. The interested reader is referred to the monographs by Jack, Noble, and
Tsien (1975) and by Tuckwell (1988a) for a treatment of many more cases of interest.
Before we do so, we will introduce a normalized version of the cable equation. Recalling
the definition of the neuronal time constant from Chap. 1 as
(2.29)
allows us to introduce dimensionless variables for both time, T = t/rm, and space,
X = x/K. Written in these units and taking care to properly transfrom the input current
(Sec. 4.4 in Tuckwell, 1988a), the cable equation becomes
(2.30)
with Iinj(X, T) — A.Tm/inj(;c, t) and rmj(x, t) corresponds to the stimulus current density.
2.3.1 Infinite Cable
In order to compute the dynamic behavior of the infinite cable in response to current
injections we will once again exploit the linearity of Eq. 2.30, that is, the fact that if the
response of the membrane to the current I (X, T) is V(X, T), the polarization in response
to the current <xI(X, T) is a V(X, T).
Voltage Response to a Current Pulse
As discussed in the first chapter (and summarized in Appendix B), we can completely
characterize the system by computing the impulse response or Green's function associated
with Eq. 2.30, which we do by transforming to the Fourier domain, assuming that V(X) 
—»•
0 as | X | -*• oo, and transferring back to the time domain (Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975).


===== Page 14 =====
38 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
Assuming that a fixed amount of charge Qo is applied at X = 0 as an infinitely brief pulse
of current /o = Qo/rm, the resultant voltage is
(2.31)
In order to gain a better intuitive understanding of cable theory, let us review various
special cases. If we record the voltage at the same location at which we injected the current,
corresponding to X = 0, the Green's function is proportional to e~T /^/T. Vg(0, T)
diverges at the origin and decays a bit faster than exponentially for large times (Figs. 2.6
and 2.7B). The singularity at the origin comes about due to the infinitesimal amount of
capacitance for X = 0 between the site of current injection and that of the measuring
device. Using L'Hopital's rule, we can see that the limit of Vg(X, T) for any value of
X other than the origin is zero. No singularity exists for the membrane patch model,
which possesses a simple exponentially decaying Green's function with a fixed amount
of capacitance (Fig. 2.6).
If one waits long enough, the voltage decay throughout the cable will be identical,
approaching more and more to the decay seen at the spatial origin. This can be observed
Fig. 2.6 IMPULSE RESPONSE AT THE ORIGIN OF AN INFINITE CABLE Comparison of the impulse
response or Green's function for an infinite cable V$(X, T) (Eq. 2.31) for X = 0 and X = 1 and
the normalized Green's function for a patch of passive membrane (e~T; Eq. 1.17; dashed line) on a
logarithmic voltage scale. Time is expressed in units of Tm. The voltage in the infinite cable (solid
lines) is measured at the location where the S pulse of current is applied or one space constant A. away.
The Green's function diverges at X = 0, since the amount of membrane capacitance between the
current injection and the voltage recording electrode is infinitely small, but has a constant value of C
for the membrane patch case.


===== Page 15 =====
2.3 Time-Dependent Solutions 
• 
39
Fig. 2.7 IMPULSE RESPONSE OF THE INFINITE CABLE Impulse response or Green's function
V$(X, T) (Eq. 2.31) at X = 0 and T = 0 as a function of normalized space (A) and time (B) using
different linear scales. At any point in time, the spatial profile of the voltage along the cable in the
upper panel can be described by a Gaussian. One of the consequences of the low-pass nature of the
membrane is evident in the bottom panel: more distant locations respond with a delay.
very well using a logarithmic scale, as in Fig. 2.6, where the decay ultimately scales as
e~'/rm.
In other words, immediately following the current injection, the voltage is sharply peaked
around the injection site. As time goes by, the spatial voltage profile becomes broader,
smearing out more and more (Fig. 2.7A). At any particular instant T, the spatial distribution
of the voltage along the cable is proportional to e~x , corresponding to a Gaussian function
centered at the injection site. If the time course of voltage is recorded at increasing distances
from the site of the charge application, the voltage response takes longer to reach its peak
due to the low-pass nature of the membrane capacitance (Fig. 2.7B).
Since the nature of the filtering carried out by the membrane does not depend on the
applied potential across it, the system is a linear one. It follows that the voltage in response
to an arbitrary current stimulus /mjCjT) injected at the origin is given by the superposition
of the impulse response function with the input current. Conceptually, one can think of the
input /injCO as a series of delta pulses staggered in time. The final voltage is the sum of the


===== Page 16 =====
40 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
impulse functions associated (and weighted) with the individual pulses. This is concisely
expressed by the convolution integral
where * denotes convolution and the rm/<2o factor is responsible for the correct normal-
ization (converting the voltage V& into an impedance).
Voltage Response to a Current Step
If a rectangular step of current is injected into the cable, such that/jn^T1) = /oforT > 0
and 0 otherwise, the previous integral evaluates to /o(tm/<2o) /o Vs(X> T')dT'. Due to
the presence of the Gaussian term in Eq. 2.31, this integral has no closed-form solution and
must be expressed in terms of the error function erf (x) = J= f* e~y dy (as first carried
out by Hodgkin and Rushton, 1946). While we will not discuss the full solution in all of
its glory (see Eq. 3.24 in Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975), we will consider several cases of
particular interest to us. The transient voltage response at the site of current injection is
(2.33)
Since erf (1) = 0.84, the voltage in the cable at the site of the current step rises to 84%
of its steady-state value in one time constant, compared to 63% of its peak value for the
exponential charging in the case of a patch of membrane (see Eq. 1.9). Conceptually, this
latter case can be thought of as resulting from injecting a current into a cable, only that
in the membrane patch case the entire cable has been "space clamped" by introducing an
imaginary wire along its length. Let us plot the normalized membrane potential for both
cases (Fig. 2.8A), that is, the potential relative to its steady-state value,
(2-34)
and plotted in Fig. 2.8 A.
When considering why the potential in the cable reaches its steady-state value faster
than the potential across a patch of membrane with the same input impedance, it is helpful
to consider the closely related problem (for linear cables) of why voltage decays faster
in a cable than across a membrane patch. In the former, current can flow longitudinally
and therefore escapes more rapidly than when it must all flow across the membrane. The
same argument holds for an electrode injecting current into the soma of a neuron with an
extended dendritic tree. A significant fraction of the injected current flows onto the extensive
dendritic membrane surface, and as a result, the buildup and decay of the somatic voltage is
faster compared to the isopotential membrane patch. This effect was first recognized by Rail
(1957). Coombs, Eccles, and Fatt (1955) had fitted the experimentally observed membrane
transients at the motoneuron soma with a single exponential with rm = 2 msec. Rail argued
that the cable properties of the dendrites needed to be accounted for and—on the basis of
Eq. 2.33—estimated a rm of 4 msec.
Frequency-Dependent Space Constant
As expressed by Eq. 2.12, the steady-state space constant X is defined as the distance
in an infinite cable over which a steady-state voltage decays by l/e. This variable can
be generalized to a function depending on frequency /. If a sinusoidal current I(t) =
/o sin(27r/f) is injected into an infinite cable, the theory of Fourier transforms can be


===== Page 17 =====
2.3 Time-Dependent Solutions 
• 
41
Fig. 2.8 VOLTAGE IN AN INFINITE CABLE IN RESPONSE TO A CURRENT STEP 
(A) Normalized
voltage W(X, T), that is, V(X, T) divided by its steady-state value at location X (Eq. 2.34), in an
infinite cable in response to a current step injected at the same location is compared to the voltage
increase in response to the same current injected into a patch of membrane. In the cable, the voltage
rises faster to its final value than in a patch of membrane. (B) The normalized voltage in response to
a current step in an infinite cylinder at different distances X from the site of current injection. As X
increases, the response becomes more smeared out. The point at which the voltage at any one location
X reaches half of its final value moves—in the limit for long times—with constant velocity 2X/rm
along the cable (see Sec. 2.4).
used to introduce a generalized frequency-dependent or transient space constant A(/) (see
Appendix B).
It is relatively straightforward to formulate the cable equation in a generalized linear
system by representing a finite or an infinite cable as a ladder network with arbitrary
intracellular impedance zfl(/) and membrane impedance zm(/) (Koch and Poggio, 1985a).
In this case, the membrane can contain any collection of linear elements, including induc-
tances, capacitances, and resistances. Under certain conditions, explored in more detail in
Chap. 10, a nonlinear membrane can be linearized and can be expressed by a combination
of these linear circuit elements.


===== Page 18 =====
42
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
If the current /o sin(27r/f) is injected into an infinite cable, the voltage at any point in
the cable will be proportional to sin(2nft + 0), with a phase shift </>(/)• The constant
of proportionality is given by e~v<-^x, where x is the distance between the site of current
injection and the recording electrode, and the propagation constant is
(2.35)
For a passive membrane, za(f) = ra and z m ( f ) — rm/(\ + i2nfTm). By extracting the
real part of this function, we can define the frequency-dependent space constant A.(/) as
(2.36)
with A(0) the sustained or steady-state space constant (Eisenberg and Johnson, 1970). As
seen in Fig. 2.9, X(f) decays steeply with increasing frequency, becoming proportional
to l/\//Tm in the limit of 2nfTm 
y>> 1. This decay is due to the distributed membrane
capacitance that soaks up more and more of the current as the frequency increases. For
instance, at 1000 Hz (roughly corresponding to the inverse of the width of a typical action
potential), A. has decreased to 8% of its steady-state value (assuming xm = 50 msec).
This emphasizes once again the low-pass nature of the passive neuronal membrane: high
frequencies are preferentially filtered out.
The frequency-dependent space constant also informs us about the limit of one-dimen-
sional cable theory. It is clear that as A.(/) *» d, the diameter of the fiber, one can no
longer neglect the radial dimensions of the cable and has to treat the full three-dimensional
problem. In general, this is not expected to occur until very high frequencies. For instance,
in an apical dendrite of 4-ju<m diameter with Rm = 50,000 2nf cm2, /?, = 200 2nf cm,
and Cm = 1 (iF/cm2. The steady-state space constant X equals 1.581 mm. Under these
conditions, one has to go to frequencies close to 1 MHz in order for A. (/) « d. We conclude
that under most circumstances, one-dimensional cable theory will hold.
Fig. 2.9 FREQUENCY-DEPENDENT SPACE CONSTANT If a sinusoidal current of frequency / is
injected at x = 0 into an infinite passive cable, the voltage at location x will also be a sinusoid of
frequency /, but attenuated by e~lfx<-^ and phase shifted. We here plot A.(/), normalized by the
steady-state space constant X(0), for rm = 50 msec. At 1 kHz, the space constant has decayed to 8%
of its original value.


===== Page 19 =====
2.3 Time-Dependent Solutions 
• 
43
2.3.2 Finite Cable
A number of different techniques are available for computing the Green's function in finite
cables (Tuckwell, 1988a). One classical method, known as separation of variables, assumes
that the Green's function can be written as the product of two functions, one depending only
on X while the other one depends solely on T. Rail (1969a) used this technique to derive
the voltage in a finite cable with sealed-end boundary conditions at X = 0 and X = L. The
voltage in response to an arbitrary current input anywhere in the cable can be expressed as
an infinite series,
(2.37)
The Bn depend on the initial conditions chosen, such as injection of a delta pulse current or
a current step. The coefficients an are the ratios of the membrane time constant rm to the
equalizing time constants that are associated with the redistribution of charge and with the
reduction of voltage differences between different regions of the cable. They are defined as
(2.38)
The physical intuition behind Eq. 2.37 is that each term results from a "reflection" of the
voltage at one of the terminals. Each term becomes progressively smaller as it is reflected
back and forth an infinite number of times (Fig. 2.10). Another way to understand Eq. 2.37
is to note that the n = 0 term, relating to the slowest decay, is constant throughout the cable
and corresponds to an exponential decay away from the average voltage along the finite
cable. The n — 1 term is associated with decay and rapid equalization of charge between
two half-lengths of the cylinder (V(X, T) is positive for 0 < X < L/2 and negative for
the other half of the cylinder). Higher order terms lead to an even more rapid equalization
of charge over shorter lengths of the cable. The sum in Eq. 2.37 can also be expressed as
Fig. 2.10 VOLTAGE RESPONSE IN A FINITE CABLE In a finite cable with sealed end boundary
conditions at X = 0 and 1, the voltage V in response to any current input can be described as the
sum (bold line) of infinitely many "reflection" terms (thin lines), each term becoming progressively
smaller. This leads to the convergent series in Eq. 2.41. Here, the current is injected at X = 0.


===== Page 20 =====
44 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
(2.39)
where the C,-'s depend both on the initial conditions as well as on X, and VOQ captures the
steady-state components of the voltage. TO equals the passive membrane time constant Tm,
while all other values of rn, called equalizing time constants, are smaller than TO, with
(2.40)
The voltage decay for large t is always dominated by the largest time constant TQ — Tm. In
other words, if the logarithm of the membrane potential in response to, say, a current step,
is plotted as a function of time, the linear slope at the tail end of the pulse is identical to the
membrane time constant rm (see also Fig. 2.6 and the next chapter).
A different way to express the voltage in a finite piece of cable with sealed-end boundary
condition at X — 0 and X = L in response to a current pulse (with /o = Q/Tm) at X = 0
uses the theory of Laplace transforms (Jack, Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Tuckwell, 1988a),
(2.41)
As L —»• oo, we recover the impulse response function for the infinite cable (Eq. 2.31).
This expression has a simple graphical interpretation (as expressed in Fig. 2.10) in terms of
ever reflecting and decreasing contributions, corresponding to an infinite number of virtual
electrodes that inject charge at ±L, ±2L, • • •
While the time constants in depend on L, they are independent of the site of the current
pulse, the site of recording, or the initial conditions. Thus, they provide a convenient way
to calculate the electrotonic length of a cable. In particular, the ratio of the first two time
constants provides a measure of the cable's electrotonic length,
(2.42)
This expression has frequently been applied to experimental data from different preparations
by measuring the two slowest time constants, obtained by peeling the slopes (time constants)
of the logarithm of the transient voltage response (see Fig. 3.12). The outcome of this
procedure is quite dependent on the neuronal geometry of the cell recorded from and the
amount of noise in the measured voltage transient and needs to be used with great care.
For an overview of the advantages and limitations of this method see Rail et al. (1992) and
Holmes, Segev, and Rail, (1992).
A related, but more complicated, expression for the voltage can be derived if one end
of the finite cable is terminated with an equipotential "soma," consisting of a somatic leak
and capacitance (Rail, 1962, 1969a). We refer the interested reader to the monograph by
Tuckwell (1988a) that lists the Green's functions associated with a host of other neuronal
geometries and initial conditions.
2.4 Neuronal Delays and Propagation Velocity
How fast does the potential induced by the current step propagate along the cable? Fig-
ure 2.8B shows the relative voltage change along an infinite cable in response to a current


===== Page 21 =====
2.4 Neuronal Delays and Propagation Velocity 
• 
45
step. The potential is normalized at each location by its steady-state value (Eq. 2.34). This
normalization accounts for the effect of the exponential attenuation of V along the cable
(Eq. 2.12). Because the membrane capacitance preferentially "soaks" up electrical charge
associated with high temporal frequencies, the farther any particular point X is away from
the site of current injection, the longer it takes W(X, T) to rise to a particular value, say 0.5
(that is, half of its maximum). Is this delay proportional to the distance or, in other words,
can one define a propagation velocity?
The linear cable equation does not admit any wave solution due to the dissipation of
energy through the passive membrane. As long as no inductive elements are present in the
neuronal membrane across which the current cannot change instantaneously, the voltage
will, in principle, respond infinitely fast to a change in the current input an arbitrary distance
away. In other words, the answer to the above question is, "No, in general one cannot define
a velocity in a passive cable." This can change if voltage-dependent nonlinear components
are incorporated in the membrane, as witnessed by the propagation of spikes at constant
velocities along axons.
Yet all is not lost. Because one cannot readily define the delay of voltages in passive
cables, Agmon-Snir and Segev (1993) used the trick of computing the propagation delay of
the centroid or the first moment of the voltage or the current in a passive cable. Following
the nomenclature of Zador, Agmon-Snir, and Segev (1995), we define the centroid of the
signal h(x,t) at location x as
(2.43)
Here h can be either a current or a voltage with a single peak or with multiple peaks. This
measure is frequently also called the center of mass if t is thought of as distance and h(x,t)
as the mass distribution, with
(2.44)
We define the transfer delay as the difference between the centroid of the induced voltage
measured at location y and the centroid of current that was injected at location jc,
(2.45)
We define the input or the local delay in the same spirit as the difference between the
centroids of the voltage response and the current that gave rise to it,
(2.46)
It is possible to prove a number of useful properties of these delays by multiplying the
cable equation by t and integrating over t. This results in an ordinary linear differential
equation, similar to the steady-state cable equation, which can be analyzed by very similar
techniques. Most importantly, Agmon-Snir and Segev (1993) prove that the transfer delay
Dxy is always positive and is independent of the shape of the transient input current. In
other words, Dxy is a property of the passive cable and not of the input. Furthermore, no
matter what the electrical structure of the cable under consideration, the transfer delay is
symmetric, that is,
(2.47)


===== Page 22 =====
46 
• 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
and it does not depend on the direction of travel.
In the simple case of an isopotential neuron,
(2.48)
due to the capacitive nature of the neuronal membrane (Fig. 2.11 A). In other words, the
centroid for a depolarizing potential occurs exactly one time constant later than the centroid
for the current underlying this potential.
In an infinite (or semi-infinite) cable, potentials rise and decay faster, as we saw already
in Fig. 2.8A. Indeed, because the charge injected into the cable not only flows onto
Fig. 2.11 NEURONAL INPUT AND PROPAGATION DELAYS 
An elegant way to define propagation
delays in passive cables involves tracking the centroid or center of mass of voltages or currents in
passive cable (Agmon-Snir and Segev, 1993). This is illustrated in (A) for an isopotential patch of
membrane with rm = 20 msec. A brief current pulse (solid profile with (peaic = 0.5 msec) gives rise
to a rapidly rising but very slowly decaying depolarizing potential (shown dashed using normalized
units). The centroids of the two signals (see arrows at 1 and 21 msec) are displaced by one time
constant. In (B), the same current is injected into a very long cable, and the normalized potential at
the same location (dashed) and at a location one space constant displaced (dotted) are plotted. In an
infinite cable, the transfer delay Dxy between the centroid of the current at x and the centroid of the
voltage at y is (1 + \x — y\/X)Tm/2 (see the arrows at 1, 11, and 21 msec). As witnessed already in
Fig. 2.8A, the potential decays faster in a cable than in an isopotential patch of membrane.


===== Page 23 =====
2.5 Recapitulation 
• 
47
the capacitance at the location of the electrode but via the intracellular resistance onto
neighboring capacitances, the input delay between any current input and the associated
potential at the same location is only delayed by half a time constant,
(2.49)
as compared to Tm for an isopotential patch of membrane. The faster local response time of
an infinite cable compared with that of a patch of membrane is obvious in Fig. 2.8A. If the
current is injected at x and the voltage recorded at y, the two centroids are displaced by
(2.50)
This is clearly evident in Fig. 2.1 IB. Again, this delay does not depend on the particular
form of the current input but holds for any input. This dependency on distance allows us to
define & propagation delay Pxy as the difference between the centroids of the voltage at x
and at y,
(2-51>
For an infinite cable,
(2.52)
This linear relationship between space and time is equivalent to the notion of a propagation
velocity in an infinite cable,
(2.53)
It is important to emphasize that v is a "pseudovelocity" rather than the physical velocity of
a constant wave moving along the cable for which V(x, t) = V(x — vt) should hold. Yet,
despite the fact that any potential will decay and become smeared out as it moves along a
cable, its center of mass travels with a fixed velocity.
We feel obliged to point out a serious drawback when using Dxy or Pxy in active
structures. The Dxy measure of a dendritic input giving rise to a somatic EPSP with
an undershoot, that is, a hyperpolarization due to potassium current activation (as in
Fig. 18. IB), will seriously underestimate the delay due to the small, but long-lasting negative
contribution to the centroid, rendering it less useful for real cells than for purely passive
structures (Bernander, 1993). Under these conditions, Dxy can be negative.
2.5 Recapitulation
One-dimensional cable theory is based on several approximations. (1) The magnetic field
due to the movement of charge can be neglected. (2) Changes in the concentration of the
charged carriers, Na+, K+, and other ions, is slight so that the current can be expressed by
Ohm's law, and the intracellular cytoplasm can be mimicked by an ohmic resistance. (3) Due
to the wirelike geometry of dendrites and axons and the high resistivity of the neuronal
membrane, the radial and angular components of voltage can be neglected, reducing the
complexity of the solution from three spatial dimensions to a single one. (4) The extracellular
space is reduced to a homogeneous resistive milieu whose resisitivity is usually set to zero.


===== Page 24 =====
48 
. 
LINEAR CABLE THEORY
This allows us to solve for the potential V (x, t) across the neuronal membrane on the basis
of a single equation.
Linear cable theory further assumes that for a limited range of voltage excursions around
the resting potential, the membrane properties are independent of the membrane potential,
reducing the electrical description of the membrane to resistances and capacitances, greatly
simplifying analysis.
Starting in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the linear cable equation was solved by Rail
and others to study the dynamics of the membrane potential in dendritic trees. Several key
concepts associated with the linear cable equation for a single finite or infinite cylinder
are the space constant A., determining the distance over which a steady-state potential in
an infinite cylinder decays e-fold, the neuronal time constant Tm, determining the charging
and decharging times of V(x, t) in response to current steps, and the input resistance /?;„,
determining the amplitude of the voltage in response to slowly varying current injections.
The voltage in response to a current input, whether delivered by an electrode or by
synapses, can be expressed by convolving the input with an appropriate Green's function.
For passive cables, this always amounts to filtering the input by a low-pass filter function.
While the class of parabolic differential equations (to which the cable equation belongs)
does not admit to any wave solutions but only shows dissipative behavior, one can define
input, transfer, and propagation delays by computing and tracking the centroid or center of
mass of V(x, t) relative to the centroid of the current input. In the following chapter, we
will apply these concepts to realistic dendritic trees.


