===== Page 1 =====
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN
A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Nerve cells are the targets of many thousands of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. An
extreme case are the Purkinje cells in the primate cerebellum, which receive between one
and two hundred thousand synapses onto dendritic spines from an equal number of parallel
fibers (Braitenberg and Atwood, 1958; Llinas and Walton, 1998). In fact, this structure has
a crystalline-like quality to it, with each parallel fiber making exactly one synapse onto
a spine of a Purkinje cell. For neocortical pyramidal cells, the total number of afferent
synapses is about an order of magnitude lower (Larkman, 1991). These numbers need
to be compared against the connectivity in the central processing unit (CPU) of modern
computers, where the gate of a typical transistor usually receives input from one, two, or
three other transistors or connects to one, two, or three other transistor gates.' The large
number of synapses converging onto a single cell provide the nervous system with a rich
substratum for implementing a very large class of linear and nonlinear neuronal operations.
As we discussed in the introductory chapter, it is only these latter ones, such as multiplication
or a threshold operation, which are responsible for "computing" in the nontrivial sense of
information processing.
It therefore becomes crucial to study the nature of the interaction among two or more
synaptic inputs located in the dendritic tree. Here, we restrict ourselves to passive dendritic
trees, that is, to dendrites that do not contain voltage-dependent membrane conductances.
While such an assumption seemed reasonable 20 or even 10 years ago, we now know that
the dendritic trees of many, if not most, cells contain significant nonlinearities, including
the ability to generate fast or slow all-or-none electrical events, so-called dendritic spikes.
Indeed, truly passive dendrites may be the exception rather than the rule in the nervous
1. The reason for this very small/«rt-/« and fan-out is that each additional gate whose parasitic capacitance needs to be charged
up increases the signal propagation delay between consecutive stages, slowing down how last the clock can operate. Since the
clock speed is one of the most important determinants of performance of the final chip, convergence as well as divergence are kept
to a minimum. The situation is quite different for random access memory circuits. For example, in a 64-Mbit DRAM (dynamic
random access memory), the fan-in and fan-out associated with the switching transistor at each memory location is approximately
8192. The time taken to charge the large interconnect capacitance that dominates these circuits is reduced through the use of
regenerative amplifiers and buffers.
117
5


===== Page 2 =====
118 
• 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
system. We will take up the theme of active dendrites and outline their putative role in
computation in Chap. 19.
The voltage change in a passive tree in response to two or more current injections is given
by the sum of the voltages induced by the individual current inputs. This linearity between
current and voltage is expressed in the cable equation and is the basis for using input and
transfer impedances to completely charter the behavior of this system. In the absence of any
nonlinearity, no true information processing operations can occur. However, as we keep on
emphasizing, a synaptic input acts to change the membrane conductance (in series with a
battery), implying that the change in membrane voltage caused by two or more synaptic
inputs is not the sum of the voltages induced by the individual synaptic inputs. It has not
escaped the attention of theoreticians that this nonlinearity could be used to implement a
type of multiplication (Blomfield, 1974; Srinivasan and Bernard, 1976; Poggio and Torre,
1978, 1981; Torre and Poggio, 1978).
In the following section, we describe the nonlinear interaction between excitation and
inhibition, which has received particular scrutiny in the literature. In the second part of this
chapter, we focus on the multiplicative-like interaction among large numbers of voltage-
dependent NMDA synaptic inputs. The example discussed here is the most plausible
instance of a higher level operation, in this case storing and discriminating complex patterns,
implemented using a biophysically very detailed model of a nerve cell. The last section
focuses on the important topic of synaptic microcircuits (Shepherd, 1972,1978), that is, very
small and specific arrangements of synapses between particular neurons. Such microcircuits
usually involve so-called dendro-dendritic synapses among two dendrites and are thought
to subserve very specific computations.
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition
In Sec. 1.5, we studied this interaction for the membrane patch model. With the addition
of the dendritic tree, the nervous system has many more degrees of freedom to make use
of, and the strength of the interaction depends on the relative spatial positioning, as we will
see now. That this can be put to good use by the nervous system is shown by the following
experimental observation and simple model.
5.1.1 Absolute versus Relative Suppression
For an animal, it is often necessary to suppress certain behaviors completely, while under
other conditions the threshold for initiating a behavior should only be elevated but not
prevented altogether. Vu and Krasne (1992) study how these two operations can be imple-
mented in the same neuron for the tail-flip escape response in the crayfish. Here, as indeed
in any other animal, during the execution of the escape reflex propelling the animal away
from a potential dangerous situation, no additional escape behavior should be initiated. The
neuronal influence responsible for this absolute suppression is called recurrent inhibition.
While the crayfish is feeding or otherwise engaged, the escape reflex becomes more difficult
to initiate. This suppressive influence, termed tonic inhibition, can be overridden in the
presence of a strong enough stimulus.
The escape response is mediated by a pair of lateral giant command (LG) neurons. On
the basis of intracellular recordings, Vu and Krasne (1992; see also Vu, Lee, and Krasne,
1993) correlate these two types of suppression with distal (tonic inhibition) and proximal


===== Page 3 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition 
• 
119
(recurrent inhibition) inhibitory inputs onto the dendritic tree of the LG cell (Fig. 5.1). Since
it is known that the excitation mediating the escape reflex is distal from the spike-initiating
zone, Vu and his colleagues use the two compartment circuits shown in Fig. 5.1 A and B to
model the two forms of inhibition (here by assuming that the GABA-mediated inhibition
is of the silent or shunting type with Ef — 0). In both cases, excitation is spatially removed
from the output of the circuit. For "proximal inhibition," the inhibitory conductance change
is located at the output (close to the soma), while for "distal inhibition," excitation and
inhibition are both colocalized in the distal compartment. Vu and Krasne point out that
in the former case, inhibition always reduces the EPSP by some amount, no matter how
strong excitation is. This, they argue, is the manifestation of absolute suppression in the
sense that no matter the level of excitation, the EPSP—and therefore the behavior—will
be suppressed. Quite a different behavior is observed for distal inhibition: any amount of
inhibition can always be overcome by more excitation, that is, the system demonstrates
relative suppression. They argue that any behavior that needs to be suppressed no matter
what the circumstances should use synaptic inhibition that is close to the soma (absolute
suppression). Conversely, if the threshold for initiating a behavior needs to be elevated—
without abolishing it altogether—distal synaptic inhibition is required.
Let us follow Vu and Krasne (1992) and reduce the neuron to but two compartments,
one proximal and one distal to the spike initiation zone. To understand the principle of the
spatial interaction we will further assume that the time course of synaptic input is slow
compared to the membrane time constant and that inhibition is of the shunting type (that
is, Et =0). Let us first analyze the case when inhibition is proximal, here in the somatic
compartment (Fig. 5.1 A). Following Kirchhoff's current law, which stipulates that the sum
of all currents flowing into a node must be zero, we can write for the compartment proximal
or close to the spike triggering zone,
(5.1)
and for the dendritic compartment,
(5.2)
After a few algebraic manipulations, we arrive at an expression for the proximal depolar-
ization,
(5.3)
The amplitude of the EPSP as a function of ge for various settings of inhibition is plotted in
Fig. 5.1 A. What is apparent is that a fixed amout of inhibition at the output, that is, the soma,
can reduce the EPSP amplitude, no matter what the level of excitation ge. This absolute
dependency on g, readily becomes apparent in the limit of large excitatory inputs,
(5.4)
Repeating the same analysis for the case that excitation and inhibition are colocalized in
the distal compartment leads to
(5.5)


===== Page 4 =====
120 
. 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.1 RELATIVE VERSUS ABSOLUTE SUPPRESSION 
An important distinction exists between
inhibition, which can partially suppress an excitatory input (relative suppression), and inhibitory input,
which cannot be overridden by excitation, no matter what its amplitude (absolute suppression). These
different types of inhibition were demonstrated by Vu and Krasne (1992) in the case of the tail-flip
escape behavior in the crayfish. Two circuits emphasize the relative placement of excitation (with an
associated conductance change ge in series with Ee = 100 mV) in the periphery and shunting inhibition
(of amplitude g,- and Ei = 0) in either the proximal (A) or the distal (B) compartment (see Eqs. 5.3 and
5.5). The curves were generated using a variable amount of inhibition (0,0.2,0.5,1,2, and 5 from top to
bottom in units of geRj). No matter how large the excitatory input, proximal inhibition can reduce the
peak potential in a graded manner (absolute suppression). This is not true if excitation and inhibition
are colocalized, where excitation can always overcome the inhibition, providing a substrate for relative
suppression. (C) Part of the neurobiological circuitry underlying the escape reflex. Excitatory inputs
onto the dendrites of the lateral giant (LG) command neuron mediate the reflex. It can be partially
suppressed by so-called tonic inhibition (TI), which is inferred to be in the distal dendritic tree. The
escape reflex can be completely abolished by recurrent inhibition (RI), which is thought to synapse close
to the spike trigger zone. SIZ demarcates the spike initiating zone. (D) Another prediction concerns
the relative amount of attenuation (the F factor of Eq. 5.14) for small (that is, small ge value; solid
bars) and large (large ge value; open bars) EPSPs for distal inhibition. The model predicts that smaller
EPSPs should be associated with a larger reduction (larger F values) than larger EPSPs, as borne
out by this data from eight different animals. For proximal inhibition, the F factor should depend
only weakly on ge (see upper left panel). Reprinted in modified form by permission from Vu and
Krasne (1992).


===== Page 5 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition 
• 
121
Although similar to Eq. 5.3, a crucial difference emerges in the limit,
(5.6)
For any fixed level of inhibition, excitation can always override its effect (relative inhibition;
Fig. 5. IB). If excitation and inhibition are not located close to each other, things are different
since the local potential saturates at Ee, placing a cap on the amount of current the excitatory
input can deliver to the soma. Because of this saturation, inhibition will always be able to
reduce the total amount of current delivered to the soma. This would not be true if the
synaptic input were to behave as a constant current source, since for ge -> oo, an infinite
amount of depolarizing current would flow to the soma, dominating any loss of current via
inhibitory synapses.
5.1.2 General Analysis of Synaptic Interaction in a Passive Tree
We have seen how treating a neuron as more than a single spatial compartment enhances
its computational power. Let us now analyze the general theory of nonlinear synaptic
interactions in a dendritic tree using two-port analysis developed in Chap. 3 (Koch, Poggio,
and Torre, 1982).
A word of warning. The theory developed here assumes that the cell operates in
its subthreshold domain, where no action potentials are generated. As discussed more
fully in Chap. 18, modeling the effect of synaptic interaction on a cell's firing rate can
yield surprising results quite different from those in the subthreshold domain (Holt and
Koch, 1997).
We assume a constant excitatory input at location e (of amplitude ge > 0 and battery
Ee > 0) and a constant inhibitory conductance change at location i (of amplitude g,- > 0
and battery E, < 0; see Fig. 5.2). We neglect the time-dependent aspects of this problem, a
simplification that allows us to use the input and transfer resistances described in Sec. 3.4,
expressing the change in membrane potential as the sum of the currents contributed by the
two synapses. At synapse e the synaptic current Ie = ge(Ee — Ve) will flow, and at location
i the current /, — g, (£, — V;). The composite postsynaptic potential at location e is given
by the synaptic current at e multiplied by the input resistance Kee plus the synaptic current
at i times the transfer resistance between i and e, Ket,
(5.7)
or,
(5.8)
Likewise, for the voltage change at location i we have
(5.9)
where we exploit the symmetry property Kfe — Kei. Finally, the potential at the soma is
given by
(5.10)
Notice that the voltage is always specified as the product of the appropriate input or transfer
resistance and the synaptic current and that the input and transfer resistances are computed in
the absence of any synaptic input. Solving these three algebraic equations is straightforward,
resulting in the following expression for the somatic potential:


===== Page 6 =====
122 • 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.2 INTERACTION AMONG AN EXCITATORY AND AN INHIBITORY SYNAPSE 
How does the
interaction between an excitatory synapse (at location e) and an inhibitory synapse (at i) in a passive
dendritic tree depend on their spatial positions? And what role do the synaptic architecture and the
dendritic morphology play? In general, the potential at the soma s is not simply the sum of the
individual IPSP and EPSP but can be much less. If the inhibition is of the shunting type, with a
reversal potential close to the resting potential of the cell, inhibition by itself leads to no significant
potential change while still being able to veto the EPSP, as long as the inhibitory synapse is either
close to the excitatory one or "on the direct path" between excitation and the soma s (shaded area).
The effectiveness of shunting inhibition drops substantially outside this zone.
(5.11)
with
Whether the somatic potential is positive or negative, that is, whether it corresponds to an
EPSP or to an IPSP, depends on the relative magnitude of the two contributions.
In order to arrive at a qualitative picture of the behavior of the system, let us assume
that the conductance inputs ge and g, are small, such that geKee <g 1, giKu <& I, and
gegiK* -C 1, and that higher than second-order terms in ge and g; can be neglected (e.g.,
gl & 0 and geg? & 0, etc.). Similarly to Eq. 4.14, we can use the Taylor series expansion
of Eq. 5.11 to arrive at
(5.12)
The three components in the first bracket are a shorthand version of the currents flowing at
locations e that are propagated to the cell body, and the three currents in the second bracket
are propagated from the site of inhibition to the soma. Ie is the current generated under
the assumption that the driving potential remains unperturbed (that is, Ee — Ve & Ee). Iee
"corrects" the first term by approximating the driving potential as the difference between


===== Page 7 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition 
• 
123
Ee and the voltage change KeegeEe associated with the first term. Iei results from the
interaction between the two synapses. It can be interpreted as follows: the first-order
approximation to the inhibitory current is g, E,, causing an IPSP at e of amplitude Kiegi Et,
which will affect the driving potential at e. The appropriate correction current is given by
the IPSP multiplied by the local conductance change —geKiegi E,. By analogy, the currents
at the site of the inhibition can likewise be explained by the superposition of a zero-order
current plus the first two correction terms.
5.1.3 Location of the Inhibitory Synapse
So far we did not discuss any specific spatial arrangements between excitation and inhibition.
We are interested in finding the location where synaptic inhibition can be maximally
effective in reducing the amplitude of the excitatory input. Specifically, given an excitatory
synapse (of amplitude ge and battery Ee) at location e, where should the inhibitory synapse
(of amplitude g, and battery £,) be located such that it maximally reduces the EPSP?
This question was the subject of an investigation into the relationship between synaptic
architecture and dendritic morphology (Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1982,1983). It is tedious
but straightforward (Koch, 1982) to prove the following:
On-the-path theorem. For arbitrary values of ge > 0, gj > 0, Ee > 0, andEi < 0,
the location where inhibition is maximally effective is always on the direct path from
the location of the excitatory synapse to the soma (Fig. 5.2).
Where exactly the optimal location is on this path depends on the details of the system
and can shift from the location of the excitatory synapse to somewhere on the path to the
cell body. As inhibition is moved toward the soma, its specificity decreases, since the same
inhibition now reduces not only the EPSP coming from synapse e but also those from other
locations. This is most pronounced at the soma, where an excitatory input anywhere in the
dendritic tree will be attenuated. Thus, mapping synaptic architecture onto the dendritic
morphology can give rise to different classes of computations.
Three useful properties concerning the optimal location of inhibition (see also Jack,
Noble, and Tsien, 1975; Rail, 1967, 1970) that are valid for stationary conductance inputs
in arbitrary, passive dendritic trees are:
1. For small synaptic inputs ge and g,-, the most relevant parameter is the distance between
the two synapses. It makes only little difference whether inhibition is behind (with respect
to the cell body) excitation or on the path. The strength of the interaction among synapses
decreases as the amplitudes of the conductance changes are decreased.
2. As ge increases while gi remains constant, the optimal location of inhibition moves
along the direct path toward the soma.
3. For very large excitatory inputs (ge -*• oo), all inhibitory synapses located behind the
excitatory synapse are completely ineffective.
These properties are a direct consequence of Eq. 5.11, the fact that there exists a unique
path between any two points in a dendritic tree, and properties of the transfer resistances
(Sec. 3.4).


===== Page 8 =====
124 
• 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Experimental verification of the specific nature of synaptic inhibition comes from a
study by Skydsgaard and Hounsgaard (1994) carried out on the large dendritic arbor
of motoneurons. Using three independent electrodes that can release either glutamate or
GABA (so-called iontophoresis electrodes) as well as a fourth recording electrode at the
cell body, they showed in 10 out of 12 experiments a spatially specific reduction in the
glutamate-induced excitatory response. In other words, the shunting action of GABA was
primarily effective in reducing the excitatory action of glutamate when the two iontophoresis
electrodes were close to each other. No or little effect was observed on the response due to
a more distal glutamate-releasing electrode. This constitutes prima facie evidence for the
spatial selectivity of shunting inhibition.
5.1.4 Shunting Inhibition Implements a "Dirty" Multiplication
Let us consider the specific case when inhibition has a reversal potential close or equal to
the resting potential of the cell. The GABA^ mediated increase in chloride conductance
approximates such a shunting inhibition. In this case, the nonlinear interaction between
excitation and inhibition is most pronounced, because activation of the inhibition by itself
does not cause any change in potential (hence its proper—but rarely used—name of silent
inhibition), while inhibition during synaptic excitation can greatly reduce the EPSP. For
small enough inputs Eq. 5.11 reduces to
(5.13)
Here the somatic potential is given by two terms in ge in addition to a crossterm involving a
multiplicative interaction between ge and g,-. Conceptually, one can think of this as a dirty
or approximate multiplication between two synaptic inputs ge and g,-, with the value of the
offset (geKes — g^KeeKes) depending in a nonlinear manner on one of the inputs (Poggio
and Torre, 1978).
In order to quantify the effectiveness of shunting inhibition, Koch, Poggio, and Torre
(1982) introduced the F factor as the ratio of the somatic EPSP in the absence of any
inhibition to the somatic EPSP in the presence of inhibition; the larger this number, the
stronger the effect of inhibition. On the basis of Eq. 5.11 this can be expressed as
(5.14)
where K+ = 0 for inhibition located on the path between e and s. A large F value
describes an effective inhibition, while 1/F indicates the relative decrease of the somatic
EPSP by inhibition. As expected, F > 1 for all cases. Table 5.1 illustrates some typical F
values obtained in a numerical simulation of the effect of inhibition in a retinal ganglion
cell responding to a single excitatory input at location 1 (Fig. 5.3A). Let us summarize
these results.
Effectiveness of Shunting Inhibition
1. For small synaptic inputs the on-the-path effect is weak and the strength of the inter-
action depends mainly on the distance between excitation and inhibition. Under these
conditions, all locations close to the excitatory synapse are equally effective in reducing
excitation.


===== Page 9 =====
5.1 Nonlinear interaction among Excitation and Inhibition
125
Fig. 5.3 SPATIO-TEMPORAL SPECIFICITY OF SYNAPTIC INTERACTION Effectiveness of shunting
inhibition (Ej = Vrest) in vetoing an EPSP in a retinal ganglion cell. (A) Excitation is always at location
1, while the position of the inhibitory synapse varies. The cell's morphology was reconstructed based
on Golgi material from Wassle, Illing, and Peichl (1979). (B) The time course of the excitatory and
the inhibitory conductance changes reflects the slow retinal dynamics (Baylor and Fettiplace, 1979),
with identical time courses but different peak conductance changes (10 nS for excitation and 100 nS
for inhibition). (C) The F factor, that is, the reduction in the peak somatic EPSP due to inhibition, as
a function of the delay between the onset of ge(t) and gt(t). The strength of the interaction (see also
Table 5.1) is specific in space and time. This result holds over a large parameter range. In particular,
Rm (here set to 14,000 Q • cm2) can be increased over several orders of magnitude. Reprinted by
permission from Koch, Poggio, and Torre (1983).


===== Page 10 =====
126
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
{
  "table_name": "TABLE 5.1",
  "description": "Effectiveness of Shunting Inhibition",
  "columns": ["Inhibition", "ge = 1, gi = 1", "ge = 1, gi = 10", "ge = 1, gi = 100", "ge = 10, gi = 100"],
  "rows": [
    {"Inhibition": "3", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.16, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 2.06, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 3.43, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 1.96},
    {"Inhibition": "1", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.17, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 2.70, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 1.80, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 7.72},
    {"Inhibition": "2", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.14, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 2.40, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 15.00, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 8.72},
    {"Inhibition": "4", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.12, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 1.72, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 2.47, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 1.87},
    {"Inhibition": "5", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.08, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 1.46, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 1.84, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 1.62},
    {"Inhibition": "s", "ge = 1, gi = 1": 1.11, "ge = 1, gi = 10": 2.06, "ge = 1, gi = 100": 11.57, "ge = 10, gi = 100": 9.18}
  ]
}

F values, describing the effectiveness of shunting inhibition in reducing a somatic EPSP, for stationary synaptic inputs
in the retinal ganglion cell model of Fig. 5.3A. The excitatory synaptic input ge (with Ee = 80 mV relative to Vrest) is
always at location 1, while inhibition gi is either located behind excitation (3), at the same location as excitation (1),
between excitation and the soma (2), in abranch just off the path (4), in a very different part of the tree (5), or at the soma
(s). The amplitudes of ge and #,- are in nanosiemens. The somatic EPSP in the absence of any inhibition for ge = 1 nS
is 6.56 mV. Km = 14, 000 Q • cm2 and K; = 70 £2-cm. From Koch (1982).
2. If the two synapses coincide anywhere in the dendritic tree (i = e), F reduces to
(5.15)
This is also the F factor obtained when dealing with a patch of passive membrane in the
presence of two synapses (if we identify R with KH). The difference between Eqs. 5.14
and 1.34 (or 5.15) is due to the spatially distributed tree. As discussed in Sec. 5.1.1,
excitation can always overcome the effect of fixed but large inhibition.
3. If the amplitude of inhibition is above a critical value (about 50 nS in the case of the
retinal ganglion cell simulation; Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1983), F values can be quite
high (2-8), even if the excitatory input is much larger than the inhibitory one, as long as
the inhibition is between excitation and the soma. Comparing this against the F factor
obtained in a lumped circuit model (Eq. 5.15), we ascertain that these high F values are
due to the cable properties of the tree. Inhibition behind excitation or on a neighboring
branch (about 10 or 20 /j,m for the retinal ganglion cell considered here) off the direct
path is ineffective in reducing excitation significantly.
4. The specificity for high values of gi persists even for very large values of the membrane
resistivity, when the cell is relatively compact (in terms of electrotonic distance or of
the logarithm of the voltage attenuation L"). For instance, for Rm — 1 M£2 • cm2,
the electrotonic size of the ganglion cell in Fig. 5.3A shrinks to 0.03A. and its input
resistances increase to over 1 GSl. Yet for ge = 10 nS and g, = 100 nS, we obtain
F = 10.5, 14.5, 21.0, 2.4, 2.7, and 2.7 for inhibition at the location of excitation (1),
on the path (2), at the cell body (s), behind excitation (3), on a neighboring branch (4),
and in a different part of the tree (5; Fig. 5.3A). These effects can be visualized with
the aid of a loose analogy between dendrites and water pipes and reservoirs. Shunting
inhibition corresponds to opening a hole in a pipe which is coupled to a water reservoir
with the same pressure as in the quiescent pipe system. If this hole is between the site
where water is being injected and the central pool, it is clear that more water will leave
the hole on its way to the large somatic sink than if the hole were to be opened upstream
from excitation.


===== Page 11 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition 
• 
127
We conclude that if gi is large enough, the on-the-path condition becomes very specific
such that blocking an EPSP is only possible if inhibition is either in the close neighborhood
of the excitatory synapse or between excitation and the cell body. Rail (1964) observed
earlier that in a single unbranched cable, shunting inhibition effectively vetoes more distal
but not more proximal excitation.
Temporal Specificity
So far we only considered the case of stationary synaptic inputs. In the general time-
dependent case, the algebraic Eqs. 5.8-5.10 are replaced by integral equations,
(5.16)
Typically, these equations are solved numerically (Segev and Parnas, 1983; Koch, Poggio,
and Torre, 1983). The efficacy of inhibition is characterized by a slight generalization of the
F factor of Eq. 5.14 (F is defined as the ratio of the peak amplitude of the somatic EPSP
without inhibition to the peak of the somatic EPSP in the presence of inhibition).
Figure 5.3 shows the dependency of F on the relative timing between the onset of
excitation and inhibition. Negative delays correspond to inhibition preceding excitation,
while positive delays are associated with inhibition following excitation. As can be seen, the
specificity of shunting inhibition in vetoing EPSPs generalizes from space to time: on-the-
path inhibition can effectively veto excitation if it occurs within about 10 msec of the onset
of excitation, about two-thirds of the membrane time constant. As we discussed in Sec. 3.6,
the local delay DU (Agmon-Snir and Segev, 1993) specifies the window during which
synaptic inputs can interact with each other. Different locations have different temporal
windows associated with them (e.g., Fig. 3.13), allowing for an operationalized definition
of what is meant by two simultaneous inputs.
The delay between the onset of excitation and optimal inhibition increases with increasing
distance between the two synapses, as expected from the definition of the propagation delay
in Eq. 2.51.
Decreasing the duration of inhibition below that of excitation decreases its effectiveness,
in some cases dramatically. In no case did the F factor for transient inputs exceed the F
factor for the corresponding stationary case. That is, inhibition appears to be at its most
effective if temporal effects can be discounted.
Figure 5.3 demonstrates the on-the-path effect very vividly. Locating inhibition between
the site of the excitatory synapse and the soma can shunt the somatic EPSP by a maximal
factor of 9, while moving inhibition beyond excitation (approximately conserving the
distance between the two synapses) renders inhibition much less effective, with the F factor
dropping to 1.3 (a reduction of about 7). Yet this specificity only occurs in the presence of
large conductance changes, possibly outside the physiological range (see Table 5.1), and
becomes much less pronounced for smaller values of g,, when the interaction depends more
on the distance between excitation and inhibition.
In summary, the veto effect of inhibition can be strong and specific with respect to spatial
location and relative timing provided the following requirements are fulfilled: (1) inhibition
must have a reversal potential close to the resting potential of the cell, (2) inhibition should
be close to excitation or on the direct path between excitation and the cell body, (3) peak


===== Page 12 =====
128 
. 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
inhibition must be large enough, and (4) inhibition must last (at least) as long as excitation
and their time courses should overlap substantially.
5.1.5 Hyperpolarizing Inhibition Acts Like a Linear Subtraction
As we saw, in the limit of small synaptic inputs (ge Kee <$C 1 and gt Kit <g 1), the action of
shunting inhibition on excitation can be characterized as a multiplication with an offset. Even
though the interaction between hyperpolarizing inhibition, such as the GABAg complex,
which increases the postsynaptic potassium conductance (reversing close to —100 mV),
and excitation also contains such multiplicative effects, it is more linear due to the direct
contribution the hyperpolarizing battery makes toward the membrane potential. Inspection
of Eq. 5.12 reveals that the first two terms in Kis are proportional to the reversal potential
of the inhibitory synapses. The more negative the inhibitory reversal potential (relative to
Vrest), the more these terms will dominate and the more the overall operation will resemble
a linear subtraction.
A physiological instance of such a subtractive inhibition that can be linked to a specific
computation occurs in the fly's motion detection system. Hassenstein and Reichardt (1956;
Reichardt, 1961) first suggested that the key mechanism underlying the optomotor response
of insects to moving stimuli is mediated by a correlation-like operation. In this scheme, the
output from one receptor is multiplied by the temporally delayed (e.g., low-pass filtered)
output from a neighboring receptor and then temporally averaged. The component that is
direction selective can be extracted from the component that is independent of the direction
of motion by subtracting the output of two mirror-symmetric pairs of Reichardt detectors
from each other.
A computational analysis (Egelhaaf, Borst, and Reichardt, 1989) of this system predicts
that as the subtraction stage between oppositely oriented motion detectors is blocked, the
power of the second-order component of the membrane potential in the cellular output
stage increases. Experiments with picrotoxin, a blocker of GABA/i receptors, confirm this
(Egelhaaf, Borst, and Pilz, 1990). Intracellular recordings from large tangential cells in the
lobula plate in the blowfly in combination with pharmacological blockers show that the
excitatory input is mediated by fast cholinergic synapses while the subtraction relies on
GABAergic synapses that reverse between —70 mV and —80 mV (Borst, Egelhaaf, and
Haag, 1995; Brotz and Borst, 1996). A stable resting potential around -50 mV (Fig. 5.4)
gives the membrane enough maneuvering room in both directions to implement a linear
operation of importance to optomotor behavior in flies.
5.1.6 Functional Interpretation of the Synaptic Architecture
and Dendritic Morphology: AND-NOT Gates
The specificity of the interaction between excitation and shunting or silent inhibition
provides in principle the substrate for implementing different classes of analog computations
in different dendritic trees. This situation is portrayed in a highly idealized but suggestive
manner in Fig. 5.5 using a logical metaphor (Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1982), bearing in
mind that these interactions are continuous and not all or none.
In an unbranched cable (Fig. 5.5A), input /1 can inhibit more distal excitatory input e\, €2
and £3, while inhibition ij, can only significantly affect e^. If we adopt the logic AND-NOT
all-or-none operation to characterize this interaction (an output only occurs in the presence
of excitation and no inhibition), such a cable implements the logic expression


===== Page 13 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition
129
Fig. 5.4 LINEAR SUBTRACTION IN THE MOTION PATHWAY OF THE FLY Intracellular recording
from a VS cell in the third optic ganglion of the blowfly Calliphora during motion of a whole-
field grating. This stimulus is moved for 1 sec in the preferred (first black bar) and for 1 sec in the
cell's opposite, null direction (second black bar) past the fly. The resting potential is stable around
—50 mV, explaining the more or less symmetric response pattern driven by opposing pairs of Reichardt
correlation detectors (Borst, Egelhaaf, and Haag, 1995). Excitation is mediated by fast cholinergic
and inhibition by GABAergic synaptic input onto this cell. Unpublished data from J. Haag and A.
Borst, printed with permission.
(5.18)
[e-} AND-NOT (i\ OR 1*2 OR ^3)] OR \Ci AND-NOT (z'l OR Z^)] OR (fii AND-NOT z'l) 
(5.17)
In other words, the soma receives a significant signal only if e3 is high and not blocked by
z'i, z-2,or /3,orif e^ is high and not vetoed by eitherz'i orz'2,orifei is high and not vetoed by
z'i. Due to the on-the-path effect, the more branched dendritic tree in Fig. 5.5B implements
a different expression,
I
Thus, the combination of dendritic morphology coupled with specific synaptic circuits
conspires to create a rich class of nonlinear operations, with different dendritic trees carrying
out different computations. These interactions would be based on voltage-independent
AMPA excitatory synapses and GABA^ inhibitory synapses.
The "dendritic tree as logic network" metaphor has been a popular concept, which has
been extended to a number of other biophysical situations and logical operators (Segev and
Rail, 1988; Shepherd and Brayton, 1987; Shepherd, 1992; Zador, Claiborne, and Brown,
1992; see Chaps. 12 and 19).
Yet as succinctly summarized by Mel (1994), this simile can be criticized on several
grounds. The principal argument against postulating that specific arrangements of individual
synapses act as logical or analog gates is the great demand that this places on developmental
processes. In order to achieve the precise type of wiring idealized in Fig. 5.5, some learning
mechanism has to guide individual synapses to individual branches in the dendritic tree to
achieve the precise spatial arrangements required. For instance, moving i-j in Fig. 5.5B to
the adjacent branch significantly changes the associated logical expression. Thus, the great
specificity of this interaction represents at the same time its own Achilles heel (Mel, 1994).


===== Page 14 =====
130 
. 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.5 IMPLEMENTING AND-NOT LOGIC IN A DENDRITIC TREE 
Idealized binary view of the
continuous nonlinear interactions occurring between excitation and shunting inhibition. Inhibitory
inputs (rectangles) veto more distal excitatory inputs (circles), but have only a marginal effect on inputs
more proximal to the soma, thereby approximating a logic AND-NOT gate. The two distinct dendritic
architectures, coupled with specific synaptic wiring, implement very different logical expressions (see
Eqs. 5.17 and 5.18). Reprinted by permission from Koch, Poggio, and Torre (1982).
It is possible, of course, that on-the-path effects are exerted not by individual synaptic
inputs but by groups of synapses, as is the case in the distinction between absolute and
relative suppression (Vu and Krasne, 1992). This spatially less precise degree of spatial
interactions places a much reduced burden on developmental processes, since it only
specifies that inhibitory synapses should be either adjacent to the excitatory ones or in
a different part of the dendritic tree.
On biophysical grounds, it is unclear how specific the interaction between excitatory and
inhibitory synapses actually is. As illustrated in Table 5.1, if the amplitude of the inhibitory
conductance change is small, little specificity results. Furthermore, during physiological
conditions, the cell potential may never be at Vrest because the cell receives tonic excitatory
input. Under these conditions, the distinction between hyperpolarizing and shunting inhi-
bition is much smaller than we assume here, since both reverse negative to the "effective"
resting potential.
5.1.7 Retinal Directional Selectivity and Synaptic Logic
Directional selectivity of retinal ganglion cells is one example of a complex nonlinear
operation that appears to use synaptic logic (Koch, Poggio, and Torre, 1986). A subset
of ganglion cells in the vertebrate retina fire vigorously in response to the motion of a
spot of light in one direction, the preferred one, but are silent to motion in the opposite,


===== Page 15 =====
5.1 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitation and Inhibition 
• 
131
null, direction. The classical experiments of Barlow and Levick (1965) inferred that
synaptic inhibition—now known to be GABAergic—plays a critical role by preventing
the cell from responding in the null direction. More recent work on rabbit ganglion cells
reveals an additional facilitatory direction-selective component (Grzywacz and Amthor,
1993).
A popular model for the biophysical basis of directional selectivity is nonlinear synaptic
interaction between cholinergic excitation and GABAergic inhibition mediated by GABA^
receptors in the dendritic tree of ganglion cells (Torre and Poggio, 1978; Koch, Poggio, and
Torre, 1982, 1983, 1986). Intracellular recordings from turtle and frog direction-selective
ganglion cells support activation of shunting inhibition in the null direction (Marchi-
afava, 1979; Watanabe and Murakami, 1984). The very complex dendritic morphology
of direction-selective ganglion cells (Oyster, Amthor, and Takahashi, 1993) provides an
ideal substrate for numerous local and nonlinear veto operations of the type schematized
in Fig. 5.5B.
Yet in some ganglion cells, direction selectivity is maintained or even reversed in the
presence of pharmacological blockers of GABA. Patch clamping the dendrites of turtle
ganglion cells revealed an excitatory input that is already direction selective (Borg-Graham,
1991b). Furthermore, motion in the preferred direction causes a much larger increase in the
input conductance than motion in the null direction, in conflict with the models presented
here, in which the exact temporal relationship between excitation and inhibition shapes the
postsynaptic response but the total conductance change remains invariant to the direction
of motion (e.g., Fig. 5.3).
It thus appears that at least some fraction of the direction-selective response is computed
presynaptically, most likely in cholinergic neurons possessing a unique dendritic branching
pattern called starburst amacrine cells (Masland, Mills, and Cassidy, 1984). In the rabbit,
starburst amacrine cells are well situated to provide synaptic input from their distal dendrites
to directionally selective ganglion cells via graded, dendro-dendritic synapses (Vaney, Collin
and Young, 1989). Their distinctive dendritic branching pattern is especially suited for
local generation of directionally selective outputs, such that directional selectivity could
be implemented using a combination of nonlinear synaptic interaction and inhibitory
kinetics that are slower than those for excitation (Borg-Graham and Grzywacz, 1992).
In the second scheme, excitation is always trailed by a slower inhibitory wave—if the
activated synaptic input is moving toward a site of synaptic output (in this case a dendritic
tip), excitation reaches the output before the inhibition catches up. On the other hand,
if the input is moving away from the output, the inhibition, interposed between the
excitation and the output, effectively shunts the excitatory current, preventing it from
depolarizing the output zone (see also Rail, 1964). Yet, biophysical simulations of amacrine
cells suggest that the nonlinear interaction of excitation and inhibition probably is the
dominant mechanism generating a direction-selective response under normal conditions
(Borg-Graham and Grzywacz, 1992).
The final verdict is not in. It appears likely that even such a simple operation as
distinguishing the direction of a moving stimulus is implemented using a plurality of
biophysical mechanisms acting at several sites, some requiring inhibition and some not
(Amthor and Grzywacz, 1993). Such redundancy might be necessary in the face of demands
that the circuitry wire itself up during development and retain its specificity in the face of
a constantly varying environment.


===== Page 16 =====
132 • 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
5.2 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitatory Synapses
What about the interaction expected between two excitatory voltage-independent synaptic
inputs (with synaptic reversal potential Ee and stationary conductance increases g\ and
gzf! If both synapses are colocalized, the somatic EPSP will be of amplitude
(5.19)
In the opposite case, when the two sites 1 and 2 are electrotonically decoupled, that is,
KYI ~^ 0, the somatic potential is given by
(5.20)
Assuming that Kee ~ K\\ ~ £22 and Kes ^ K\_s ^ KIS (that is, 1 and 2 have the
same electrotonic properties), it is clear that the somatic EPSP is smaller if both synapses
coincide (Eq. 5.19) than if both are far apart (Eq. 5.20). The same results holds true even
if the coupling term K\2 is nonzero and transient inputs are considered (Koch, Poggio, and
Torre, 1982). The reason for this sublinear addition is simply the fact that as the postsynaptic
potential increases, the amount of current flowing through voltage-independent excitatory
synaptic channels decreases (Rail, 1977).
Experimental studies of these predictions have been scant, with the large motoneurons
providing a favorite preparation. Two earlier studies (Burke, 1967; Kuno and Miyahara,
1969) had concluded, based on an indirect inference, that excitatory inputs interact sublin-
early when located somewhere in the distal dendritic tree. In the Skydsgaard and Hounsgaard
(1994) experiment mentioned, glutamate was applied locally to different parts of the
dendritic tree of turtle motoneurons from two independent iontophoresis electrodes. At
the cell's resting potential they observed linear summation at the soma (see also Langmoen
and Andersen, 1983), which turned supralinear as the membrane was depolarized by the
recording electrode (most likely due to amplifying voltage-dependent membrane conduc-
tances). Yet basic biophysics implies nonlinear saturation due to the conductance-increasing
nature of synaptic input. Is it possible that synaptic saturation is always compensated for
by voltage-dependent outward currents distributed in the dendritic tree? And if so, why?
5.2.1 Sensitivity of Synaptic Input to Spatial Clustering
As emphasized in Chap. 4, in the central nervous system many, if not most, neurons receive
synaptic input from a mixture of voltage-independent AMPA and voltage-dependent NMDA
ionotrophic synapses.
For instance, a major role for NMDA input in cat visual cortex is supported by experi-
ments that blocked NMDA responses using the pharmacological agent APV. This procedure
caused the visual response of neurons whose cell bodies are located in the upper three layers
to be either strongly attenuated or eliminated altogether, while neurons in input layer 4 could
still be visually activated (Miller, Chapman, and Stryker, 1989; Fox, Sato, and Daw, 1990;
Daw, Stein, and Fox, 1993). Thus, NMDA distribution is most likely not homogeneous
but layer specific.
Such a voltage-dependent excitatory input can implement a multiplicative-like interac-
tion: while the EPSP produced by a single NMDA synapse might not be strong enough to
allow current to flow through the associated channels, two or more simultaneously active


===== Page 17 =====
5.2 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitatory Synapses 
• 
133
NMD A inputs could depolarize the potential sufficiently to relieve the Mg2+-mediated
blockage and lead to a much larger depolarization (Fig. 4.8; Koch, 1987). Motivated by the
possibility that such interactions can instantiate a specific class of computations underlying
certain forms of learning, Mel (1992, 1993, 1994; Mel and Koch, 1990; see also Brown
et al., 1992) initiated a detailed biophysical investigation of synaptic integration in the
dendritic tree of cortical pyramidal cells on the basis of three different mechanisms: NMDA
receptors and calcium- and sodium-mediated active dendritic membrane conductances. In
this chapter we focus on the interaction occurring in a passive dendritic tree among NMDA
synapses, deferring the more complex set of events that can occur in a dendritic tree with
voltage-dependent conductances to Sec. 19.3.4.
The basic question Mel addresses is the following: what is the sensitivity of excitatory
input to spatial clustering in the postsynaptic neuron? In particular, are spatially adjacent
synapses in a passive dendritic tree more or less effective than the same number of synapses
spread throughout the tree?
To answer these questions, Mel (1992) models the layer 5 pyramidal cell (Fig. 3.7) from
cat visual cortex with a passive dendritic tree and a cell body that contains the two basic
Hodgkin and Huxley currents /Na and /K necessary for spike initiation (and which are
described exhaustively in the following chapter). Mel randomly distributes 100 synapses
in clusters of k over the entire dendritic tree, like sprinkling salt over food. Figure 5.6
illustrates this procedure for cluster sizes k — 1 and 7. In the first case 100 synapses
are placed at random within the dendritic tree, while in the second case clusters of seven
synapses each (plus one cluster of two synapses) are assigned randomly to 14 locations in
the tree. In the absence of any NMDA input, each synapse is placed onto a dendritic spine
and treated as a fast, glutamergic input of the AMPA type. In the alternative case, 90% of the
postsynaptic conductance increase is of the NMDA type, using the membrane potential and
time dependence of Eq. 4.6 (Fig. 5.7). The NMDA-mediated synaptic current, the product of
the driving potential (which decreases for increasing levels of membrane depolarization) and
the conductance change (which first increases and subsequently saturates with increasing
Vm), increases to about —30 mV potential, after which it decreases and reverses sign at the
synaptic reversal potential of 0 mV. The remaining 10% of the synaptic conductance is of
the AMPA type.
All synapses (whether belonging to the same cluster or not) are activated independently
of each other at a mean rate of 100 Hz. As a measure of cell response, Mel considers the
number of spikes triggered over a 100-msec period. Using the peak somatic potential or the
time integral of the somatic potential (in the absence of a somatic spiking mechanism) gives
results that are qualitatively very similar. In the passive cell with voltage-independent inputs,
the somatic response following activation of 100 synapses randomly located throughout the
dendritic arbor is much bigger than the response following activation of 10 clusters of 10
neighboring synapses (Fig. 5.7). Indeed, the former situation triggers four spikes, while the
latter none (even though here the local response is larger, but, of course, fewer clusters
contribute toward the somatic excitability).
If the cell's membrane is endowed with NMDA channels, it will respond selectively
to patterns of stimulation in which activated synapses are spatially clustered rather than
uniformly distributed across the tree (Fig. 5.7). The cell fails to spike in response to random
activation of 100 NMDA "isolated" synapses (firing at 100 Hz), while it fires at an effective
rate of 20 Hz if the same 100 synapses are clustered in 10 locations (Mel, 1993).
This preference for spatial clustering as compared to a more uniform synaptic distribution
for NMDA input is confirmed statistically by generating a large number (either 50 or 100)


===== Page 18 =====
134
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.6 CELLULAR RESPONSE TO CLUSTERED AND NONCLUSTERED INPUT 
In the study by Mel
(1992), the layer 5 pyramidal cell is festooned with 100 fast excitatory synapses that are either spread out
over 100 randomly selected individual locations (left) or clustered at 14 randomly chosen locations of 7
synapses each (right). In a passive dendritic tree and in the absence of NMDA input, clustered synaptic
activity leads to a reduced somatic response compared to the case when synapses are dispersed. For
synaptic input of the NMDA type, cooperativity exists, such that spatial clustering causes an enhanced
somatic response. Unpublished data from B. Mel, printed with permission.
of randomized synaptic distributions of the type shown in Fig. 5.6 and averaging the results
for cluster sizes ranging between 1 and 15. The effect is clear and unambiguous (Fig. 5.8).
Due to synaptic saturation, non-NMDA input will always be more effective when spread out
in space, while the converse is true for NMDA input: as the size of the cluster is increased
(and even though the number of cluster sites goes down since the total number of synapses
remains fixed) the cellular response increases. For very large cluster sizes the attenuating
effects of synaptic saturation begin to offset the excitatory effects of the NMDA voltage
dependence.
While the exact shape of the curve in Fig. 5.8B, such as the most effective cluster size,
depends on the details of the biophysical setting, the overall shape does not. Its convex
shape is due to cooperativity for small cluster sizes and to synaptic saturation for large
cluster sizes (that is, the subsynaptic potential approaches the synaptic reversal potential)
and is extremely robust to parameter variations (Mel, 1992).
We conclude that due to the voltage dependency of the NMDA receptor complex,
cooperativity pays off, in the sense that a cluster of adjacent synapses will lead to a larger
postsynaptic response than if the synapses are randomly distributed throughout the tree.
As opposed to the more demanding spatial accuracy in positioning excitation and shunting
inhibition to obtain the AND-NOT effect discussed in Sec. 5.1, cluster sensitivity does not
depend on the exact positioning of synapses within a cluster. Thus, it places much less
premium on development mechanisms to carefully "wire" up the synaptic architecture of the
cell. Mel (1992,1993) made no special assumptions about temporal synchronization among
synaptic inputs: if input to a cluster arrives as a highly synchronized wave of excitation, it


===== Page 19 =====
5.2 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitatory Synapses
135
Fig. 5.7 DETAILS OF THE CELL'S RESPONSE TO NMDA SYNAPTIC INPUT Membrane potential at
the synapses (panels AI, BI) and at the soma (panels A3,83) in response to 100 uniformly distributed
synapses (upper panels) and to 10 clusters of 10 synapses. 90% of the synaptic conductance change is
of the NMDA type, the remainder being voltage independent. Each synapse, whether within a cluster
or not, is independently activated by a Poisson process of 100-Hz rate. Because in the first case,
synapses act "alone," the average synaptic conductance (A2> and synaptic current (A4> remain modest.
If, however, synapses can "cooperate" due to spatial proximity, the effective synaptic conductance
(82) and synaptic current flowing (84) can be much larger, inducing the cell to fire at 20 Hz. The
synaptic conductance changes scale inversely with the local input resistance, with high gpeak values
at the soma and low ones in the distal dendritic tree. Reprinted by permission from Mel (1993).
can be much more powerful than if spread out over time. In this sense, his analysis represents
a worst-case scenario.
The sensitivity to spatial clumping of synaptic input is present under a broad parameter
regime, in particular in the presence of calcium or sodium conductances in the dendritic
tree (as we will discuss in more detail in Chap. 19). Cluster sensitivity appears to represent
a neurobiologically plausible mechanism to confer nonlinear, multiplicative properties to
local submits in the dendritic tree. Such a subunit could be more rigorously defined as a
region of the dendritic tree within which synaptic interaction is strong and nonlinear, while
interaction between two or more subunits would be linear (Koch, Poggio and Torre, 1982).


===== Page 20 =====
136
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.8 CLUSTER SENSITIVITY IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE Average number of spikes within
a 100-msec period using (A) zero NMDA and (B) high NMDA conditions as a function of cluster size.
In each case, 100 synapses are placed on spines in 100/k clusters randomly distributed throughout the
passive tree (with uniform probability density over the dendritic length). This procedure is repeated
either (A) 100 or (B) 50 times for cluster sizes between 1 and 15, and the cellular responses are
averaged. Due to the cooperativity of NMDA synapses, spatial clustering increases the postsynaptic
response. This basic effect is very robust to parameter variations. Reprinted in modified form by
permission from Mel (1993).
5.2.2 Cluster Sensitivity for Pattern Discrimination
Mel (1992) provides an illustrative example of how the nonlinear cooperative interaction
of NMDA synapses can implement a high-level computation, discriminating one pattern
among many others.
The basic idea is straightforward: if a set of synaptic afferents coding for pattern A
terminates in a synaptic cluster on a particular neuron, and the synapses expressing some
pattern B are randomly spread throughout the cell, the cell can be said to recognize or
discriminate pattern A, since activating its associated synaptic cluster makes the cell fire,
while the cellular response to activation of the randomly distributed synapses will be
negligible. This is illustrated by showing how a neuron can discriminate among a set of 100
black-and-white photos from a summer vacation (Mel, 1992).
The coding of the gray-scale pictures is accomplished in the following manner. First 50
randomly chosen images, designated as training set, are convolved with four oriented Gabor
filters on a 64- by 64-pixel grid, resulting in a population of 16,384 orientation-selective
visual units. Each one of these oriented units is assumed to make a single all-or-none
output synapse on the layer 5 pyramidal cell in Fig. 5.6. The activity of one such unit
would represent the presence of a particular oriented edge at that location in the image.
Out of this large population, the 80 most active units are selected—the output of all other
units being suppressed—and are mapped onto 10 cluster of eight neighboring synapses
known to trigger at least one spike. This process is repeated for each of the 50 training
images, except that a visual unit, once mapped onto the cell, is not remapped if it occurs
in a subsequent training image. Following this "learning" procedure, the remaining unused
orientation-selective units (about 12,000) are mapped randomly onto individual synaptic
sites. Although a caricature of what is expected to occur in visual cortex, this procedure
assures that each of the 50 images is mapped onto at most 80 clustered synapses (because
of the potential overlap among images).
As seen in Fig. 5.9, the cell responds to any one of the 50 training images with an
effective spike frequency of 12.5 Hz, while the 50 randomly assigned test images fail


===== Page 21 =====
5.2 Nonlinear Interaction among Excitatory Synapses
137
to bring the cell above threshold. Mel (1992) also uses three sets of partially corrupted
training images as input to the pyramidal cell. In the "half/half" stimulation paradigm, half
of the vector components coding for one training image were swapped with half of the
components encoding another training image. In a linear perception, the superposition of
two training patterns cannot be distinguished from a single training pattern. In this case the
cell's response is significantly reduced compared to its response to a full training pattern (by
about 33%; Fig. 5.9). The same performance is seen if 20% of a training image is randomly
corrupted. If much more noise is added, the cell only responds weakly.
The performance of the pyramidal cell endowed with NMDA synapses is quite re-
markable. The cell can be trained to respond to any one of 50 high-dimensional vectors,
discriminating them from random input or vectors not beloging to the training set. The
probability of misclassification is 14%, with the majority being false negatives, that is,
training images not recognized as such. Given the highly dispersed three-dimensional
geometry of dendritic and axonal arbors and the rich combinatorics possible in choosing
particular spatial arrangements among 10,000 afferent synapses, the true discrimination
capacity of even a single pyramidal cell could be much greater than demonstrated here
(Mel, 1993, 1994; see also Brown et al., 1991a). The thread of this story is picked up
in Sec. 14.4.2 in the context of understanding the computational capabilities of neu-
ral networks.
Fig. 5.9 NMDA ENDOWED PYRAMIDAL CELL AS PATTERN DISCRIMINATOR 
Average response
(over a 100-msec period) of the pyramidal cell to five types of images mapped onto its synapses.
The largest response is to the 50 training images and the smallest to the remaining 50 test images.
In the intermediate cases, training images are partially corrupted. In the "half/half" case, half of the
features of one image are combined with half of the features of another image. Note the significantly
reduced response to the superposition of two training patterns, direct evidence of the nonlinear pattern
discrimination ability of a neuron endowed with NMDA input. In the two other cases, either 20% or
50% of the image is replaced by random features. Reprinted by permission from Mel (1992).


===== Page 22 =====
138 
• 
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
To what extent pyramidal cells in cortex implement such a scheme is difficult to ascertain
since the detailed microanatomy of the origin of all synapses would, by itself, not be
sufficient to answer the question. Yet this mechanism predicts the existence of a learning
rule that favors the placement of simultaneously active synapses in clusters on the dendritic
tree, while uncorrelated synapses should have no priviliged spatial relationship to each other.
Biophysical experiments involving synaptic plasticity should uncover such a clustering rule.
The degree of specificity required is less than that of the AND-NOT type of interaction
discussed at the beginning of this chapter. Yet similar to the interaction between excitation
and inhibition, clustering effectively fractionates the dendritic tree into many small subunits,
within which nonlinear interactions take place.
5.2.3 Detecting Coincident Input from the Two Ears
One situation where sublinear addition is exploited is in aiding individual neurons to detect
coincident inputs. In both birds and mammals, sound localization involves comparing the
travel time of inputs from the two ears (Konishi, 1992). If the sound source is located
straight ahead, there will be no delay between inputs from the two ears, while shifting the
source to one side will cause the auditory input from one side to be delayed relative to
input from the opposite side (Carr and Konishi, 1990). Individual cells can perform quite a
remarkable job in detecting the resultant small interaural time differences. For instance, a
neuron specialized to sounds in the 5 kilohertz auditory range reduces its firing range when
the delay between the two ears changes by a mere 20 /x,sec (Moiseff and Konishi, 1981).
This remarkable sensitivity goes hand in hand with a very low passive time constant of less
than 2 msec (Reyes, Rubel, and Spain, 1994).2
Auditory brainstem cells receive binaural inputs segregated onto their two dendrites
(Fig. 5.10), a mechanism that enhances the discriminability of sounds that arrive in phase
(straight ahead) relative to those arriving 180° out of phase. Numerous synaptic inputs con-
verge onto each dendrite and the associated synaptic amplitude has a significant stochastic
component (Sec. 4.2). Suppose that six simultaneous synaptic events are just enough to
trigger a spike in a point neuron without a dendrite. Since twice as many presynaptic
inputs are active simultaneously when both inputs arrive in a coincident manner, the neuron
responds more strongly to in-phase than to out-of-phase input. In the bipolar neuron with
segregated inputs from the two ears to its two dendrites, the amplitude of the synaptic
conductance is adjusted. The resulting three synaptic inputs on one dendrite, coupled with
three synaptic events on the other, give rise to the same firing rate as in the point neuron.
If—due to the stochastic nature of how many inputs arrive per sound cycle—four, five, or
more synaptic events were to occur on one dendrite (and not on the other), the neuron would
still not fire due to the synaptic saturation that limits how much current each dendrite by
itself can deliver to the soma (see also Sec. 18.4.1). As long as the voltage threshold for
spike initiation is set sufficiently high, synaptic current from two independent dendrites is
required to trigger a spike and temporal discrimination is enhanced compared to a point
neuron with no dendrites (Agmon-Snir, Carr, and Rinzel, 1998).
5.3 Synaptic Microcircuits
Excitation and inhibition by individual synapses usually have little computational signif-
icance by themselves. It is the assembly of synapses into specific patterns of connectivity
2. Since these cells fire at high rates, their membrane is rarely at rest and the effective time constant is probably in the
submillisecond range (Gerstner et al., 1996).


===== Page 23 =====
5.3 Synaptic Microcircuits
139
Fig. 5.10 COINCIDENCE DETECTION IN
BIPOLAR NEURONS Two auditory brain
stem neurons from the guinea pig that
receive segregated inputs from the two
ears onto their two bipolar dendrites. In a
model of these cells (Agmon-Snir, Carr, and
Rinzel, 1998), the average firing rate evoked
by the two inputs arriving synchronously
(/max) or maximally out of phase (/min)
is plotted as the amplitude of the synaptic
conductance is varied. The least amount of
discrimination (smallest difference between
/max and /mi,,) is obtained in a point neuron
(dashed curve). Synaptic saturation in the
long and thin dendrites (dotted curve) pre-
vents randomness in the number of inputs
to each side from firing the cell when inputs
arrive only to one side without coincident
inputs from the other ear. Thicker dendrites
(solid curve) perform at an intermediate
level. Thus, dendrites enhance the ability of
an individual cell to detect coincident input.
Reprinted by permission from Agmon-Snir,
Carr, and Rinzel, (1998).
which gives rise to identifiable building blocks, which can be found throughout the nervous
system. Shepherd (1972,1978) has termed such specific synaptic arrangements, which have
a spatial extent measured in micrometers, synaptic microcircuits (Fig. 5.11). Any particular
neuron may have dozens or hundreds of such microcircuits. Very often they will include
dendro-dendritic synapses, that is, fast excitatory or inhibitory chemical synapses from one
dendrite of the presynaptic cell onto a dendrite from a different, postsynaptic, cell. Examples
of such circuits abound in the central nervous systems of both vertebrates and invertebrates.
(For an excellent and detailed account of microcircuits in the mammalian brain see the
monograph by Shepherd, 1998.)
Well-known examples include dendro-dendritic interactions among spiking and nonspik-
ing interneurons in the sensory-motor system of the locust (Laurent and Burrows, 1989;
Laurent, 1990), synaptic arrangements among the nonspiking neurons in the vertebrate
retina (Dowling, 1979, 1987; Sterling, 1998; Fig. 1.5), the reciprocal dendro-dendritic
inhibition occurring among the dendrites of the mitral cells and the spines of the granule
cells in the mammalian olfactory bulb (Rail et al., 1966; Rail and Shepherd, 1968; Woolf,
Shepherd, and Greer, 1991a,b) and the spine-triad circuit in the thalamus (Hamos et al.,
1985; Koch, 1985; Fig. 12.8). What characterizes these synaptic arrangements is that they
involve at least one excitatory and one inhibitory synapse on a very compact spatial scale,
operate at the millisecond time scale, and exist in very large numbers (Shepherd, 1972,
1978; Shepherd and Koch, 1998).
Curiously, synaptic microcircuits do not appear to be numerous in mature cortical
structures. To a good first approximation, fast excitatory and inhibitory traffic is mediated
from the presynaptic axon of one cell to the postsynaptic dendrites of another cell without
the involvement of higher order synaptic arrangements nor the dendro-dendritic synapses.3
3. It could be argued that an exception to this rule are the small fraction of dendritic spines that carry both an excitatory and
an inhibitory synaptic profile; it is doubtful, though, that such arrangements have a specific function (Sec. 12.3.3).


===== Page 24 =====
140
SYNAPTIC INTERACTIONS IN A PASSIVE DENDRITIC TREE
Fig. 5.11 SYNAPTIC MICROCIRCUITS MEDIATING DIFFERENT TYPES OF INHIBITION 
Two types
of synaptic microcircuits that mediate two types of inhibition in the vertebrate nervous system. (A) The
spine triade consists of an afferent a making an excitatory synapse onto a dendrite or spine b as
well as onto an interneuron c. The interneuron in turn inhibits, via a dendro-dendritic synapse, the
postsynaptic neuron b. This feedforward inhibition is common in the retina and the thalamus (see
Sec. 12.3.4 and Fig. 12.8). (B) Recurrent inhibition is implemented by a relay cell a that excites
an interneuron b. This interneuron inhibits, via a dendro-dendritic synapse, the original relay cell.
Dendro-dendritic reciprocal inhibition occurs between mitral and granule cells in the olfactory bulb.
Such microcircuits, which are specified at the micrometer level, are common in structures outside the
cortex and in invertebrates. Reprinted by permission from Shepherd and Koch (1998).
5.4 Recapitulation
The fact that a synaptic input changes the conductance in the postsynaptic membrane in
series with a synaptic battery and does not correspond to a constant current source ultimately
implies that synaptic inputs interact with each other via the membrane potential. In particular,
the somatic potential in a passive tree in response to two or more inputs is not equal to the
sum of the individual synaptic components. We explored the computational consequences
of this in two cases.
The interaction between voltage-independent non-NMDA excitatory input and shunting
inhibition (that is, when £",- reverses close to the cell's resting membrane potential) in
the subthreshold domain can mediate a veto operation that is specific in space and time.
If inhibition is adjacent to the excitatory synapse or on the path between excitation and
the cell body and if their time courses overlap, inhibition can effectively suppress the
effect of excitation. This implies that specific synaptic arrangements in a dendritic tree
can implement logic-like AND-NOT operations, possibly one of the crucial nonlinearities
underlying direction selectivity in retinal ganglion cells.
The specificity of synaptic interaction represents at the same time also its greatest
weakness, in the sense that it places great demands on developmental mechanisms to
precisely guide synapses and dendrites during development. A more plausible synaptic
arrangement could be implemented at the level of synaptic populations: if excitatory and
inhibitory synapses are colocalized onto the same part of the dendritic tree, excitatory input
can always override any inhibitory influence. Conversely, if inhibition is at a different site,
for instance, close to the spike initiating zone, and excitation at more distal sites, then any
excitatory input can always be vetoed by inhibition. These two types of synaptic placements
might instantiate different kinds of suppressive behaviors. Under certain conditions the
threshold for initiating a reflex should be elevated (relative suppression) while under others
the behavior needs to be totally abolished (absolute suppression).


===== Page 25 =====
5.4 Recapitulation 
• 
141
If GABAergic inhibition has a reversal potential much below the membrane resting
potential, as in the fly tangential interneurons, inhibition tends to act akin to a linear
subtraction.
A more plausible mechanism to implement multiplicative behavior involves NMDA
synapses clustered over the dendritic tree. When clusters of adjacent non-NMDA synapses
are randomly sprinkled around the dendritic tree of a pyramidal cell, their activation
causes a smaller cellular response than when the synapses are isolated from each other,
a consequence of synaptic saturation. A very different behavior is obtained with clusters of
voltage-dependent NMDA synapses. Because of their cooperative nature, clusters of 6 to
10 adjacent NMDA synapses are much more effective than the same number of synapses
by themselves. A dendritic tree endowed with such synapses can be used to implement
a very efficient nonlinear pattern discriminator that is robust to the presence of dendritic
nonlinearities, while also serving as a plausible biophysical mechanism for multiplication,
which is required for a host of computations, such as motion, binocular disparity, and tabular
look-up storage.
Both case studies imply that the dendritic tree, rather than just performing a filtering
operation onto the synaptic input, as suggested by linear cable theory presented in Chaps. 2
and 3, can be partitioned into numerous spatial subunits. Within each such subunit, synaptic
inputs interact nonlinearly, while the interaction between two or more subunits is approxi-
mately linear.
Finally, we mentioned the concept of a synaptic microcircuit, pioneered by Shepherd
(1978, 1998). These usually involve a combination of one or several excitatory and
inhibitory synapses with a predilection for a specific arrangement among two or three
neurons and are common in extracortical structures such as the retina, the olfactory bulb,
and the thalamus and in invertebrates.


