===== Page 1 =====
LINEARIZING
VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT
CURRENTS
We hinted several times at the fact that a small excitatory synaptic input in the pres-
ence of voltage-dependent channels will lead to a local depolarization, followed by a
hyperpolarization (Fig. 10.1). Those of us who built our own radios will recognize such
an overshooting response as being indicative of so-called RLC circuits which include
resistances, capacitances as well as inductances. As a reminder, a linear inductance is
defined as a circuit element whose instantaneous I—V relationship is,
(10.1)
where L is the inductance measured in units of henry (abbreviated as H). Although
neurobiology does not possess any coils or coillike elements whose voltage is proportional
to the current change, membranes with certain types of voltage- and time-dependent
conductances can behave as (/they contained inductances. We talk of a phenomenological
inductance, a phenomenon first described by Cole (1941) and Cole and Baker (1941) in the
squid axon (see Cole, 1972). Under certain circumstances, discussed further below, such
damped oscillations can become quite prominent.
This behavior can be obtained in an entirely linear system, as can be observed when
reducing (in numerical simulations) the amplitude of the synaptic input (or step current):
even though the voltage excursion around steady-state becomes smaller and smaller, the
overshoot persists (Fig. 10.1). It is not due to any amplification inherent in such a membrane
but is caused by its time- and voltage-dependent nature. Such a linear membrane, whose
constitutive elements do not depend on either voltage or time, and which behaves like a
bandpass element, has been called quasi-active (Koch, 1984) to distinguish it from a truly
active, that is, nonlinear membrane.
In this chapter, we will explain in considerable detail how an inductance-like behavior can
arise from these membranes by linearizing the Hodgkin-Huxley equations. Experimentally,
this can be done by considering the small-signal response of the squid giant axon and
232
10


===== Page 2 =====
10.1 Linearization of the Potassium Current
233
Fig. 10.1 A QUASI-ACTIVE MEMBRANE A small (gpeak = 1 nS) excitatory synaptic input close
to the soma of a simulated pyramidal cell (Fig. 18.IB) gives rise to an EPSP followed by a small
hyperpolarization due to activation of somatic potassium currents. This overshoot is not due to any
nonlinearity in the system since it can be observed for arbitrarily small inputs. (If the synaptic input
is reduced by a factor of 100 to gp^ = 0.01 nS and the associated EPSP rescaled by 100 and
superimposed onto the larger amplitude response, the curves cannot be distinguished.) The system
behaves like a linear electrical circuit containing an inductance-like element and the associated
membrane is called quasi-active.
comparing it against the theoretical predicted value, a further test of the veracity of the
Hodgkin-Huxley equations, which they passed with flying colors. For more details on
the linearization procedure we will be using, consult the original references (Chandler,
FitzHugh, and Cole, 1962; Sabah and Leibovic, 1969; and the very clear Mauro et al.,
1970). Although such a linearization has been applied to membranes other than the squid
axon (Clapham and DeFelice, 1976, 1982) we will primarily discuss this well-explored
model system.
10.1 Linearization of the Potassium Current
In order to demonstrate the principle behind this linearization, we will describe the procedure
in detail for the potassium current of the Hodgkin-Huxley equation (Eq. 6.4 and Fig. 10.2A):
(10.2)
Let us consider small variations of this current around some fixed potential Vr. We can
express such a variation as
(10.3)
where both derivatives are evaluated at the potential around which the system is linearized,
hence the subscript r. Retaining only the first-order terms and neglecting all higher order
ones (such as (Sn)2 or SnS V) is at the heart of the linearization procedure. We have
(10.4)


===== Page 3 =====
234 
• 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.2 PHENOMENOLOGICAL INDUCTANCE ASSOCIATED WITH THE LINEARIZED POTASSIUM
CURRENT 
(A) Equivalent electrical circuit for a noninactivating potassium current. The conduc-
tance gK is given by H^n4, with n the voltage- and time-dependent activation constant. (B) Conduc-
tance g in series with an inductance L. The voltage across both components is SV and the current
through them 57. VL is the voltage at the intermediate location. (C) Equivalent circuit when the
potassium current (in panel A) is linearized around some fixed membrane potential. The response
to this circuit mimics the small-signal response of the potassium current /K around some potential
Vr. It includes a pure conductance, GK = lie"4' m parallel witn a conductance gn in series with an
inductance Ln. For Vm > EK, all three components are positive.
(see Fig. 10.2C) and
(10.5)
We eliminate the variation in the rate constant Sn by recalling Eq. 6.6 governing its dynamics,
(10.6)
For small variations we can expand this to
(10.7)
Since an and /?„ only depend on the membrane potential, we can express their variations as
(10.8)
and
(10.9)
Replacing these two expression into Eq. 10.7 leads to
(10.10)


===== Page 4 =====
10.1 Linearization of the Potassium Current 
• 
235
This can be formally expressed as
(10.11)
When replacing this result in Eq. 10.3 and exploiting Eqs. 10.4 and 10.5, we arrive at the
following equation for the first-order variation of the potassium current
(10.12)
with two parameters that need to be evaluated at the membrane potential at which the current
is linearized,
(10.13)
and
(10.14)
In order to understand Eq. 10.12 let us apply Kirchhoff's voltage law to the one branch
circuit shown in Fig. 10.2B. With SI the current through both components we can write
(10.15)
Eliminating the voltage VL, we are left with
(10.16)
Comparing this result with the second component on the right-hand side of Eq. 10.12 we
can see that they are very similar. Indeed, the voltage S V across the electrical circuit with
two branches drawn in Fig. 10.2C is the same as 8V in Eq. 10.12 if
(10.17)
and if we set the inductance to
(10.18)
For a small perturbation SV around Vr, the potassium current responds as though the
conductance GK (in units of S-cm2) is shunted by the conductance gn (also in S-cm2) in
series with the inductance Ln (in units of sec-cm2/S, that is, in H-cm2). By examining the
slopes of the on and off rates an and fin (Eqs. 6.10 and 6.11), we see that for the entire range
of relevant voltages, V > EK, all three electrical components are always positive.
Mauro et al., (1970) captured the key point of the previous analysis in a graphical
manner; see Fig. 10.3. As before, we assume that we are only considering the small-signal
response (this is, after all, what any linearization procedure amounts to) of the potassium
current around some fixed potential Vr (positive to EK). Injecting a current step /jnj > 0
at this potential will turn on the potassium current 7K (Fig. 10.3A). Because the underlying
potassium conductance requires some time to increase to its final value, the initial change
in membrane potential 5V is given by the injected current divided by the conductance GK.
In the absence of any capacitance, this causes the membrane to depolarize instantaneously


===== Page 5 =====
236 
• 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
by /inj / GK, moving in the direction of the dotted slope (the vector labeled to in Fig. 10.3 A).
However, this depolarization will eventually led to an increase in the potassium conductance,
which causes the voltage change S V to decrease with time, as indicated by the trajectory
in Fig. 10.3C, to finally approach the new steady-state value of the membrane potential Vr,
(around t2). In other words, as expected of an inductance—inducing a voltage proportional
to the change in current—8 V rises instantaneously and then falls off gradually. This analysis
also makes obvious the fact that this inductive behavior is caused by both the time and the
voltage dependency of the membrane conductance.
When the current /inj terminates, the inverse occurs (Fig. 10.3B). 8 V first undershoots Vr,
relaxing with a time lag back to its earlier steady-state value Vr. The response is inductive
for both on and off steps (provided that Vr > EK). If the capacitive nature of the neuronal
membrane is included, the phenomenological inductance combines with the capacitance to
give a damped oscillatory response (Fig. 10.3C).
10.2 Linearization of the Sodium Current
In a similar manner, we can compute the small-signal response of the sodium current,
(10.19)
By taking variations and retaining only the first-order terms we arrive at
(10.20)
that is,
(10.21)
Following the same procedure to eliminate the variational variables 5m and Sh as for the
potassium current leaves us with an equation for the small-signal change in the sodium
current:
(10.22)
with
(10.23)
(10.24)
and
(10.25)
all evaluated at V — Vr. As illustrated in Fig. 10.4A, this describes the current flow in a
three-branch electrical circuit with inductances
(10.26)


===== Page 6 =====
10.2 Linearization of the Sodium Current 
• 
237
Fig. 10.3 GRAPHICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE LINEARIZATION PROCEDURE Following the
lead of Mauro et al., (1970), we here illustrate the linearization procedure for the potassium current
/K. (A) Steady-state f-V relationship of a potassium current is indicated schematically and we are
considering the small-signal response around the potential V,. Not shown is the time dependency of
the underlying potassium conductance. Injecting a positive current /;nj leads to an instantaneous jump
of the membrane potential to a new value (which lies along the dotted line going through the reversal
potential £"K) given by /JHJ/GK (the vector labeled to). As the potassium conductance gradually
adapts to its new value and increases, the voltage change 8 V becomes smaller, until it converges to
its new value Vr, (from to to t\ to ti\ left panel). This inductive behavior would not be evident in a
stationary nonlinear membrane. (B) Upon termination of the current step /inj, the voltage change SV
first overshoots before settling to its old value. (C) Complete voltage response to the current injection
in the absence of any membrane capacitance (left panel). When the capacitance is added to the circuit,
a damped oscillatory response results (right panel).
and
(10.27)
The two inductive branches reflect the separate contributions from the activating and the
inactivating components of the sodium conductance.


===== Page 7 =====
238 
• 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.4 RLC CIRCUIT FOR THE LINEARIZED SODIUM CURRENT (A) Electrical RLC circuit
obtained by linearizing the Hodgkin-Huxley sodium current at some potential below £NS- Both
elements associated with the activation variable are negative. (B) These negative elements can be
transformed into a positive conductance g'm in series with a positive phenomenological capacitance
C'm, with a shunt conductance G^a that is negative.
At this point, a problem arises. For the voltage range of interest, that is, EK < V < E^a,
the resistive and inductive components of the inactivating branch of the circuit, that is, gf,
and Lf,, are positive, but the corresponding circuit elements of the m branch are negative:
gm < 0 and, therefore, Lm < 0. The negative conductance arises as a consequence of the
negative slope of the iNa-V curve.


===== Page 8 =====
10.3 Linearized Membrane Impedance of a Patch of Squid Axon 
• 
239
We can fix this problem by transforming the negative components into an equivalent
RC system (Fig. 10.4B) with
(10.28)
(10.29)
and a positive capacitance, instead of a negative inductance,
(10.30)
This capacitance is also a phenomenological one, in the sense that activating the sodium
current leads to similar behavior (for small perturbation) as would the existence of an
additional capacitive branch.
For V < ENa, the conductance g'm and the capacitance C'm are positive, but the shunting
conductance G'Na is negative. This is to be expected if we only treat /Na in isolation, with
no counteracting current. Indeed, in order for the circuit to be stable, the total steady-state
conductance must be positive (Koch, 1984). This can be assured if the linearized potassium
current as well as the leak current are all jointly considered, as we will do now.
10.3 Linearized Membrane Impedance of a Patch of Squid Axon
The final RLC circuit, mimicking the small-signal response of a patch of squid axon
membrane, includes five branches (Fig. 10.5A): a pure capacitance due to the physical
capacitance of the bilipid membrane, a single positive conductance lumping the steady-
state contributions of the leak, sodium, and potassium currents, the two phenomenological
inductive branches and the one phenomenological capacitive branch. The values of these
electrical elements vary with Vr, as discussed in Mauro et al., (1970) and in the legend to
Fig. 10.5.
We know from electrical circuit theory that RLC circuits can show oscillatory behavior
with the presence of one or more resonances. This is best investigated by computing the
complex impedance K (/) of the circuit in Fig. 10.5A. Writing down an expression for the
total current (see Eqs. 10.12 and 10.22) directly in Fourier space, we have
(10.31)
With dSI(t)/dt transforming into if • <$/(/), we obtain an expression for the impedance
as the ratio of S V(f) and 81'(/):
(10.32)
The a, 's and ft's are constants, which depend on the values of the electrical components
(Koch, 1984). Figure 10.5B shows the calculated amplitude of the impedance if the mem-
brane is linearized around the resting potential, and Fig. 10.5C shows the experimentally
recorded amplitude. Both sets of curves have the same characteristic bandpass response.
For the low-temperature curves, sinusoidal inputs in the neighborhood of 50-70 Hz are
more attenuated than slower or more rapidly varying current inputs. The linearized squid
axon membrane behaves similar to a passive membrane for sinusoidal inputs with 200 Hz
or faster components.


===== Page 9 =====
240
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.5 LINEARIZED SQUID AXON
MEMBRANE (A) Electrical RLC cir-
cuit mimicking the small-signal re-
sponse of a patch of squid axon
obtained by adding <5/K> 
<5^Na. as
well as the contribution from the leak
current <5/ieak- Note that G is posi-
tive. If the Hodgkin-Huxley equations
with standard parameters (at 6.3° C;
see Chap. 6) are linearized around
rest, the following numerical values
are obtained (for details, see the ap-
pendix in Koch, 1984): Cm = 1,
G = 0.246, gn = 0.849, gh = 0.072,
g'm = 0.432, Ln = 6.43, Lh = 119.0
and C'm = 0.102 (units are ^F/cm2
for the capacitances, H • cm2 for the
inductances, and mS/cm2 for the con-
ductances). The combined steady-state
conductance of the system at rest is
1.167 mS/cm2. (B) Amplitude of the
membrane impedance of this circuit,
corresponding to the impedance of the
small-signal response of the squid axon
at two different temperatures. As ex-
pected of a quasi-active membrane,
the transversal membrane impedance
displays a resonance around 67 Hz.
Reprinted in modified form by permis-
sion from Mauro et al., (1970). (C) Am-
plitude of the small-signal impedance
measured in the space-clamped squid
axon at two different temperatures.
Reprinted in modified form by permis-
sion from Mauro et al., (1970).
The range of validity of the linearized membrane is a few millivolts around the resting
potential (for more details, see Sabah and Leibovic, 1969; Koch, 1984). This is evident in
the experimental record from the squid axon displayed in Fig. 10.6A. Here, a current step
of increasing magnitude is injected into the space-clamped squid giant axon (see Fig. 6.2A
for the experimental arrangement). As is apparent, the voltage has a characteristic ringing
response as well as displaying undershooting at the offset of the current step. This ringing
becomes more pronounced for larger, but still subthreshold, current stimuli, revealing
nonlinear components. A similar experiment is repeated in Fig. 10.6B, where an action
potential is elicited at the top of the oscillation.
It makes sense to associate a resonant frequency with the membrane impedance, defined


===== Page 10 =====
10.3 Linearized Membrane Impedance of a Patch of Squid Axon 
• 
241
Fig. 10.6 SMALL-SIGNAL 
VOLTAGE 
RE-
SPONSE IN SQUID AXON Membrane poten-
tial in a space-clamped giant axonal fiber (of
0.4-mm diameter). (A) Membrane potential in
response to depolarizing current steps of differ-
ent amplitudes. Notice the damped oscillations
during and at the offset of the current step. The
maximum current strength applied is barely sub-
threshold in the last case. Reprinted in modified
form by permission from Mauro et al., (1970).
(B) A suprathreshold current of sufficient am-
plitude is applied to evoke a second action po-
tential that arises from the second oscillation.
At higher current amplitudes, a train of spikes
can be generated with a moderate increase in
repetition rate relative to the subthreshold oscil-
lation frequency. Reprinted in modified form by
permission from Mauro et al., (1970).
here as the frequency of the peak response of K ( f ) . If the standard Hodgkin-Huxley
equations at 6.3° C are linearized around rest, /max — 67 Hz (Fig. 10.6B). This frequency
is relatively stable for larger current steps, as is evident in Fig. 10.5B, varying no more than
15% and roughly coinciding with the frequency of the oscillatory components seen in the
experimental records. Furthermore, /max is only marginally higher than the natural spiking
frequency of an "infinite" train of action potentials (53 Hz; see Fig. 6.9B).
So far, we only considered a patch of squid membrane (or, equivalently, a space-clamped
ax on). On the basis of the propagation factor y (/) defined in Sec. 23.1, the input and trans-
fer impedances as well as the frequency-dependent space constant of the linearized squid
axon can be computed. It is possible to prove (Koch, 1984) that if the membrane impedance
is a bandpass, then so will these three functions for an infinite cable. For instance, a 1 £tm thin
infinite cable with the quasi-active membrane shown in Fig. 10.5A has a dc space constant
of 175 jU,m. In any passive cable structure, the space constant at higher frequency will always
be less than the dc space constant (Fig. 2.8), due to the unavoidable charge leakage via the
membrane capacitance. While this capacitance is also present, the inductances "present"
in the linearized squid axon can boost A(/) for an intermediate frequency range (for the
definition of the frequency-dependent space constant in an infinite cable see Eq. 2.36). Thus,
A,(/) has a pronounced peak (345 /urn) at 74 Hz. The sharpness of the tuning curve (as
expressed by its half width at half height) as well as the resonant frequency /max increase
monotonically with the channel density of both potassium and sodium channels as well as
with the distance between the injection and the recording sites (Koch, 1984).
Figure 10.7A shows the computed amplitude of the somatic input impedance of our
standard model of the layer 5 pyramidal cell as a function of the frequency of the applied
sinusoidal current injection. While its dendritic tree is passive, the soma contains seven


===== Page 11 =====
242 • 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.7 SMALL-SIGNAL SOMATIC INPUT IMPEDANCE OF PYRAMIDAL CELL MODEL 
Small-
signal response of the voltage-dependent model of the layer 5 pyramidal cell. (A) Amplitude of
the somatic input impedance \Kss(f)\ 
defined as the peak somatic voltage change relative to the
resting potential (at —65 mV) in response to a small sinusoidal current (peak amplitude of 10 pA) of
frequency / injected into the soma. The peak occurs around 12 Hz. The roll-off at high frequency is
due to the distributed capacitance. (B) The range of this linear approximation is illustrated by plotting
the normalized membrane change in response to current steps /damp- For currents less then 0.1 nA,
the responses superimpose and the depolarizing response is a mirror image of the hyperpolarizing
response. Larger currents increasingly deviate from this linear behavior. For current steps of 0.30 nA,
the membrane potential slowly drifts upward, eventually initiating an action potential.
voltage-, time-, and calcium-dependent membrane conductances. K is computed using a
small-signal response. The amplitude of K is 16.5 M£2 at dc and peaks at 24.1 M£2 around
12 Hz. At these frequencies, the transient potassium current /A is relatively inactivated
(the inactivation rate constant has a time constant of 100 msec). The decay evident at high


===== Page 12 =====
10.4 Functional Implications of Quasi-Active Membranes 
• 
243
frequencies is due to the membrane capacitance and has a dependency close to 1/V/,
as expected in an infinite cable. (At these high frequencies, the neuron can be considered
to have a practical infinite extent relative to A(/); Fig. 2.9.) The range of validity of this
small-signal approximation to the neuronal response can be directly read off Fig. 10.7B.
For current steps up to 0.1 nA, this relatively large cell is in its linear range. Larger currents,
in particular if they are depolarizing, will trigger a sufficient amount of sodium current to
bring the cell out of its linear range. For a step of 0.295 nA amplitude, the potential will
slowly creep upward until an action potential is initiated (not shown; see Sec. 17.3).
10.4 Functional Implications of Quasi-Active Membranes
What are some of the computational implications for neurons with quasi-active membranes?
The fact that the input and transfer impedances and the frequency-dependent space constant
have peaks at nonzero frequencies has interesting consequences for information processing.
Let us allude to three examples.
10.4.1 Spaf/o-Temporal Filtering
In a dendritic tree endowed with a purely passive membrane, Kij and A. are monotonically
decreasing functions of the frequency of the applied current. As illustrated with the help of
the dynamic morphoelectrotonic transforms in Fig. 3.8, voltage attenuation is substantially
more pronounced at higher than at lower frequencies. For a neuron in the visual pathway,
say in the retina, this effect will partly determine its receptive field, since a visual stimulus
with a high frequency content can only influence the cell's firing if it is closer to the cell body
than more slowly varying synaptic input of the same amplitude. This effect is caricaturized
in Fig. 10.8A. In a sort of precursor to METs, Koch (1984) determined the fraction of the
dendritic tree of a cat retinal ganglion cell whose voltage attenuation to the soma, Ais,
for two different frequencies is less than 4. This amounts to a functional definition of the
receptive field of the cell (assuming that the synaptic inervation density is constant across
its dendrites). If the dendritic tree is entirely passive, the "receptive field" of this cell is
large for dc synaptic input, shrinking to a much smaller size for 100 Hz input.
If, to the contrary, the cell is endowed with the quasi-active membrane shown in
Fig. 10.5A, the opposite behavior occurs. Because the membrane impedance is higher for
high-frequency inputs, the fraction of the dendritic tree for which Ats < 4 is large for 100 Hz
input, and small for either dc or 200 Hz input (Fig. 10.8B). Assuming that the processing
between the photoreceptor and the ganglion cell is linear for low-contrast visual stimuli,
this neuron would be tuned to transient input and would respond less to sustained stimuli, a
form of spatio-temporal tuning (Derrington and Lennie, 1982; Enroth-Cugell et al., 1983).
70.4.2 Temporal Differentiation
Computing the temporal derivative of some function V(t) is equivalent to multiplying its
Fourier transform V ( f ) by if. Such a differentiation operation can be implemented by
filtering V(t) with a function whose Fourier transform is proportional to /.
While the transfer impedance of any neuronal membrane will ultimately decay with
increasing frequency (due to the presence of the capacitance), the transfer impedance in a
cable endowed with a quasi-active membrane shows a high-pass behavior over a limited


===== Page 13 =====
244 
• 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.8 SPATIO-TEMPORAL FILTERING IN RETINAL GANGLION CELLS In a cell endowed with
a quasi-active membrane, high-frequency synaptic input can propagate further than sustained input.
This effect is shown here graphically by determining the fraction of the dendritic tree whose voltage
attenuation to the soma is less than some threshold, here Ajs < 4 in a cat retinal ganglion cell
reconstructed from Boycott and Wassle (1974). This can be thought of as the receptive field of the
cell. (A) The membrane is entirely passive. The large, heavily dotted area indicates the region within
which the voltage attenuation for stationary inputs to the soma is less than 4. The smaller, lightly
dotted area illustrates the same concept for a sinusoidal input of 100 Hz. (B) If the quasi-active
membrane obtained from the linearized Hodgkin-Huxley equations (Fig. 10.5A) is added to the
passive component in panel A, the previous situation is reversed. Now a sinusoidal current input
at 100 Hz (lightly dotted region) attenuates much less than sustained input (heavily dotted region).
For 200-Hz input the region of small attenuation will be less than for the region for sustained input.
Such a cell would be more responsive to transient than to dc signals. Reprinted by permission from
Koch (1984).
frequency range. If the signal is restricted to this part of the spectrum, then such a membrane
can implement a temporal derivative operation.
Koch (1984) simulated this behavior in an extended, unbranched cable with the quasi-
active membrane of Fig. 10.5A. Injecting a current that peaks at 5 msec and decays within
20 msec (whose spectrum is monotonically decreasing and has decayed to 50% of its dc
value at 70 Hz, the peak frequency of the transfer) the voltage recorded 350 /u,m away is
qualitatively very similar to the temporal derivative of the current injected into the cable.
The approximation is worse for faster synaptic input (since a larger fraction of its spectrum
will lie beyond the peak at /max) and better for slowly changing input. What is appealing
about this linear operation is that it can be implemented in a very compact manner in a
single cable.
10.4.3 Electrical Tuning in Hair Cells
Receptor cells in auditory and electroreceptive systems of many species show electrical
resonance: upon appropriate sensory stimulation, their membrane potential oscillates. This
has been explored in detail for hair cells in the amphibian auditory system. Hair cells, whose
function is to translate the acoustic stimuli into electrical ones (for an incisive review of
their biophysical properties, see Hudspeth, 1985), are organized tonotopically along the
basilar membrane in the cochlea according to their characteristic frequency (the frequency


===== Page 14 =====
10.5 Recapitulation 
• 245
of the acoustic stimuli the cell optimally responds to). Upon stimulation with a current step,
the membrane potential responds with exponentially damped oscillations (Crawford and
Fettiplace, 1981; Lewis and Hudspeth, 1983; see Fig. 10.9A). The oscillation frequency is
a nonlinear function of the membrane potential. The frequency around the resting potential
indicates the cell's natural frequency, that is, the frequency of sound or vibration to which
the cell is most sensitive. In the bullfrog, this ranges from 80 to 160 Hz and in the turtle
from 100 to about 700 Hz.
Hudspeth and Lewis (1988a,b) used the patch-clamp technique to identify the biophysical
mechanism responsible for this resonance. They characterized two key currents, a noninac-
tivating calcium current /ca, and a calcium- and voltage-dependent potassium current /K(Ca)
(which they modeled using a linear, five-state kinetic scheme that requires two intracellular
Ca2+ ions for the channel to open, and a third Ca2+ ion that can prolong the channel
opening; Hudspeth and Lewis, 1988a). Using a Hodgkin-Huxley-like model, which also
incorporates the capacitive and leak currents, they showed that electrical tuning could be
explained in its majority by the interdependence of these currents (Hudspeth and Lewis,
1988b). Injection of a step current depolarizes the membrane, activating /ca. Calcium ions
rush in and rapidly turn on /K(Ca) • This outward current then brings the membrane potential
down again, turning itself off in the process. If the current step persists, the cycle can now
begin anew. Varying the kinetics and the density of the calcium-dependent calcium channels
controls the frequency of resonance.
The input to hair cells is provided by activation of the mechanically sensitive cilia
(hairs) that modulate a conductance in their membrane. If this conductance is included in
the model and stimulated using sinusoidally varying acoustical input, the resulting tuning
curve (Fig. 10.9B) closely mimics the electrical resonance frequency around the resting
potential. We conclude that in the amphibian cochlea, hair cells behave like small electrical
resonant elements—bandpass filters— whose tuning properties are due to the interplay of
an inward and an outward current. Note that Hudspeth and Lewis (1988b) used a nonlinear
model to explain the electrical resonance. Previous efforts to model hair cells using RLC
circuits as described above (Crawford and Fettiplace, 1981; Art and Fettiplace, 1987) did,
however, capture most of the qualitative aspects of these oscillations.
Have such resonating neuronal elements been found anywhere else? Llinas, Grace, and
Yarom (1991), recording in layer 4 neurons in the cortical slice preparation, found that a
constant current step evoked subthreshold oscillations in the 10-50 Hz frequency range.
Because these cells are small, with smooth and aspiny dendrites, Llinas and coworkers
argue that they are inhibitory interneurons. In contradistinction, other neurons in the cortex,
termed chattering cells, show an oscillatory firing pattern in the 20-70 Hz band in response
to visual stimuli or suprathreshold current injection, but no such oscillatory changes in the
membrane potential in response to subthreshold current injections (Gray and McCormick,
1996). The function of these oscillations is at present not known, although much has been
speculated on this topic (for an overview, see Koch, 1993).
10.5 Recapitulation
Although it can be argued that a linear analysis of a nonlinear phenomenon does not do justice
to it, it will certainly help us to understand certain aspects of the mechanism underlying
the phenomenon. This is true when considering certain resonant or oscillatory behaviors
evident in nerve cells.


===== Page 15 =====
246 
• 
LINEARIZING VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT CURRENTS
Fig. 10.9 ELECTRICAL RESONANCE IN HAIR CELLS 
Hair cells in the cochlea of amphibians
behave like electrical band-pass elements, preferentially responding to an acoustic stimulus of a
particular frequency. (A) Membrane potential recorded in a solitary hair cell of the bullfrog (Hudspeth
and Lewis, 1988b). Upon injection of a 50-msec-long current step, the membrane responds by
generating exponentially damped oscillations whose frequency varies with the membrane potential.
The frequency (93 Hz) around the resting potential (—49 mV) determines the frequency of sound
or vibration the cell is most sensitive to. As the average membrane potential increases to —41 mV
(by using larger current steps, whose amplitude is indicated to the right of each trace), the frequency
of the damped oscillations increases to 240 Hz. Reprinted by permission from Hudspeth and Lewis
(1988b). (B) The acoustic stimulus couples to a mechanically triggered membrane conductance. If
this conductance is added to a model that includes a calcium and a calcium-dependent potassium
current, it is sufficient to explain the resonant property of isolated hair cells. Here the peak-to-peak
amplitude of the receptor potential in response to a sinusoidal ±20-nm displacement of the hair bundle
is plotted as a function of the stimulus frequency. Thus, each individual cell acts like a bandpass
element, here optimally sensitive to input around 112 Hz. Reprinted by permission from Hudspeth
and Lewis (1988b).


===== Page 16 =====
10.5 Recapitulation 
• 247
As Detwiler, Hodgkin and McNaughton (1980) pointed out, a time- and voltage-
dependent potassium current that is activated by depolarization or an inward current that is
activated by hyperpolarization (as the h part of the fast sodium current) does behave, under
certain restricted conditions, like an inductance in series with a conductance would. That
is, one can mimic the small-signal behavior of such a current by an electrical circuit that
includes such an inductance. This explains why EPSPs or the depolarization in response to
even very small current injections will be followed by a hyperpolarizing overshoot (provided
the experimental setup is sensitive enough to record such small voltages superimposed onto
the background noise). The membrane impedance of a membrane that includes resistances,
capacitances, as well as phenomenological inductances (RLC circuit) peaks at some
nonzero resonant frequency /max- Such a quasi-active membrane with a bandpass response
will cause the membrane potential to show damped oscillations at or close to the resonant
frequency /max in response to a current step. This has been confirmed empirically when
recording the response of the squid giant axon to small, subthreshold current steps.
One consequence of a bandpass-like membrane impedance is that the transfer impedance
and the frequency-dependent space constant associated with an infinite cable covered by
such a quasi-active membrane can also show resonant behavior. This implies that input
signals with frequencies around /max are treated preferentially in terms of a smaller voltage
attenuation to the soma (or other measures of synaptic efficiency) than inputs at faster or
slower frequencies: the cable is spatio-temporally tuned to some frequency range. If the
transfer impedance of a cable with a quasi-active membrane can be approximated by a
bandpass, injecting a current whose dominant signal content lies in the spectrum between
dc and /max induces a voltage change that approximates the continuous temporal derivative
of the injected current. In other words, a small piece of quasi-active dendritic cable can
implement a temporal derivative operation.
Hudspeth and Lewis (1988b) used a nonlinear, squid axonlike membrane description of
a calcium and a calcium-dependent potassium current (in series with leak and capacitive
currents) to model the electrical behavior of bullfrog hair cells in the cochlea. Confirming
earlier linear RLC analyses, each hair cell by itself acts as an electrical resonant element
best tuned to respond to sounds in the /max frequency band. The kinetics and density of
^K(Ca) control /max as well as the tuning of the bandpass. The morale is that individual
neurons can implement a variety of different linear and nonlinear computational operations
on the basis of the cornucopia of known membrane currents.


