===== Page 1 =====
44    Part I / Overall Perspective
Why would variability in signaling enzymes be 
preserved in wild populations of Drosophila, which 
typically include both rovers and sitters? The answer is 
that variations in the environment create pressure for 
balanced selection for alternative behaviors. Crowded 
environments favor the rover larva, which is more 
effective at moving to new, unexploited food sources 
in advance of competitors, whereas sparse environ-
ments favor the sitter larva, which exploits the current 
source more thoroughly.
The for gene is also found in honeybees. Honey-
bees exhibit different behaviors at different stages of 
their life; in general, young bees are nurses, while older 
bees become foragers that leave the hive. The for gene 
is expressed at high levels in the brains of active forag-
ing honeybees and at low levels in the younger and 
more stationary nurse bees. Activation of cGMP sign-
aling in young bees can cause them to enter the forager 
stage prematurely; this change could be induced by an 
environmental stimulus or the bee’s advancing age.
Thus the same gene controls variation in a behav-
ior in two different insects, but in different ways. In 
the fruit fly, variations in the behavior are expressed 
in different individuals, whereas in the honeybee, they 
are expressed in one individual at different ages. The 
Sitters
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
Number of individuals
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
70
Rovers
Sitters
Rovers
Yeast
Agar
Yeast
Agar
A  
Within-patch foraging
B
Sitters
Rovers
Foraging trail length (cm) 
Between-patch foraging
Figure 2–14  Foraging behavior of Drosophila melanogaster 
rover and sitter larvae differs while feasting on patches of 
yeast. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sokolowski. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
A. Rover-type larvae move from patch to patch, whereas sitter-
type larvae stay put on a single patch for a long time. When 
foraging within a single patch, rover larvae move about more 
than sitter larvae. On agar alone, rover and sitter larvae move 
about equally.
B. While foraging within a patch of food, rovers have longer trail 
lengths than sitters (trail lengths were measured over a period 
of 5 minutes).
This difference in foraging behavior maps to a single protein 
kinase gene, for, which varies in activity in different fly larvae.
difference illustrates how an important regulatory 
gene can be recruited to different behavioral strategies 
in different species.
Neuropeptide Receptors Regulate the Social 
Behaviors of Several Species
Many aspects of behavior are associated with an animal’s 
social interactions with other animals. Social behaviors 
are highly variable between species, yet have a large 
innate component within a species that is controlled 
genetically. A simple form of social behavior has been 
analyzed in the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. 
These animals live in soil and eat bacteria.
Different wild-type strains exhibit profound differ-
ences in feeding behavior. Animals from the standard 
laboratory strain are solitary, dispersing across a lawn 
of bacterial food and failing to interact with each other. 
Other strains have a social feeding pattern, joining 
large feeding groups of dozens or hundreds of animals 
(Figure 2–15). The difference between these strains is 
genetic, as both feeding patterns are stably inherited.
The difference between social and solitary worms 
is caused by a single amino acid substitution in a single 
gene, a member of a large family of genes involved in 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    45
signaling between neurons. This gene, npr-1, encodes a 
neuropeptide receptor. Neuropeptides have long been 
appreciated for their roles in coordinating behaviors 
across networks of neurons. For example, a neuropep-
tide hormone of the marine snail Aplysia stimulates a 
complex set of movements and behavior patterns asso-
ciated with a single behavior, egg laying. Mammalian 
neuropeptides have been implicated in feeding behav-
ior, sleep, pain, and many other behaviors and physi-
ological processes. The existence of a mutation in the 
neuropeptide receptor that alters social behavior sug-
gests that this kind of signaling molecule is important 
both for generating the behavior and for generating 
the variation between individuals.
Neuropeptide receptors have also been implicated 
in the regulation of mammalian social behavior. The 
neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin stimulate 
mammalian affiliative behaviors such as pair bonding 
and parental bonding with offspring. In mice, oxytocin 
is required for social recognition, the ability to iden-
tify a familiar individual. Oxytocin and vasopressin 
have been studied in depth in prairie voles, rodents 
that form lasting pairs to raise their young. Oxytocin 
released in the brain of female prairie voles during 
mating stimulates pair-bond formation. Likewise, 
vasopressin released in the brain of male prairie voles 
during mating stimulates pair-bond formation and 
paternal behavior.
The extent of pair-bonding varies substantially 
between mammalian species. Male prairie voles form 
long-lasting pair-bonds with females and help them 
raise their offspring and are described as monogamous, 
but the closely related male montane voles breed widely 
Figure 2–15  Feeding behavior of the roundworm Caeno-
rhabditis elegans depends on the level of activity of the 
gene coding for a neuropeptide receptor. In one strain, indi-
vidual worms graze in isolation (left), whereas in another strain, 
individuals mass together to feed. The difference is explained 
by a single amino acid substitution in the neuropeptide receptor 
gene. (Reproduced, with permission, from De Bono and  
Bargmann 1998.)
and do not engage in paternal behavior. The difference 
between the behaviors of males in these species corre-
lates with differences in the expression of the V1a class 
of vasopressin receptors in the brain. In prairie voles, 
V1a vasopressin receptors are expressed at high levels 
in a specific brain region, the ventral pallidum (Figure 
2–16). In montane voles, the levels are much lower in this 
region, although high in other brain regions.
The importance of oxytocin and vasopressin and 
their receptors has been confirmed and extended by 
reverse genetic studies in mice, which are easier than 
voles to manipulate genetically. Introducing the V1a 
vasopressin receptor gene from prairie voles into male 
mice, which behave more like montane voles, increases 
the expression of the V1a vasopressin receptor in the 
ventral pallidum and increases the affiliative behavior of 
the male mice toward females. Thus differences between 
species in the pattern of expression of the vasopressin 
receptor can contribute to differences in social behaviors.
The analysis of vasopressin receptors in different 
rodents provides insight into the mechanisms by which 
genes and behaviors can change during evolution. Thus 
evolutionary changes in the pattern of expression of the 
V1a vasopressin receptor in the ventral forebrain have 
altered the activity of a neural circuit, linking the func-
tion of the ventral forebrain to the function of the vaso-
pressin-secreting neurons that are activated by mating. 
As a result, social behaviors are altered.
The importance of oxytocin and vasopressin in 
human social behavior is not known, but the central 
role of pair-bonding and pup rearing in mammalian 
species suggests that these molecules might play a role 
in our species as well.


===== Page 3 =====
46    Part I / Overall Perspective
Studies of Human Genetic Syndromes 
Have Provided Initial Insights Into the 
Underpinnings of Social Behavior
Brain Disorders in Humans Result From 
Interactions Between Genes and the Environment
The first gene discovered for a neurological disease in 
humans clearly illustrates the interaction of genes and 
environment in determining cognitive and behavioral 
phenotypes. Phenylketonuria (PKU), described by AsbØrn 
FØlling in Norway in 1934, affects one in 15,000 children 
and results in severe impairment of cognitive function.
Children with this disease have two abnormal 
copies of the PKU gene that codes for phenylalanine 
hydroxylase, the enzyme that converts the amino acid 
phenylalanine to tyrosine. The mutation is recessive 
and heterozygous carrier individuals have no symp-
toms. Children who lack normal function in both cop-
ies of the gene accumulate high blood concentrations 
of phenylalanine from dietary proteins, which in turn 
leads to the production of toxic metabolites that inter-
fere with neuronal function. The specific biochemical 
processes by which phenylalanine adversely affects 
the brain are still not understood.
The PKU phenotype (intellectual disability) results 
from the interaction of the genotype (the homozy-
gous pku mutation) and the environment (the diet). 
The treatment for PKU is thus simple and effective: 
Social
recognition
pathway
Reward
pathway
Vasopressin
Ventral pallidum
Social
recognition
pathway
Reward
pathway
Vasopressin
Ventral pallidum
LS
VP
LS
VP
A  Montane vole (nonmonogamous)
B  Prairie vole (monogamous)
Figure 2–16  Distribution of vasopressin receptors (V1a) in two 
closely related rodent species. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Young et al. 2001. Copyright © 2001 Academic Press.)
A. Receptor expression is high in the lateral septum (LS) but 
low in the ventral pallidum (VP) in the montane vole, which 
does not form pair bonds.
B. Expression is high in the ventral pallidum of the monoga-
mous prairie vole. Expression of the receptor in the ventral pal-
lidum allows vasopressin to link the social recognition pathway 
to the reward pathway.
developmental delay can be prevented by a low-pro-
tein diet. The molecular and genetic analysis of gene 
function in PKU has led to dramatic improvements in 
the life of affected individuals. Since the early 1960s, 
the United States has instituted mandatory testing 
for PKU in newborns. Identifying children with the 
genetic disorder and modifying their diet before the 
disease appears prevents many aspects of the disorder.
Later chapters of this book describe many exam-
ples of single-gene traits that, like PKU, have led to 
insights into brain function and dysfunction. Certain 
themes have emerged from these studies. For example, 
a number of rare neurodegenerative disorders such as 
Huntington disease and spinocerebellar ataxia result 
from the pathological, dominant expansion of gluta-
mate residues within proteins. The discovery of these 
polyglutamine repeat disorders highlighted the dan-
ger to the brain of unfolded and aggregated proteins. 
The discovery that epileptic seizures can be caused by 
a variety of mutations in ion channels led to the reali-
zation that these disorders are primarily disorders of 
neuronal excitability.
Rare Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide 
Insights Into the Biology of Social Behavior, 
Perception, and Cognition
Neurological and developmental disorders that mani-
fest themselves in childhood have illuminated the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    47
importance and complexity of genetics in human brain 
function. Early evidence that genes affect specific cog-
nitive and behavioral circuitry emerged from studies of 
a rare genetic condition known as Williams syndrome. 
Individuals with this disorder typically exhibit normal 
language as well as extreme sociability; early in devel-
opment, they lack the reticence children typically have 
in the presence of strangers. At the same time, they are 
profoundly impaired in spatial processing, show over-
all intellectual disability, and have very high rates of 
anxiety (but rarely social anxiety disorder).
The patterns of impairments in Williams syn-
drome, as compared with for example autism spec-
trum disorders, suggest that language and social skills 
can be separated from some other brain functions. 
Brain areas concerned with language are impaired in 
children with autism but are active or accentuated in 
Williams syndrome. By contrast, general and spatial 
intelligence is more impaired in Williams syndrome 
than in about half of all children with autism spectrum 
disorder.
Williams syndrome is caused by a heterozygous 
deletion of the chromosome region 7q11.23, most often 
encompassing about 1.5 Mb and 27 genes. The simplest 
interpretation of this defect is that the level of expres-
sion of the genes within the interval is reduced because 
there is only one copy instead of two of each gene in 
the region. The precise genes in the interval that influ-
ence social communication and spatial processing are 
not yet known, but they are of great interest because of 
their potential to provide insight into the genetic regu-
lation of human behavior.
A more recent discovery in studies of autism spec-
trum disorders has further highlighted the complex 
relationship between genetic variation and social and 
intellectual functioning first illuminated by Williams 
syndrome. Within about the past decade, advances in 
genomic technology have allowed for high-throughput 
methods to screen the genome for variations in chro-
mosomal structure, and at much higher resolution 
than was allowed by the light microscope (see Box 2–1).  
Seminal studies in 2007 and 2008 demonstrated that 
individuals with autism spectrum disorder carry new 
(de novo) copy number variations much more often 
than unaffected individuals. These findings led to 
some of the first discoveries of specific genomic inter-
vals contributing to common forms of the syndrome 
(ie, autism spectrum disorder without evidence of syn-
dromal features, also known as idiopathic or nonsyndro-
mic autism spectrum disorder).
In 2011, two simultaneous large-scale studies of de 
novo copy number variations in a very well-characterized 
cohort found that precisely the same region deleted 
in Williams syndrome conferred substantial risk for 
autism spectrum disorder in an individual. However, 
in these cases, it was rare duplications (one excess copy 
of the region), and not deletions, that dramatically 
increased the risk for social disability. These findings, 
that losses and gains in the identical set of genes may 
lead to contrasting social phenotypes (while both typi-
cally lead to intellectual disability), further support the 
notion that domains of cognitive and behavioral func-
tioning are separable but may share important molecu-
lar mechanisms.
Fragile X syndrome is another neurodevelopmen-
tal disorder of childhood that provides insight into the 
genetics of cognitive function; unlike Williams syn-
drome, it has been mapped to a single gene on the X 
chromosome. Fragile X syndrome varies in its pres-
entation. Affected children may have intellectual dis-
ability, poor social cognition, high social anxiety, and 
repetitive behavior; about 30% of boys with fragile X 
syndrome meet diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum 
disorder. Fragile X syndrome is also associated with a 
broader range of traits, including physical characteris-
tics such as an elongated face and protruding ears.
Fragile X syndrome has been shown to result from 
mutations that reduce expression of a gene called frag-
ile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). Because the 
gene falls on the X chromosome, males lose all expres-
sion of the gene when their one copy is mutated. FMRP 
protein regulates the translation of mRNAs into pro-
teins in neurons, in a process that is itself regulated 
by neuronal activity. Regulated translation in neurons 
is an important component of the synaptic plasticity 
required for learning. The fragile X defect at the level 
of translation thus cascades up to affect neuronal func-
tion, learning, and higher-order cognitive processes. 
Interestingly, a large proportion of the other genes 
associated with increased risk for autism spectrum 
disorder as well as schizophrenia are regulated by the 
FMRP protein.
Another Mendelian disorder whose genetic basis 
is well understood is Rett syndrome (discussed in 
detail in Chapter 62). Rett syndrome is an X-linked, 
progressive neurodevelopmental disorder and one 
of the most common causes of intellectual disability 
in females. The disorder is almost always confined 
to females because canonical Rett mutations are very 
often lethal in the developing male embryo, which has 
a single X chromosome. Affected girls develop typi-
cally until they are 6 to 18 months of age, when they 
fail to acquire speech, show regression in intellectual 
functioning, and display compulsive, uncontrolled 
hand wringing instead of purposeful hand movement. 
In addition, girls with Rett syndrome often show a 


===== Page 5 =====
48    Part I / Overall Perspective
period of markedly impaired social interaction that 
may be indistinguishable from autism spectrum dis-
order, although it is thought that social functioning is 
largely preserved in later life. Huda Zoghbi and her 
colleagues found that the major cause of this syndrome 
results from mutations in the methyl CpG binding pro-
tein 2 (MeCP2) gene. Methylation of specific CpG 
sequences in DNA alters expression of nearby genes, 
and one of the established functions of MeCP2 is that it 
binds methylated DNA as part of a process that regu-
lates mRNA transcription.
Rare syndromes have also offered some of the first 
insights into the genetic substrates of schizophrenia 
(Chapter 60). For example, as first described by Robert 
Shprintzen and colleagues in 1978, deletions of chromo-
some 22q11 lead to a wide range of physical and behav-
ioral symptoms, including psychosis, now often referred 
to as velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS), DiGeorge syn-
drome, or 22q11 deletion syndrome. The initial descrip-
tions by Shprintzen were met with some skepticism as 
a result of the extremely broad range of phenotypes 
associated with the identical deletion. It is now widely 
appreciated that the 22q11 deletion is the most common 
chromosomal abnormality associated with schizophre-
nia and childhood-onset schizophrenia. Moreover, chro-
mosomal losses of the identical region have been found 
to be associated with large individual risks for autism. 
To date, the specific genes within the region responsible 
for the psychiatric phenotype(s) have not been defini-
tively established. Moreover, recent evidence from the 
autism literature suggests that it is likely that a combi-
nation of multiple genes within this interval, each con-
ferring relatively small individual effects, is responsible 
for the social disability phenotype.
Psychiatric Disorders Involve Multigenic Traits
As mentioned earlier, single-gene syndromes are 
rare compared to the total burden of neurodegenera-
tive and psychiatric disease. Consequently, one might 
question the rationale for studying rare disorders if 
they represent just a fraction of the total disease bur-
den. The reason is that rare conditions can provide 
insight into the biological processes involved in more 
common, complex forms of a disease. For example, 
among the prominent successes of human genetics has 
been the discovery of rare genetic variants that lead to 
early-onset Alzheimer disease or Parkinson disease. 
Individuals with these severe rare variants represent 
a tiny subset of all individuals with these conditions, 
but the identification of rare disease variants uncov-
ered cellular processes that are also disrupted in the 
larger patient pool, pointing to general therapeutic 
avenues. Similarly, pursuit of the pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying Rett, fragile X, and other neu-
rodevelopmental disorders has already led to some of 
the first attempts at rational drug development in psy-
chiatric syndromes.
In the remainder of this chapter, we expand the 
discussion of the genetics of two complex neurodevel-
opmental and psychiatric phenotypes: autism spec-
trum disorders and schizophrenia. Compared to the 
rare Mendelian examples discussed earlier, the genet-
ics of common forms of these conditions are indeed 
more diverse, varied, and heterogeneous, involving 
many different genes in different individuals as well 
as multiple risk genes conferring liability in combina-
tions. Moreover, for both diagnoses, while the support 
for a genetic contribution is substantial, there is also 
compelling evidence for a contribution from environ-
mental factors.
Progress in understanding these disorders came 
from the combination of rapidly advancing genomic 
technologies and statistical methods, a culture of 
open data sharing, and the consolidation of very large 
patient cohorts providing adequate power to detect 
very rare highly penetrant alleles as well as com-
mon genetic variants carrying small increments of 
risk. Importantly, recent successes in understanding 
both syndromes have provided a solid foundation for 
the pursuit of their biological consequences and the 
molecular, cellular, and circuit-level pathophysiology 
conveyed by these genetic risk factors.
Advances in Autism Spectrum Disorder Genetics 
Highlight the Role of Rare and De Novo Mutations 
in Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Autism spectrum disorders are a collection of develop-
mental syndromes of varying severity affecting approx-
imately 2% to 3% of the population and characterized 
by impairment in reciprocal social communication as 
well as stereotyped interests and repetitive behaviors. 
There is a significant male predominance; on average, 
three times as many boys as girls are affected. The 
clinical symptoms of autism spectrum disorders, by 
definition, emerge in the first 3 years of life, although 
highly reliable differences between affected and unaf-
fected children are very often identifiable within the 
first months of life.
There is considerable phenotypic variability 
between those affected, leading to the development 
of the quite broad diagnostic classification of autism 
spectrum disorders. In addition, affected individu-
als have a higher frequency of seizures and cognitive 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    49
problems than the general population and often have 
serious impairments in adaptive functioning. How-
ever, many autistic individuals are not as profoundly 
affected and lead highly successful lives.
Autism has a very strong heritable component (see 
Figure 2–1A), which is likely to account for its being 
among the first genetically complex neuropsychiatric 
syndromes to yield to modern gene discovery tools 
and methods. Autism spectrum disorder has broader 
significance because it provides insight into behaviors 
that are quintessentially human: language, complex 
intelligence, and interpersonal interactions. Impor-
tantly, the fact that the defects in social communication 
seen in autism spectrum disorders can coexist with 
normal intelligence and typical functioning in other 
domains suggests that the brain is to some degree 
modular with distinct cognitive functions that can 
vary independently.
While syndromic forms of autism spectrum disor-
der account for a small fraction of all cases, the first 
findings in more common so-called “idiopathic” or 
“nonsyndromic” forms of the disorder also demon-
strated a role for rare mutations carrying large bio-
logical effects. For example, in 2003, the sequencing of 
genes within a region on the X chromosome deleted in 
a very small number of females with autistic features 
led to the discovery of rare, loss-of-function mutations 
in the gene neuroligin 4X (NLGN4X), a gene encoding a 
synaptic adhesion molecule in excitatory neurons and 
found in several affected male family members. Soon 
thereafter, a linkage analysis of a large pedigree with 
intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder 
showed that affected family members all carried a loss-
of-function NLGN4X mutation.
De novo submicroscopic deletions and duplica-
tions in chromosomal structure may dramatically 
increase an individual’s risk for autism spectrum 
disorder. These copy number variations (CNVs) 
cluster in specific regions of the genome, identifying 
specific risk intervals. The earliest reports using this 
approach showed that the de novo CNVs at chromo-
some 16p11.2, although present in only about 0.5% to 
1% of affected individuals, carried substantial (greater 
than 10-fold) risk of autism spectrum disorder. Subse-
quent studies have now identified a dozen or more de 
novo CNVs that carry risk, including at chromosomes 
16p11.2, 1q21, 15q11-13, and 3q29; deletions at 22q11, 
22q13 (deleting the gene SHANK3), and 2p16 (deleting 
the gene NXRN1); and de novo duplications of 7q11.23 
(the Williams syndrome region).
Interestingly, although these CNVs carry large 
risks for autism spectrum disorder, studies of other 
psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia and 
bipolar disorder, have found that many of the same 
regions increase the risk for these conditions as well. 
Moreover, studies of individuals ascertained by gen-
otype (eg, 16p11.2 deletions and duplications) have 
found a wide variety of associated behavioral pheno-
types, ranging from specific language impairment to 
intellectual disability to schizophrenia. This “one-to-
many” phenomenon presents important challenges to 
illuminating specific pathophysiological mechanisms 
in psychiatric illness and to conceptualizing the steps 
from gene discovery to therapies.
The widespread and replicable findings that de 
novo rare CNVs increase the risk for autism spectrum 
disorder and other developmental disorders imme-
diately raised the question of whether rare de novo 
mutations in single genes might carry similar risks. 
Indeed, the development of technology for low-cost, 
high-throughput DNA sequencing, initially focused on 
the coding portion of the genome, led to the identifica-
tion of an excess of de novo mutations deemed likely 
to disrupt gene function (LGD mutations) in affected 
individuals. The repeated occurrence of these muta-
tions in close proximity among unrelated individuals 
has now been exploited as a means to identify specific 
risk genes for autism spectrum disorders.
Large-scale studies of de novo mutations in autism 
spectrum disorders have now identified more than 
100 associated genes, with about 45 of these reaching 
the highest confidence level of statistical significance. 
These genes have a wide range of known functions, 
but analyses reveal a statistically significant overrepre-
sentation of genes involved in synaptic formation and 
function, and in regulation of transcription. Moreover, 
there are a greater than expected number of risk genes 
that encode RNAs that are targets of fragile X mental 
retardation protein and/or proteins that are active in 
early brain development.
Identification of Genes for Schizophrenia 
Highlights the Interplay of Rare and  
Common Risk Variants
Schizophrenia affects about 1% of all young adults, 
causing a pattern of thought disorders and emotional 
withdrawal that profoundly impairs life. It is strongly 
heritable (see Figure 2–1B) and also has a strong envi-
ronmental component that is associated with stress on 
a developing fetus. Children born just after the Dutch 
Hunger Winter famine of World War II had a greatly 
increased risk of schizophrenia many years later, and 
children whose mothers were infected with the rubella 
virus during pregnancy in the 1960s pandemic were 
also at considerably increased risk.


===== Page 7 =====
50    Part I / Overall Perspective
Genes, as well as the environment, contribute to 
schizophrenia. As with autism, the sequencing of 
the human genome, the development of inexpensive 
methods for genome-wide genotyping of common 
variants and detection of CNVs, and the consolida-
tion of very large patient cohorts have all resulted in a 
transformation in the genetics of schizophrenia. First, 
essentially in parallel with the findings in autism spec-
trum disorders noted earlier, rare and de novo CNVs 
began to be implicated in the risk for schizophrenia by 
the early 2000s. A small percentage of cases are associ-
ated with chromosomal abnormalities that carry large 
risks, including, for example, deletions at chromo-
some 22q11. These chromosomal abnormalities over-
lap entirely, or nearly so, with those loci implicated 
in autism spectrum disorders, but the distribution of 
risk among deletions and duplications at these loci 
does not appear to be identical. For instance, although 
duplications and deletions of the 16p11.2 region are 
both associated with autism spectrum disorders and 
schizophrenia, duplications of the region are more 
likely to lead to schizophrenia, whereas deletions are 
more likely to be seen with autism spectrum disorders 
and intellectual disability.
With regard to schizophrenia, the most impor-
tant development of the last decade and a half has 
been the emergence of common variant genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs). In contrast to studies of 
hypothesis-driven candidate genes described earlier, 
genome-wide association relies on assaying polymor-
phisms at every gene in the genome simultaneously. 
This hypothesis-free approach, when used with well-
powered cohorts and appropriate correction for mul-
tiple comparisons, has proven to be a highly reliable 
and reproducible strategy for identifying common risk 
alleles in common disorders across all of medicine.
GWASs involving nearly 40,000 cases and 113,000 
controls have resulted in the identification of 108 risk 
loci for schizophrenia. The effects attributable to any 
individual genetic variant in this set have been quite 
modest, typically accounting for a less than 25% 
increase in risk. Moreover, many of the genetic poly-
morphisms assayed in GWASs map to regions outside 
of the coding segment of the genome. Consequently, 
although 108 risk loci have been identified, it is not yet 
entirely clear which genes correspond to all of these 
risk variants. In some cases, the variations mapped 
sufficiently close to a single gene that such a relation-
ship could be reasonably inferred; in other cases, this 
remains to be determined.
The genes implicated in schizophrenia risk provide 
a starting point for determining the biology under-
lying the disorder. For example, since the late 1990s, 
evidence has pointed to the involvement of a region 
called the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) in 
schizophrenia risk. Accordingly, the MHC region has 
the strongest GWAS signal of any part of the human 
genome in the schizophrenia cohort. Detailed studies 
made possible by the very large number of patients in 
the cohort resolved this robust risk association signal 
in the MHC region into three different loci (and likely 
three different genes). Among these three loci, one 
gene, encoding the complement C4 factor, has a strong 
and definable effect on disease risk. Steven McCarroll 
and his colleagues showed that the complement C4 
locus represents a natural case of CNV, that healthy 
individuals vary substantially in the number of copies 
of the gene they have, and that the level of expression 
of the C4A allele correlates with increasing schizophre-
nia risk. Subsequent follow-up studies showed that 
mice with knockouts of the C4 gene had a deficit in 
synaptic pruning during development, suggesting the 
hypothesis that excess C4A in humans might cause 
excessive synaptic pruning, a process that has long 
been of interest in the schizophrenia literature.
This finding represents an important demonstra-
tion of the ability to link genomics to a possible bio-
logical mechanism for increased disease risk. Even 
so, an individual with the highest-risk C4 haplotype 
who did not have a family history of schizophrenia 
would on average increase from having a 1% chance 
of being affected to approximately a 1.3% chance of 
being affected as a result of this allele. To get a sense 
of scale, having a first-degree relative with schizo-
phrenia results in an approximately 10-fold increase 
in risk. This promising start and its limits reflect the 
challenges that geneticists and neurobiologists now 
face in moving from successful common variant gene 
discovery to the elaboration of the specific mecha-
nisms leading to human pathology.
In addition to identifying numerous specific risk 
loci, GWASs in schizophrenia have repeatedly found 
that the small individual effects of many common 
alleles add up to increase risk. These results provide 
an additional, powerful avenue to study genotype-
phenotype relationships in aggregate. Indeed, it is 
already clear that the number of risk alleles that an 
individual carries can have a significant (and addi-
tive) impact on the risk of developing the disorder. For 
instance, those in the top decile for a so-called poly-
genic risk score—a summary statistic relating to the 
overall amount of additive genetic risk an individual 
carries—are at 8- to 20-fold increased risk compared 
to the general population. Although the biology of 
the cumulative effect is not yet known, the observa-
tion nonetheless sets the stage for studying a series 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    51
of interesting questions related to disease trajectory and 
treatment response and will almost certainly reinvigor-
ate studies combining neuroimaing and genomics. These 
latter types of investigations, similar to early efforts at 
common variant discovery, have suffered from poor 
reliability due to the inherent limitations of studying 
selected, biologically plausible candidate genes.
Finally, high-throughput sequencing methods, simi-
lar to those employed in autism spectrum disorders, 
have begun to yield results in schizophrenia as well. 
Specifically, exome sequencing in search of rare and de 
novo risk alleles has been pursued with some success. 
However, such studies require much larger cohorts to 
identify statistically significant risks for LGD muta-
tions compared to autism spectrum disorders, sug-
gesting that the overall effect size of these types of 
variations is likely to be substantially less in schizo-
phrenia. To date, these investigations have identified a 
handful of risk genes and implicated key neurobiologi-
cal pathways. In particular, recent exome studies have 
pointed to the importance of the molecules within the 
activity-regulated cytoskeleton (ARC) complex, as 
well as the gene set domain containing 1A (SETDIA), as 
relevant for schizophrenia pathogenesis.
Perspectives on the Genetic Bases of 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Genes affect many aspects of behavior. There are 
remarkable similarities in personality traits and psychi-
atric illnesses in human twins, even those raised sepa-
rately. Domestic and laboratory animals can be bred 
for particular, stable behavioral traits; and increasingly, 
the contributions of a wide range of genetic variations 
for neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders are 
being discovered.
A series of parallel advances have ushered in an 
era of remarkable opportunity to understand the 
relationship between genes, brain, and behavior. The 
armamentarium available to manipulate and study 
model systems has been revolutionized. At the same 
time, progress in defining the genetic risk factors for 
human neuropsychiatric disorders has advanced con-
siderably. Although the field remains in an early stage 
in this process, multiple examples of the value of suc-
cessful gene discovery, and its application to deep bio-
logical understanding, have emerged.
Among the many striking findings from recent 
genetic studies of neurodevelopmental and psychi-
atric conditions is the overlap in genetic risks across 
a wide range of diagnostic boundaries. While it may 
not come as much of a surprise that biology does not 
hew to categorical diagnostic criteria, it is nonetheless 
a formidable conceptual challenge to consider how the 
field will trace these effects and arrive at new thera-
peutic strategies.
In addition, it is worthwhile noting that for many 
other psychiatric conditions that have not yet seen the 
type of progress noted earlier, the calculus is straight-
forward: greater investment and larger sample sizes 
will lead to greater insight. For example, recent stud-
ies of de novo mutations in Tourette syndrome and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder clearly demonstrate 
that the rate-limiting factor for the identification of high 
confidence risk genes is the availability for sequencing 
of parent-child trios. In a similar vein, GWAS studies 
of major depression have only very recently reached 
sample sizes adequate to confirm statistically signifi-
cant associated common variants. These studies have 
included hundreds of thousands of individuals and, 
not surprisingly, have identified risk alleles carrying 
very small individual effects.
This last point highlights the idea that one size 
does not fit all for the genomics of behavioral, devel-
opmental, and psychiatric disorders. From the inves-
tigations of model systems, to the illumination of rare 
Mendelian disorders, to the disentangling of both 
common and rare variants contributing to common 
disorders, the tools and opportunities available today 
are unprecedented. The coming years should see deep 
insights into the biology of psychiatric and neurode-
velopmental disorders, and perhaps therapies with the 
potential to help patients and their families.
Highlights
1.	 Rare genetic syndromes such as fragile X syn-
drome, Rett syndrome, and Williams syndrome 
have provided important insights into the molec-
ular mechanisms of complex human behaviors. 
Moreover, while considerable work remains to be 
done, the study of these syndromes has already 
challenged the notion that associated cognitive 
and behavioral deficits are immutable and has 
demonstrated the utility of a wide range of model 
systems in illuminating conserved biological 
mechanisms.
2.	 The sequencing of the human genome, the devel-
opment of high-throughput genomic assays, and 
simultaneous computing and methodological 
advances have led to a profound change in the 
understanding of the genetics of human behav-
ior and psychiatric illness. Several paradigmatic 
disorders, including schizophrenia and autism, 


===== Page 9 =====
52    Part I / Overall Perspective
have seen dramatic progress, leading to the 
identification of dozens of definitive risk genes 
and chromosomal regions.
3.	 The maturation of the field of psychiatric genetics 
and genomics over the past decade has revealed 
the frailty of testing pre-specified candidate genes. 
These types of studies have now been supplanted 
by genome-wide scans of both common and rare 
alleles. Coupled with rigorous statistical frame-
works and consensus statistical thresholds, these 
are yielding highly reliable and reproducible 
results.
4.	 At present, the cumulative evidence suggests that 
the full range of genetic variations underlies com-
plex behavioral syndromes, including common 
and rare, transmitted and de novo, germline and 
somatic, and sequence and chromosomal struc-
tural variation. However, the relative contribu-
tions of these various types of genetic changes 
vary for a given disorder.
5.	 A striking finding from recent advances in the 
genetics of human behavior has been the over-
lap of genetic risks for syndromes with distinct 
symptoms and natural histories. Understanding 
how and why an identical mutation may lead to 
highly diverse phenotypic outcomes in differ-
ent individuals will be a major challenge for the 
future.
6.	 Findings across common psychiatric disorders 
point to extremely high rates of genetic hetero-
geneity. This, coupled with the biological pleiot-
ropy of the risk genes that have been identified to 
date, as well as the dynamism and complexity of 
human brain development, all point to important 
challenges ahead in moving from an understand-
ing of risk genes to an understanding of behav-
ior. Similarly, at present, an important distinction 
can be made between illuminating the biology of 
risk genes and unraveling the pathophysiology of 
behavioral syndromes.
Glossary1
Allele. Humans carry two sets of chromosomes, one 
from each parent. Equivalent genes in the two sets 
might be different, for example, because of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms. An allele is one of the two 
(or more) forms of a particular gene.
Centromere. Chromosomes contain a compact region 
known as a centromere, where sister chromatids (the 
two exact copies of each chromosome that are formed 
after replication) are joined.
Cloning. The process of generating sufficient copies of a 
particular piece of DNA to allow it to be sequenced or 
studied in some other way.
Complementary DNA (cDNA). A DNA sequence made 
from a messenger RNA molecule, using an enzyme 
called reverse transcriptase. cDNAs can be used experi-
mentally to determine the sequence of messenger 
RNAs after their introns (non–protein-coding sections) 
have been spliced out.
Conservation of genes. Genes that are present in two 
distinct species are said to be conserved, and the two 
genes from the different species are called orthologous 
genes. Conservation can be detected by measuring the 
similarity of the two sequences at the base (RNA or 
DNA) or amino acid (protein) level. The more simi-
larities there are, the more highly conserved the two 
sequences.
Copy number variation (CNV). A deletion or duplication 
of a limited genetic region that results in an individual 
having more or fewer than the usual two copies of 
some genes. Copy number variations are observed in 
some neurological and psychiatric disorders.
CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindro-
mic Repeats). An enzyme-RNA system in which the 
enzyme cleaves target sequences that match an RNA 
guide; the RNA guide can be engineered to recognize 
a desired gene or sequences within a cell for mutation.
Euchromatin. The gene-rich regions of a genome (see 
also heterochromatin).
Eukaryote. An organism with cells that have a com-
plex internal structure, including a nucleus. Animals, 
plants, and fungi are all eukaryotes.
Genome. The complete DNA sequence of an organism.
Genotype. The set of genes that an individual carries; 
usually refers to the particular pair of alleles (alterna-
tive forms of a gene) that a person has at a given region 
of the genome.
Haplotype. A particular combination of alleles (alter-
native forms of genes) or sequence variations that 
are closely linked—that is, are likely to be inherited 
together—on the same chromosome.
Heterochromatin. Compact, gene-poor regions of a 
genome, which are enriched in simple sequence repeats.
Introns and exons. Genes are transcribed as continuous 
sequences, but only some segments of the resulting mes-
senger RNA molecules contain information that encodes 
a protein product. These segments are called exons. The 
regions between exons are known as introns and are 
spliced from the RNA before the product is made.
1Based on Bork P, Copley R. 2001. Genome speak. Nature 409:815.


