===== Page 1 =====
1060    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural 
Correlates of Feelings
Conscious experiences of an emotion are generally 
referred to as feelings. Evidence for the neural corre-
lates of feelings comes primarily from functional imag-
ing studies of humans and from neuropsychological 
testing of patients with specific brain lesions. A main 
challenge for these studies is in dissociating the con-
scious experience of the emotion from other aspects 
of the emotion, such as the elicitation of physiological 
responses, since these tend to occur contemporane-
ously. Another challenge is how to connect such stud-
ies with studies of emotion in animals, where we have 
no agreed-upon dependent measures to assay what 
they consciously experience.
One early functional imaging study used positron 
emission tomography to test the idea that feelings are 
correlated with activity in those cortical and subcortical 
somatosensory regions that specifically receive inputs 
related to the internal environment—the viscera, endo-
crine glands, and musculoskeletal system. Healthy 
subjects were asked to recall personal episodes and to 
attempt to reexperience as closely as possible the emo-
tions that accompanied those events. Activity changed 
in many regions known to represent and regulate body 
states, such as the insular cortex, secondary somatosen-
sory cortex (S-II), cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, and 
upper brain stem. These results support the idea that at 
least a part of the neural substrate for feelings involves 
brain regions that regulate and represent bodily states, 
a finding that bears some resemblance to the hypoth-
esis of William James mentioned earlier, that feelings 
are based on an awareness of bodily reactions.
The importance of both cortical and subcortical 
structures in processing feelings is also borne out by 
more recent fMRI studies. One such study examined 
the feeling of fear induced by anticipation of electri-
cal shock (Figure 42–8). In this study, subjects lay in 
the scanner while they saw a game on a video screen 
in which a virtual predator (a red dot) gets closer to 
the subject. Once the predator caught them, they could 
receive a painful electric shock to the hand. The anxi-
ety produced when the predator was some distance 
away was associated with activation of the medial pre-
frontal cortex; as the predator closed in, the periaque-
ductal gray became activated, and this was correlated 
with reports by the subjects of a feeling of dread. This 
finding supports a role for the medial prefrontal cortex 
in planning and anticipation related to a distant threat 
and a role for the periaqueductal gray in mounting 
the defensive responses required for coping with an 
immediate threat.
Another brain region of interest in relation to feel-
ings is the subgenual sector of the anterior cingulate 
cortex (Brodmann’s area 25), which has been found in 
neuroimaging studies to be activated when subjects are 
experiencing sadness. This region is of special interest 
because it is also differentially activated in patients 
with bipolar depression, and it appears thinned in 
structural MRI scans of patients with chronic depres-
sion. Direct electrical stimulation of this brain region 
(deep brain stimulation) can dramatically improve the 
mood of some patients with severe depression.
Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis
While it seems clear that no brain region is special-
ized for any specific emotion, it is even doubtful that 
there are any brain regions specialized for emotions 
in general. It may be that all brain regions involved 
in emotions also carry out other functions. In fact, 
those nonemotional functions may give us clues about 
how emotions evolved and, indeed, may be the basic 
building blocks through which emotion states are 
assembled.
For example, sectors of the human insular cortex 
that are activated during recall of feelings are also 
activated during the conscious sensation of pain and 
temperature. The insular cortex receives homeostatic 
information (about temperature and pain, changes in 
blood pH, carbon dioxide, and oxygen) through path-
ways that originate in peripheral nerve fibers. These 
afferent fibers include, for example, the C and Aδ fibers 
that form synapses with neurons in lamina I of the pos-
terior horn of the spinal cord or the pars caudalis of the 
trigeminal nerve nucleus in the brain stem. The path-
ways from lamina I and the trigeminal nucleus project 
to brain stem nuclei (nucleus of the solitary tract and 
parabrachial nucleus) and from there to the thalamus 
and on to the insular cortex. The identification of this 
functional system is further support for the idea that 
signals in the afferent somatosensory pathways play a 
role in the processing of feelings.
Moreover, in patients with pure autonomic fail-
ure, a disease in which visceral afferent information 
is severely compromised, functional imaging studies 
reveal a blunting of emotional processes and attenu-
ation of activity in the somatosensory areas that con-
tribute to feelings. Like other feelings, social feelings 
engage the insular cortices and the primary and sec-
ondary somatosensory cortices (S-I and S-II), as has 
been found in functional neuroimaging experiments 
evaluating empathy for pain and, separately, admira-
tion and compassion.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1061
Figure 42–8  Both cortical and subcortical regions come 
into play during emotion states. Results are from a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging study in which a subject lies in 
the scanner while watching a virtual predator (red dot) move 
around on the screen and get closer to a subject (blue triangle, 
representing the actual research participant). (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Mobbs et al. 2007. Copyright © 2007 AAAS.)
A. Once the predator catches up to the subject, there is a 
chance that a real and painful electric shock will be delivered to 
the hand.
B. When the predator gets closer to the subject, activity in the 
prefrontal cortex and periaqueductal gray matter increases. 
Notably, this pattern of neural activation shifts such that a 
distant predator elicits greater activity in the medial prefrontal 
cortex, whereas a predator close by elicits more activity in the 
periaqueductal gray.
C. Activation of the periaqueductal gray (PAG) is correlated with 
the subjective sense of dread measured by ratings that sub-
jects gave while in the scanner.
A
B
C
Distant threat
Close threat
Shock
Medial
prefrontal cortex
(distant threat)
Periaqueductal gray
(close threat)
2
4
6
Dread ratings
8
10
–100
–200
0
100
200
300
400
PAG activity
PAG


===== Page 3 =====
1062    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Using these data as support, some influential 
modern theories build on William James’s original 
hypothesis and propose that the feeling of all emotions 
is grounded in the brain’s representation of bodily 
homeostasis. As in the case of the amygdala’s role in 
both positive and negative emotions, the insula’s role 
in processing both interoceptive and emotional infor-
mation is still compatible with the possibility that these 
processes are distinct. That is, different populations of 
neurons within these structures may be involved in 
processing different emotions. Therefore, fMRI may 
not provide the level of resolution needed to elucidate 
distinct yet anatomically intermingled neuronal popu-
lations, and cellular techniques in animal models may 
be required.
Although most neuroscience research thus far has 
focused on negatively valenced emotions, the neural 
circuitry for positively valenced emotions is being elu-
cidated in studies in both humans and animals. These 
studies consistently implicate the medial prefrontal 
cortex in computing the subjective value of rewards, as 
well as the nucleus accumbens and other nuclei of the 
basal ganglia in processing the hedonic component (or 
pleasure) of positive emotions. A growing number of 
functional imaging studies in humans—especially in 
the fields of neuroeconomics and social neuroscience—
links the role of these structures in emotion processing 
to their role in value-based decision making and social 
behavior.
Highlights
1.	 In the overall physiology of regulating the body 
and behavior of organisms, emotion states carry 
out functions intermediate to those of the simpler 
processes of reflexes and homeostatic regulation, 
on the one hand, and those of cognitive processes 
and deliberate behavior on the other. Emotions 
are more flexible, context-dependent, and con-
trolled than are simple reflexes, but less flexible, 
context-dependent, and controlled than deliberate 
behavior. Emotions evolved to produce behavior 
in response to recurring environmental and inter-
nal challenges that are too varied for reflexes, but 
sufficiently stereotyped that they do not require 
the full flexibility of cognition.
2.	 Emotion states need to be carefully distinguished 
from the conscious experience of emotion (feel-
ings) and also from the concepts and words that 
we have in everyday language to describe emo-
tions. For example, a hissing cat’s behavior is 
caused by an emotion state, but whether the cat 
consciously feels afraid is unclear. The cat prob-
ably has no concept, and certainly no words, with 
which to think about the emotion. Human sub-
jects who recognize fear while observing a facial 
expression are attributing fear to another person 
and are thinking about a particular emotion, but 
are not themselves necessarily in a state of fear or 
experiencing fear. It is a major challenge in design-
ing experiments, especially in humans, to inde-
pendently control and manipulate these different 
components of emotion.
3.	 Emotions coordinate integrated changes in 
many organismal parameters, including effects 
on somatic behavior, autonomic and endocrine 
responses, and cognition. We do not yet under-
stand how this coordination arises, although it 
is probably achieved through a combination of 
hierarchical control (through brain regions that 
function as “command centers” of sorts) and dis-
tributed dynamics. Understanding how this is 
accomplished in biological organisms will also 
inform how we might engineer robots that exhibit 
emotional behaviors in the future.
4.	 Different specific emotions can be thought of cat-
egorically (eg, happiness, fear, anger) or dimen-
sionally (in terms of arousal and valence or other 
dimensional frameworks). It is likely that many of 
the categories for which we have words in a par-
ticular language (like the examples just given) will 
need to be revised once we have a more scientific 
understanding. New analytic methods applied 
to data acquired using fMRI, including methods 
that take into account the spatial and temporal 
patterns of brain activity and utilize powerful 
machine-learning algorithms, may provide new 
insights into how the brain mediates a broad 
range of emotions.
5.	 In humans, emotions can be regulated by sev-
eral mechanisms. Thus, we have some control 
over how we feel and some control over how we 
express emotional behaviors, for instance, through 
facial expressions. Nonhuman animals do not 
have this same level of control, and so their emo-
tional behaviors will generally be honest signals of 
their emotion state, whereas humans often engage 
in strategic deception.
6.	 Fear is probably the emotion whose neurobiology 
is best understood. It depends on the amygdala, 
in both animals and humans. However, some data 
suggest that certain types of fear, such as the panic 
of suffocating induced by inhaling carbon dioxide, 
are independent of the amygdala. Indeed, we now 
know that the amygdala is part of a distributed 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1063
brain system, and therefore, many other brain 
regions also participate in processing fear. Increas-
ingly, modern studies use sophisticated genetic and 
cellular techniques to image and to causally manip-
ulate brain function, allowing us to understand the 
necessary and sufficient roles of multiple brain struc-
tures in mediating different emotional behaviors.
7.	 The ventral and medial prefrontal cortex is inti-
mately involved in emotion and connected with 
the amygdala. Social emotions, reward represen-
tations, and emotion regulation and extinction 
all involve specific sectors of prefrontal cortex. 
This region of the brain, together with the insula, 
may also be the most important for our conscious 
experience of emotions, an aspect of emotion that 
remains the most challenging to study.
 C. Daniel Salzman  
 Ralph Adolphs 
Selected Reading
Amaral DG and Adolphs R (eds). 2016. Living Without an 
Amygdala. New York: Guilford Press.
Anderson, DJ, Adolphs R. 2018. The Neuroscience of  
Emotion in People and Animals: A New Synthesis. Princeton 
University Press.
Bechara A, Tranel D, Damasio H, Adolphs R, Rockland C, 
Damasio AR. 1995. A double dissociation of conditioning 
and declarative knowledge relative to the amygdala and 
hippocampus in humans. Science 269:1115–1118.
Craig AD. 2002. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of 
the physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev Neurosci 
3:655–666.
Damasio AR. 1994. Descartes’s Error: Emotion, Reason, and the 
Human Brain. New York: Penguin Books.
Darwin, C. 1872/1965. The Expression of the Emotions in Man 
and Animals. Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press.
Dolan RJ. 2002. Emotion, cognition, and behavior. Science 
298:1191–1194.
Feinstein JS, Adolphs R, Damasio A, Tranel D. 2011. The 
human amygdala and the induction and experience of 
fear. Curr Biol 21:34–38.
Feinstein JS, Buzza C, Hurlemann R, et al. 2013. Fear and 
panic in humans with bilateral amygdala damage. Nat 
Neurosci 16:270–272.
Feldman Barrett L, Adolphs R, Marsella S, Martinez AM, 
Pollack SD. 2019. Emotional expressions reconsidered: 
challenges to inferring emotion from human facial move-
ments. Psychol Sci Public Interest 20:1–68.
McGaugh JL. 2003. Memory and Emotions: The Making of Lasting 
Memories. New York: Columbia Univ Press.
Salzman CD, Fusi S. 2010. Emotion, cognition, and mental 
state representation in amygdala and prefrontal cortex. 
Ann Rev Neurosci 33:173–202.
Thornton MA, Tamir DI. 2017. Mental models accurately 
predict emotion transitions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
114:5982–5987.
Whalen PJ, Phelps EA. 2009. The Human Amygdala. New York: 
Guilford Press.
References
Adolphs R, Gosselin F, Buchanan T, Tranel D, Schyns P, 
Damasio A. 2005. A mechanism for impaired fear recogni-
tion in amygdala damage. Nature 433:68–72.
Anderson SW, Bechara A, Damasio H, Tranel D, Damasio AR. 
1999. Impairment of social and moral behavior related to 
early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 
2:1032–1037.
Berridge KC, Kringelbach ML. 2013. Neuroscience of affect: 
brain mechanisms of pleasure and displeasure. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 23:294–303.
Cahill L, McGaugh JL. 1998. Mechanisms of emotional 
arousal and lasting declarative memory. Trends Neurosci 
21:294–299.
Clithero JA, Rangel A. 2014. Informatic parcellation of the 
network involved in the computation of subjective value. 
Soc Cogn and Affect Neurosci 9:1289–1302.
Damasio AR, Grabowski TJ, Bechara A, et al. 2000. Feeling 
emotions: subcortical and cortical brain activity during 
the experience of self-generated emotions. Nat Neurosci 
3:1049–1056.
Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank R, Galaburda AM, Damasio 
AR. 1994. The return of Phineas Gage: clues about the brain 
from the skull of a famous patient. Science 264:1102–1105.
De Martino B, Kumaran D, Seymour B, Dolan RJ. 2006. 
Frames, biases, and rational decision-making in the 
human brain. Science 313:684-687.
Gore F, Schwartz EC, Brangers BC, et al. 2015. Neural represen-
tations of unconditioned stimuli in basolateral amygdala 
mediate innate and learned responses. Cell 162:132–145.
Holland PC, Gallagher M. 2004. Amygdala-frontal inter-
actions and reward expectancy. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
14:148–155.
Jin J, Gottfried JA, Mohanty A. 2015. Human amygdala 
represents the complete spectrum of subjective valence.  
J Neurosci 35:15145–15156.
LeDoux, JE. 1996. The Emotional Brain. 1996. New York: Simon 
& Schuster.
LeDoux JE. 2000. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev 
Neurosci 23:155–184.
Lin D, Boyle MP, Dollar P, Lee H, Perona P, Anderson DJ. 
2011. Functional identification of an aggression locus in 
the mouse hypothalamus. Nature 470:221–226.
MacLean PD. 1990. The Triune Brain in Evolution. New York: 
Plenum.


===== Page 5 =====
1064    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, et al. 2005. Deep brain 
stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron 
45:651–660.
Medina JF, Repa CJ, Mauk MD, LeDoux JE. 2002. Parallels 
between cerebellum- and amygdala-dependent condi-
tioning. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:122–131.
Mobbs D, Petrovic P, Marchant JL, et al. 2007. When fear is 
near: threat imminence elicits prefrontal-periaqueductal 
gray shifts in humans. Science 317:1079–1083.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human 
Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd ed. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.
Ochsner KN, Gross JJ. 2005. The cognitive control of emotions. 
Trends Cogn Sci 9:242–249.
Paton JJ, Belova MA, Morrison SE, Salzman CD. 2006. The pri-
mate amygdala represents the positive and negative value of 
visual stimuli during learning. Nature 439:865–870.
Pessoa L, Adolphs R. 2010. Emotion processing and the 
amygdala: from a “low road” to “many roads” of evaluat-
ing biological significance. Nat Neurosci 11:773–782.
Phelps EA. 2006. Emotion and cognition: insights from studies 
of the human amygdala. Annu Rev Psychol 57:27–53.
Rauch SL, Shin LM, Phelps EA. 2006. Neurocircuitry models 
of posttraumatic stress disorder and extinction: human 
neuroimaging research—past, present, and future. Biol 
Psychiat 60:376–382.
Redondo RL, Kim J, Arons AL, Ramirez S, Liu X, Tonegawa 
S. 2014. Bidirectional switch of the valence associated 
with a hippocampal contextual memory engram. Nature 
513:426–430.
Saez A, Rigotti M, Ostojic S, Fusi S, Salzman CD. 2015 
Abstract context representations in primate amygdala 
and prefrontal cortex. Neuron 87:869–881.
Weiskrantz L. 1956. Behavioral changes associated with abla-
tion of the amygdaloid complex in monkeys. J Comp 
Physiol Psychol 49:381–391.


===== Page 6 =====
43
Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States
different. What has changed is the motivational state 
of the animal.
Motivational states influence attentiveness, goal 
selection, investment of effort in the pursuit of goals, 
and responsiveness to stimuli. They thus drive approach, 
avoidance, and action selection. This chapter focuses 
on the neurobiological basis of motivational states 
related to rewards and the manner in which reward-
related brain circuits are implicated in mechanisms 
underlying drug addiction.
Both Internal and External Stimuli Contribute to 
Motivational States
Motivational states reflect one’s desires, and desires 
can be influenced by physiological status as well as 
by stimuli that predict future rewarding and aversive 
events. Motivational states thus depend on both inter-
nal and external variables. Internal variables include 
physiological signals concerning hunger or thirst, as 
well as variables related to the circadian clock. For 
example, the frequency and duration of foraging vary 
with the time of day, the time since an animal has last 
eaten, and whether, if female, she is lactating.
Other internal variables are related to cognitive 
processes. In the game of blackjack, for instance, being 
dealt the same card in different hands can cause a 
player to go bust or make 21, leading to very different 
emotional responses and adjustments in subsequent 
decision making and action selection. The differential 
meaning of the same stimulus (a particular card) is made 
possible by the cognitive understanding of the rules of 
the game of blackjack. The cognitive understanding of 
Motivational States Influence Goal-Directed Behavior
Both Internal and External Stimuli Contribute to 
Motivational States
Rewards Can Meet Both Regulatory and Nonregulatory 
Needs on Short and Long Timescales
The Brain’s Reward Circuitry Provides a Biological 
Substrate for Goal Selection
Dopamine May Act as a Learning Signal
Drug Addiction Is a Pathological Reward State
All Drugs of Abuse Target Neurotransmitter Receptors, 
Transporters, or Ion Channels
Repeated Exposure to a Drug of Abuse Induces Lasting 
Behavioral Adaptations
Lasting Molecular Adaptations Are Induced in Brain 
Reward Regions by Repeated Drug Exposure
Lasting Cellular and Circuit Adaptations Mediate 
Aspects of the Drug-Addicted State
Natural Addictions Share Biological Mechanisms With 
Drug Addictions
Highlights
Motivational States Influence  
Goal-Directed Behavior
O
ne day a cheetah, taking refuge  from the 
mid-day sun in the shade of a tree, views a dis-
tant antelope with apparent indifference. Later 
in the afternoon, the sighting of the antelope provokes 
immediate orienting and stalking behavior. The stimu-
lus is the same, but the behavioral responses are very 


===== Page 7 =====
1066    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
a rule is an internal variable. Similarly, different social 
situations often elicit distinct behavioral responses to 
the same stimulus, such as whether one chugs wine at 
a college party or sips it at a formal dinner.
External variables also influence motivational 
states. These variables include rewarding incentive stimuli. 
For example, when a dehydrated cheetah comes across 
a watering hole during a search for antelopes, the sight 
of the water may serve as an incentive stimulus, tip-
ping the balance between hunger and thirst and driv-
ing the animal to interrupt its quest for food to drink. 
However, an internal variable—the state of the chee-
tah’s hydration—can also lead to a different reward 
value being assigned to the same sensory stimulus, the 
watering hole. Even innately rewarding stimuli, such 
as a sweet tastant that normally elicits pleasure, can 
in some circumstances become unpleasurable. Choc-
olate cake may be innately rewarding to chocolate 
lovers, but satiation to the chocolate—which involves 
modulation of an internal variable—can decrease the 
reward value of this stimulus and thereby affect moti-
vational state.
Rewards Can Meet Both Regulatory and 
Nonregulatory Needs on Short and Long Timescales
Feeding, drinking, and thermoregulatory behaviors and 
their underlying motivational states typically arise in 
response to (or anticipation of) a physiological imbal-
ance. In these cases, actions acquire rewards in a rela-
tively short timescale. In contrast, some motivational 
states serve biological imperatives other than short-term 
physiological homeostasis. More complex long-term 
goals, such as finding and sustaining a love partner or 
achieving an educational or professional goal, require 
goal-oriented actions on longer timescales. Nonregu-
latory motivational states may resemble those arising 
from physiological signals, but motivated behaviors 
often involve sequences of actions in which not every 
action is immediately rewarded (except in the sense of 
making progress toward a longer-term goal).
In general, incentive stimuli, even stimuli that 
only signal progress toward a longer-term goal, can 
influence motivational states so that complex behav-
ioral sequences are completed. A simple example of 
this concept is when a cheetah must stalk, chase, run 
down, and kill an antelope, and then drag the carcass 
to a refuge before beginning to feed. Of course, even 
the complexity of the actions involved in foraging 
and feeding is far simpler than the steps required of 
a student motivated to achieve a graduate degree and 
develop an academic career. Motivational states must 
be sustained across challenging circumstances in order 
to achieve such goals.
The Brain’s Reward Circuitry Provides a Biological 
Substrate for Goal Selection
Rewards are objects, stimuli, or activities that have 
positive value. Rewards can incite an animal to switch 
from one behavior to another or to resist interruption 
of ongoing action. For example, a rat that encounters a 
seed while scouting the environment may cease explor-
ing in order to eat the seed or carry it to a safer place; 
while nibbling the seed, the rat will resist the efforts of 
another rat to steal the food from its paws. If seeds are 
made available only at a particular location and time, 
the rat will go to that location as the expected moment 
of reward delivery approaches.
Much contemporary work in neuroscience is 
directed at elucidating the neural systems that process 
different types of rewards. These systems must link 
the initial sensory representation of a reward to differ-
ent behaviors that respond to physiological needs and 
environmental challenges and opportunities. Patholo-
gies such as addiction can highjack these reward sys-
tems, resulting in maladaptive behavior (discussed in 
the latter part of this chapter).
Goal-directed behaviors entail the assessment of 
risks, costs, and benefits. Straying from the herd may 
offer an antelope better opportunities for foraging 
but only at the risk of becoming an easier target for a 
lurking cheetah. Attacking the venturesome antelope 
offers the cheetah an easier promise of a meal but at 
the risk that energetic and hydromineral resources will 
be depleted needlessly if the antelope gets away. Thus, 
the neural mechanisms responsible for goal selection 
must weigh the costs and benefits of different behav-
iors that might attain a specific goal.
In 1954, James Olds and Peter Milner reported their 
work on the neural pathways responsible for reward-
related behaviors. These classic studies employed 
electrical brain stimulation as a goal. Rats and other 
vertebrates ranging from goldfish to humans will 
work for electrical stimulation of certain brain regions. 
The avidity and persistence of this self-stimulation 
are remarkable. Rats will cross electrified grids, run 
uphill while leaping over hurdles, or press a lever for 
hours on end in order to trigger the electrical stimula-
tion. The phenomenon that leads the animal to work 
for self-stimulation is called brain stimulation reward  
(Figure 43–1A). Brain stimulation, therefore, elicits a 
motivational state, a strong drive to perform an action 
(eg, lever pressing) that will deliver further stimulation.
Although brain stimulation reward is an artificial 
goal, it mimics some of the properties of natural goal 
objects. For example, brain stimulation can compete 
with, summate with, or substitute for other reward-
predictive stimuli to induce motivational states that 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1067
Figure 43–1  Intracranial self-stimulation recruits reward  
circuitry and dopaminergic neural pathways.
A. Classic testing apparatus for self-stimulation experiments. 
In this example, an electrode is implanted in a brain region of a 
rodent. Lever pressing by the rodent triggers electrical  
stimulation of that brain area.
B. Brain structures that produce self-stimulation behavior  
typically activate dopaminergic pathways emanating from the 
ventral tegmental area (VTA), among other pathways.
C–D. Cocaine and nicotine affect the rate of electrical  
self-stimulation. The rate at which the animal presses the  
stimulation lever increases with increases in the frequency  
of the self-stimulation current. In the presence of the drugs, 
animals press the lever at lower stimulation frequencies, 
indicating that the drugs augment the effects of the electrical 
stimulation.
VTA
Dopamine
Stimulating electrode
Stimulation frequency (Hz)
Rate (responses/min)
100
60
40
Rate (responses/min)
20
0
50
25
12.5
Stimulation frequency (Hz)
60
40
20
0
100
50
25
Baseline
Nicotine
Baseline
Cocaine
C  Cocaine
D  Nicotine
B
A
Lever that generates
self-stimulation
drive goal-directed behaviors. The circuitry that medi-
ates brain stimulation reward is broadly distributed. 
Rewarding effects can be produced by electrical stimu-
lation of sites at all levels of the brain, from the olfac-
tory bulb to the nucleus of the solitary tract.
Particularly effective sites lie along the course of 
the medial forebrain bundle and along longitudinally 
oriented fiber bundles coursing near the midline of 
the brain stem. Stimulation of either of these path-
ways results in activation of dopaminergic neurons 
in the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain. These 
neurons project to several areas of the brain, includ-
ing the nucleus accumbens (the major component of 
the ventral striatum), the ventromedial portion of the 
head of the caudate nucleus (in the dorsal striatum), 
the basal forebrain, and regions of the prefrontal cor-
tex (Figure 43–1B).
Activation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral 
tegmental area plays a crucial role in brain stimulation 
reward. The effects of this activation are strengthened 


===== Page 9 =====
1068    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
by increases in dopaminergic synaptic transmission and 
weakened by decreases. These dopaminergic neurons 
are excited by glutamatergic cells in the prefrontal cor-
tex and amygdala as well as from cholinergic cells in the 
laterodorsal tegmental and pedunculopontine nuclei 
of the hindbrain, and are inhibited by local GABAergic 
cells within or just caudal to the ventral tegmental area. 
Brain stimulation is thought to activate dopaminergic 
neurons in the ventral tegmental area in part through 
the activation of these hindbrain cholinergic neurons. 
Blockade of this cholinergic input reduces the rewarding 
effects of the electrical stimulation. While most attention 
has focused on dopamine pathways in mediating brain 
stimulation reward, it is important to emphasize the 
involvement of non-dopaminergic pathways as well.
The strength of brain stimulation reward is indi-
cated by the finding that starving rats provided with 
brief daily access to food will forego eating to press 
a lever for brain stimulation. The heedless pursuit of 
an artificial goal to the detriment of a biological need 
is one of many parallels between self-stimulation 
and drug abuse. Indeed, drugs of abuse augment the 
rewarding effects of activation of dopaminergic path-
ways with brain stimulation (Figure 43–1C,D). Lower 
frequencies of stimulating currents accompanied by 
cocaine or nicotine administration—both of which 
enhance dopaminergic neurotransmission through 
different mechanisms—produce a rate of lever press-
ing equivalent to that obtained during self-stimulation 
at higher stimulating currents in the absence of these 
drugs. These results indicate that cocaine and nicotine 
amplify the effects of neuronal activation elicited by 
microstimulation.
Dopamine May Act as a Learning Signal
An earlier view of the function of dopamine was that 
it conveyed “hedonic signals” in the brain and that, in 
humans, it was directly responsible for subjective pleas-
ure. From this point of view, addiction would reflect 
the habitual choice of short-term pleasure despite a 
host of long-term life problems that emerge. In fact, 
however, new research indicates that the hedonic prin-
ciple cannot easily explain the persistence of drug use 
by addicted persons as negative consequences mount.
The effects of dopamine have proven to be far 
more complex than was first thought. Dopamine can 
be released by aversive as well as by rewarding stim-
uli, and the short latency component of a dopamine 
neuron’s response may not be related to the reward-
ing or aversive qualities of a stimulus at all. Moreover, 
rodents lacking dopamine—rats in which dopamine is 
depleted by 6-hydroxydopamine and mice genetically 
engineered so that they cannot produce dopamine—
continue to exhibit hedonic responses to sucrose. 
Dopamine delivery itself is not currently considered to 
produce hedonic qualities. Instead, the degree to which a 
particular sensory stimulus is rewarding is thought to be 
processed by a broad network of brain areas, spanning 
sensory cortices of different modalities, association cor-
tex, prefrontal cortex (in particular, orbitofrontal regions), 
and many subcortical areas such as the amygdala, hip-
pocampus, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum.
Many of the brain areas whose activity is modu-
lated by reward anticipation or receipt receive dopa-
minergic input. What information do dopaminergic 
neurons transmit to these brain areas? Wolfram Schultz 
and his colleagues discovered that dopaminergic neu-
rons often have a complex and changing pattern of 
responses to rewards during learning. In one experi-
ment, Schultz trained monkeys to expect juice at a 
fixed interval after a visual or auditory cue. Before the 
monkeys learned the predictive cues, the appearance 
of the juice was unexpected and produced a transient 
increase in firing above basal levels by ventral teg-
mental area dopaminergic neurons. As the monkeys 
learned that certain cues predict the juice, the timing 
of the firing changed. The neurons no longer fired in 
response to presentation of the juice—the reward—
but earlier, in response to a predictive visual or audi-
tory cue. If a cue was presented but the reward was 
withheld, firing paused at the time the reward would 
have been presented. In contrast, if a reward exceeded 
expectation or was unexpected, because it appeared 
without a prior cue, firing was enhanced (Figure 43–2).
These observations suggest that dopamine release 
in the forebrain serves not as a pleasure signal but as 
a prediction error signal. A burst of dopamine would 
signify a reward or reward-related stimulus that had 
not been predicted; pauses would signify that the 
predicted reward is less than expected or absent. If 
a reward is just as expected based on environmental 
cues, dopaminergic neurons would maintain their 
tonic (baseline) firing rates. Alterations in dopamine 
release are thus thought to modify future responses 
to stimuli to maximize the likelihood of obtaining 
rewards and to minimize fruitless pursuits. For natural 
rewards, like the sweet juice consumed by the mon-
keys in Schultz’s experiments, once the environmental 
cues for a reward are learned, dopaminergic neuron 
firing returns toward baseline levels. Schultz has inter-
preted this to mean that as long as nothing changes in 
the environment, there is nothing more to learn and 
therefore no need to alter behavioral responses.
Experiments using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging in humans have provided further evidence 


