===== Page 1 =====
388    Part IV / Perception
Figure 17–2  The psychometric function. The psychometric 
function plots the percentage of stimuli detected by a human 
observer as a function of the stimulus magnitude. Threshold is 
defined as the stimulus intensity detected on 50% of the trials, 
which in this example would be about 5.5 (arbitrary units). Psy-
chometric functions are also used to measure the just notice-
able difference (JND) between stimuli that differ in intensity, 
frequency, or other parametric properties.
the hand, the relationship between the stimulus mag-
nitude and its perceived intensity is linear, that is, a 
power function with a unity exponent (n = 1).
All sensory systems have a threshold, and thresh-
olds have two essential functions. First, by asking if a 
sensation is large enough to have a high enough prob-
ability of being of interest or relevance, they reduce 
unwanted responses to noise. Second, the specific 
nonlinearity introduced by thresholds aids encoding 
and processing, even if the rest of the primary sen-
sory response scales linearly with the stimulus. Sen-
sory thresholds are a feature, not a bug. Thresholds 
are normally determined statistically by presenting a 
subject with a series of stimuli of random amplitude. 
The percentage of times the subject reports detecting 
the stimulus is plotted as a function of stimulus ampli-
tude, forming a relation called the psychometric function 
(Figure 17–2). By convention, threshold is defined as 
the stimulus amplitude detected in half of the trials.
The measurement of sensory thresholds is a use-
ful technique for diagnosing sensory function in indi-
vidual modalities. An elevated threshold may signal 
an abnormality in sensory receptors (such as loss of 
hair cells in the inner ear caused by aging or exposure 
to very loud noise), deficits in nerve conduction prop-
erties (as in multiple sclerosis), or a lesion in sensory-
processing areas of the brain. Sensory thresholds may 
also be altered by emotional or psychological factors 
related to the conditions in which stimulus detection 
1
0
50
25
75
100
3
5
4
7
9
2
6
Stimulus intensity (arbitrary units)
Stimulus detection (%)
8
10
is measured. Thresholds can also be determined by 
the method of limits, in which the subject reports the 
intensity at which a progressively decreasing stimu-
lus is no longer detectable or an increasing stimulus 
becomes detectable. This technique is widely used in 
audiology to measure hearing thresholds.
Subjects can also provide nonverbal responses in 
sensory detection or discrimination tasks using levers, 
buttons, or other devices that allow accurate measure-
ment of decision times. Experimental animals can be 
trained to respond to controlled sensory stimuli using 
such devices, allowing neuroscientists to investigate 
the underlying neural mechanisms by combining elec-
trophysiological and behavioral studies in the same 
experiment. Methods for quantifying responses to 
stimuli are summarized in Box 17–1. 
Stimuli Are Represented in the Nervous 
System by the Firing Patterns of Neurons
Psychophysical methods provide objective techniques 
for analyzing sensations evoked by stimuli. These quan-
titative measures have been combined with neurophysi-
ological techniques to study the neural mechanisms that 
transform sensory neural signals into percepts. The goal 
of sensory neuroscience is to follow the flow of sensory 
information from receptors toward the cognitive centers 
of the brain, to understand the processing mechanisms 
that occur at successive synapses, and to decipher how 
this shapes our internal representation of the external 
world. The neural coding of sensory information is bet-
ter understood at the early stages of processing than at 
later stages in the brain.
This approach to the neural coding problem was 
pioneered in the 1960s by Vernon Mountcastle, who 
showed that single-cell recordings of spike trains from 
peripheral and central sensory neurons provide a sta-
tistical description of the neural activity evoked by a 
physical stimulus. He then investigated which quan-
titative aspects of neural responses might correspond 
to the psychophysical measurements of sensory tasks 
and, just as important, which do not.
The study of neural coding of information is fun-
damental to understanding how the brain works. A 
neural code describes the relationship between the 
activity in a specified neural population and its func-
tional consequences for perception or action. Sen-
sory systems are ideal for the study of neural coding 
because both the physical properties of the stimulus 
input and the neural or behavioral output of these sys-
tems can be precisely defined and quantified in a con-
trolled setting.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    389
Two major functions of our sensory systems are to tell 
us if something is there and what it is. To test our ability 
and the ability of our sensory systems to answer these 
questions, experimental protocols, tools, and methods 
have been developed to quantify the response of sen-
sory systems to stimuli. These include decision theory and 
signal detection theory. Each uses statistical methods to 
quantify the variability of subjects’ responses.
In an “Is something there?” task, for example, sub-
jects or experimental animals can correctly detect a specific 
stimulus (a “hit” or “true positive”), respond incorrectly 
in the absence of that stimulus (“false positive” or “false 
alarm”), fail to respond to a true stimulus (“miss”), or 
correctly decline to respond in the absence of the stimu-
lus (“true negative” or “correct rejection”). With repeated 
presentations, these choices can be tabulated in a four-cell 
stimulus–response matrix (Figure 17–3A).
This quantifies sensitivity, defined as the number 
of true positives divided by the number of stimuli pre-
sented, and specificity, defined as the number of true 
negatives divided by the number of presentations with-
out a stimulus.
In 1927, L. L. Thurstone proposed that the variabil-
ity of sensations evoked by stimuli could be represented 
as normal or Gaussian probability functions, equating 
the physical distance between the amplitudes of two 
stimuli to a psychological scale value of inferred inten-
sity called the discrimination index or d′.
Decision theory methods were first applied to 
psychophysical studies in 1954 by the psychologists 
Wilson Tanner and John Swets. They developed a series 
of experimental protocols for stimulus detection that 
allowed accurate calculation of d′ as well as techniques 
for quantitative analyses of sensations in both human 
and animal subjects. Such studies can be designed to 
measure not just “Is something there?” as in the earlier 
example, but also comparative judgments of a physi-
cal property of a stimulus such as its intensity, size, or 
temporal frequency, thereby measuring a two-alternative 
forced-choice analog of “What is it?”
When subjects are asked to report whether the second 
stimulus is stronger or weaker, higher or lower, larger 
or smaller, or same or different than the first stimu-
lus, responses in each trial can again be tabulated in a 
four-cell stimulus–response matrix similar to the one 
in Figure 17–3A, but with the terms “stimulus” or “no 
stimulus” replaced by the two distinct stimuli.
Box 17–1  Signal Detection Theory: Quantifying Detection and Discrimination
Figure 17–3A  The stimulus–response matrix for data 
collected during a yes–no stimulus detection task (“Is 
a particular stimulus there?”). Each trial updates one of 
the four totals. For example, correct detection of the stim-
ulus would update the count of true positives (hits), but an 
incorrect positive response in the absence of the stimulus 
would count as a false positive. From such a table, impor-
tant measures such as the sensitivity and false-positive 
rate can be calculated.
By recording neuronal activity at various stages 
of sensory processing, neuroscientists attempt to deci-
pher the mechanisms used by various sensory modali-
ties to represent information and the transformations 
needed to convey these signals to the brain encoded by 
sequences of action potentials. Additional analyses are 
performed of the transformation of signals by neural 
networks along pathways to and within the cerebral 
cortex. Neuroscientists can also modify activity within 
sensory circuits by direct stimulation with electrical 
pulses, chemical neurotransmitters, and modulators, 
or can use genetically encoded light-activated ion 
channels (optogenetics) to depolarize or hyperpolarize 
sensory neurons. How sensory stimuli are encoded by 
neurons may lead to insight into the coding principles 
that underlie cognition.
It is often said that the power of the brain lies in 
the millions of neurons processing information in 
parallel. That formulation, however, does not capture 
the essential difference between the brain and all the 
other organs of the body. In the kidney or a muscle, 
most cells do similar things; if we understand typical 
(continued )
A
Stimulus
No stimulus
True positive
(“Hit”)
False positive
(“False alarm”)
False negative
(“Miss”)
True negative
(“Correct 
rejection”)
Response
No 
response


===== Page 3 =====
390    Part IV / Perception
Discriminability (d′) in these studies is measured 
with receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses that 
compare the neural firing rates or choice probability 
evoked by pairs of stimuli that differ in some property. 
The assumption is that one of the two stimuli evokes 
higher responses than the other. ROC graphs of neu-
ral or psychophysical data plot the proportion of trials 
judged correctly (hits) and incorrectly (false positives) 
when the decision criteria are set at various firing levels 
or choice rates (Figure 17–3B). The area under the ROC 
curve provides an accurate estimate of d′ for each stimu-
lus pair.
Signal detection methods have been applied by 
William Newsome, Michael Shadlen, and J. Anthony 
Movshon in studies of neural responses to visual 
stimuli that differ in orientation, spatial frequency, or 
coherence of motion in order to correlate changes in 
neural firing rates with sensory processing. The neu-
rometric function, plotting neural discriminability as 
a function of stimulus differences, corresponds closely 
to the psychometric function obtained in forced-choice 
paradigms testing the same stimuli, thereby provid-
ing a physiological basis for the observed behavioral 
responses.
Many of these tools, developed in part to study 
sensory systems, have been generalized to apply 
broadly beyond neuroscience. ROC curves, sensitivity, 
and specificity are essential in quantification of diag-
nosis and treatment of disease. The area under an ROC 
curve, or AUC, is today used much more than d′. Val-
ues of AUC close to 1 characterize high sensitivity and 
high specificity. The false positive rate (1 – specificity, or 
the number of false positives divided by the number of 
presentations without a stimulus) is, for many experi-
ments or clinical investigations in which true positive 
findings are rare, a more meaningful measure than the 
classical p value.
Box 17–1  Signal Detection Theory: Quantifying Detection and Discrimination (continued)
Figure 17–3B  A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
plot displays the results of sets of trials, each collected 
in matrices such as those in Figure 17–3A. The vertical 
axis plots the fraction or probability of hits as a function of 
fraction or probability of false alarms on the horizontal axis. 
It is also common to label the vertical axis TPR (true-positive 
rate), or sensitivity, and the horizontal axis FPR (false-posi-
tive rate), or (1 – specificity). A set of trials in which yes or no 
responses are delivered randomly (discriminability [d ′] = 0) 
plots as a straight line from the origin to the upper right  
corner. The area under such an ROC curve (AUC) would be 
0.5. A perfect set of trials, in which observers accurately 
detect the presence of every stimulus and fail to be fooled 
by any trials without stimuli (d ′ > 3), would rise sharply 
along the left axis, and the AUC would be 1.0. AUC values 
are increasingly quoted as single-number measures of con-
fidence. The (theoretical) curves shown demonstrate how 
higher values of d ′ result in larger AUC. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Swets 1973. Copyright © 1973 AAAS.)
muscle cells, we essentially understand how whole 
muscles work. In the brain, millions of cells each do 
something different. To understand the brain, we need 
to understand how its tasks are organized in networks 
of neurons.
Sensory Receptors Respond to Specific Classes of 
Stimulus Energy
Functional differences between sensory systems arise 
from two features: the different stimulus energies that 
drive them and the discrete pathways that compose 
each system. Each neuron performs a specific task, and 
the train of action potentials it produces has a specific 
functional significance for all postsynaptic neurons in 
that circuit. This basic idea was expressed in the theory 
of specificity set forward by Charles Bell and Johannes 
Müller in the 19th century, and remains one of the cor-
nerstones of sensory neuroscience.
When analyzing sensory experience, it is important 
to realize that our conscious sensations differ qualita-
tively from the physical properties of stimuli because, 
0.1
0
0.5
0.6
0.8
0.9
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.7
1.0
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.2
0.6
Probability of false alarm
Probability of hit
0.8
1.0
d’ = 0
d’ = 0.5
d’ = 1.0
d’ = 1.5
d’ = 2
d’ = 3
B


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    391
as Kant and the idealists predicted, the nervous system 
extracts only certain features of each stimulus while 
ignoring others. It then interprets this information 
within the constraints of the brain’s intrinsic structure 
and previous experience. Thus, we receive electromag-
netic waves of different frequencies, but we see them as 
colors. We receive pressure waves from objects vibrat-
ing at different frequencies but we hear sounds, words, 
and music. We encounter chemical compounds float-
ing in the air or water but we experience them as odors 
and tastes. Colors, tones, odors, and tastes are mental 
creations constructed by the brain out of sensory expe-
rience. They do not exist as such outside the brain but 
are linked to specific physical properties of stimuli.
The richness of sensory experience begins with 
millions of highly specific sensory receptors. Sensory 
receptors are found in specialized epithelial structures 
called sense organs, principally the eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, and skin. Each receptor responds to a specific 
kind of energy at specific locations in the sense organ 
and sometimes only to energy with a particular tem-
poral or spatial pattern. The receptor transforms the 
stimulus energy into electrical energy; thus, all sen-
sory systems use a common signaling mechanism. 
The amplitude and duration of the electrical signal 
produced by the receptor, termed the receptor potential, 
are related to the intensity and time course of stimula-
tion of the receptor. The process by which a specific 
stimulus energy is converted into an electrical signal is 
called stimulus transduction.
Sensory receptors are morphologically special-
ized to transduce specific forms of energy, and each 
receptor has a specialized anatomical region within 
the sense organ where stimulus transduction occurs 
(Figure 17–4). Most receptors are optimally selective 
for a single type of stimulus energy, a property termed 
B  Photoreceptor
A  Chemoreceptor
C  Mechanoreceptor
Light
Odorants
Pressure
Figure 17–4  Sensory receptors are specialized to trans-
duce a particular type of stimulus energy into electrical 
signals. Sensory receptors are classified as chemoreceptors, 
photoreceptors, or mechanoreceptors depending on the class 
of stimulus energy that excites them. They transform that 
energy into an electrical signal that is transmitted along path-
ways that serve one sensory modality. The inset in each panel 
illustrates the location of the ion channels that are activated 
by stimuli.
A. The olfactory hair cell responds to chemical molecules in 
the air. The olfactory cilia on the mucosal surface bind specific 
odorant molecules and depolarize the sensory nerve through a 
second-messenger system. The firing rate signals the concen-
tration of odorant in the inspired air.
B. Rod and cone cells in the retina respond to light. The outer 
segment of both receptors contains the photopigment rho-
dopsin, which changes configuration when it absorbs light of 
particular wavelengths. Stimulation of the chromophore by light 
reduces the concentration of cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophos-
phate (cGMP) in the cytoplasm, closing cation channels and 
thereby hyperpolarizing the photoreceptor. (Adapted from 
Shepherd 1994.)
C. Meissner’s corpuscles respond to mechanical pressure. The 
fluid-filled capsule (pale blue) surrounding the sensory nerve 
endings (pink) is linked by collagen fibers to the fingerprint ridges. 
Pressure or motion on the skin opens stretch-sensitive ion chan-
nels in the nerve fiber endings, thus depolarizing them. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Andres and von Düring 1973.)


===== Page 5 =====
392    Part IV / Perception
receptor specificity. We see particular colors, for exam-
ple, because we have receptors that are selectively sen-
sitive to photons with specific ranges of wavelengths, 
and we smell particular odors because we have recep-
tors that bind specific odorant molecules.
In all sensory systems, each receptor encodes the 
type of energy applied to its receptive field, the local 
stimulus magnitude, and how it changes with time. For 
example, photoreceptors in the retina encode the hue, 
brightness, and duration of light striking the retina from 
a specific location in the visual field. Hair cell receptors 
in the cochlea encode the tonal frequency, loudness, and 
duration of sound-pressure waves hitting the ear. The 
neural representation of an object, sound, or scene is 
therefore composed of a mosaic of individual receptors 
that collectively signal its size, contours, texture, tempo-
ral frequency, color, and temperature.
The arrangement of receptors in the sense organ 
allows further specialization of function within each sen-
sory system. Mammalian sensory receptors are classified 
as mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, photoreceptors, 
or thermoreceptors (Table 17–1). Mechanoreceptors and 
Table 17–1  Classification of Sensory Receptors
Sensory system
Modality
Stimulus
Receptor class
Receptor cells
Visual
Vision
Light (photons)
Photoreceptor
Rods and cones
Auditory
Hearing
Sound (pressure waves) Mechanoreceptor
Hair cells in cochlea
Vestibular
Head motion
Gravity, acceleration, 
and head motion
Mechanoreceptor
Hair cells in vestibular labyrinths
Somatosensory
 
 
 
Cranial and dorsal root ganglion 
cells with receptors in:
 
Touch
Skin deformation and 
motion
Mechanoreceptor
Skin
 
Proprioception
Muscle length, muscle 
force, and joint angle
Mechanoreceptor
Muscle spindles, Golgi tendon 
organs, and joint capsules
 
Pain
Noxious stimuli (ther-
mal, mechanical, and 
chemical stimuli)
Thermoreceptor, 
mechanoreceptor, and 
chemoreceptor
All tissues except central nervous 
system
 
Itch
Histamine, pruritogens Chemoreceptor
Skin
 
Visceral (not 
pain)
Wide range (thermal, 
mechanical, and chemi-
cal stimuli)
Thermoreceptor, 
mechanoreceptor, and 
chemoreceptor
Cardiovascular, gastrointestinal 
tract, urinary bladder, and lungs
Gustatory
Taste
Chemicals
Chemoreceptor
Taste buds, intraoral thermal, and 
chemoreceptors
Olfactory
Smell
Odorants
Chemoreceptor
Olfactory sensory neurons
chemoreceptors are the most widespread and the most 
varied in form and function.
Four different kinds of mechanoreceptors that sense 
skin deformation, motion, stretch, and vibration are 
responsible for the sense of touch in the human hand 
and elsewhere (Chapters 18 and 19). Muscles contain 
three kinds of mechanoreceptors that signal muscle 
length, velocity, and force, whereas other mechanore-
ceptors in the joint capsule signal joint angle (Chapter 31).  
Hearing is based on two kinds of mechanoreceptors, 
inner and outer hair cells, that transduce motion of the 
basilar membrane in the inner ear (Chapter 26). Other 
hair cells in the vestibular labyrinth sense motion and 
acceleration of the fluids of the inner ear to signal 
head motion and orientation (Chapter 27). Visceral 
mechanoreceptors detect the distension of internal 
organs such as the bowel and bladder. Osmoreceptors 
in the brain, which sense the state of hydration, are 
activated when a cell swells. Certain mechanorecep-
tors report extreme distortion that threatens to dam-
age tissue; their signals reach pain centers in the brain 
(Chapter 20).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    393
Chemoreceptors are responsible for olfaction, gusta-
tion, itch, pain, and many visceral sensations. A signifi-
cant part of pain is due to chemoreceptors that detect 
molecules spilled into the extracellular fluid by tissue 
injury and molecules that are part of the inflamma-
tory response. Several kinds of thermoreceptors in the 
skin sense skin warming and cooling. Another ther-
moreceptor, which monitors blood temperature in the 
hypothalamus, is mainly responsible for whether we 
feel warm or cold.
Vision is mediated by five kinds of photoreceptors 
in the retina. The light sensitivities of these receptors 
define the visible spectrum. The photopigments in 
rods and cones detect electromagnetic energy of wave-
lengths that span the range of 390 to 670 nm (Figure 
17–5A), the principal wavelengths of sunlight and 
moonlight reaching the earth and informing our visual 
world. Unlike some other species, such as birds or rep-
tiles, humans do not detect ultraviolet light or infra-
red radiation because we lack receptors that detect the 
appropriate short or long wavelengths. Likewise, we 
do not perceive radio waves and microwave energy 
bands because we have not evolved receptors for these 
wavelengths.
Multiple Subclasses of Sensory Receptors Are 
Found in Each Sense Organ
Each major sensory system has several submodalities. 
For example, taste can be sweet, sour, salty, savory, or 
bitter; visual objects have qualities of color, shape, and 
pattern; and touch includes qualities of temperature, 
texture, and rigidity. Some submodalities are medi-
ated by discrete subclasses of receptors that respond 
to limited ranges of stimulus energies of that modality; 
others are derived by combining information from dif-
ferent receptor types.
The receptor behaves as a filter for a narrow range 
or bandwidth of energy. For example, an individual 
photoreceptor is not sensitive to all wavelengths of 
light but only to a small part of the spectrum. We say 
that a receptor is tuned to an optimal or best stimulus, 
the preferred stimulus that activates the receptor at low 
energy and evokes the strongest neural response. As a 
result, we can plot a tuning curve for each receptor based 
on physiological experiments (see the light absorbance 
curves for photoreceptors in Figure 17–5A). The tun-
ing curve shows the range of sensitivity of the recep-
tor, including its preferred stimulus. For example, blue 
cone cells in the retina are most sensitive to light of 
430 to 440 nm, green cone cells respond best to 530 to 
540 nm, and red cone cells respond most vigorously 
to light of 560 to 570 nm. Responses of the three cone 
cells to other wavelengths of light are weaker as the 
incident wavelengths differ from these optimal ranges 
(Chapter 22).
Each rod and cone cell thus responds to a wide 
spectrum of colors. The graded sensitivity of photore-
ceptors encodes specific wavelengths by the amplitude 
of the evoked receptor potential. However, this ampli-
tude also depends upon the intensity or brightness of 
the light, so a green cone responds similarly to bright 
orange or dimmer green light. How are these distin-
guished? Stronger stimuli activate more photorecep-
tors than do weaker ones, and the resulting population 
code of multiple receptors, combined with receptors 
of different wavelength preferences, distinguishes 
intensity from hue. Such neural ensembles enable indi-
vidual visual neurons to multiplex signals of color and 
brightness in the same pathway.
Additionally, because the tuning curve of a pho-
toreceptor is roughly symmetric around the best fre-
quency, wavelengths of greater or lesser values may 
evoke similar responses. For example, red cones 
respond similarly to light of 520 and 600 nm. How does 
the brain interpret these signals? The answer again lies 
with multiple receptors, in this case the green and blue 
cones. Green cones respond very strongly to light of 
520 nm, as it is close to their preferred wavelength, 
but respond weakly to 600 nm light. Blue cones do not 
respond to 600 nm light and are barely activated at 
520 nm. As a result, 520 nm light is perceived as green, 
whereas 600 nm is seen as orange. Thus, through vary-
ing combinations of photoreceptors, we are able to per-
ceive a spectrum of colors.
Similarly, the complex flavors we perceive when 
eating are a result of combinations of chemoreceptors 
with different affinities for natural ligands. The broad 
tuning curves of a large number of distinct olfactory 
and gustatory receptors afford many combinatorial 
possibilities.
The existence of submodalities points to an impor-
tant principle of sensory coding, namely that the 
range of stimulus energies—such as the wavelength 
of light—is deconstructed into smaller, simpler com-
ponents whose intensity is monitored over time by 
specialized receptors that transmit information in 
parallel to the brain. The brain eventually integrates 
these diverse components of the stimulus to convey 
an ensemble representation of the sensory event. The 
ensemble hypothesis is even more important when we 
examine the representation of sensory events in the 
central nervous system. Although most studies of sen-
sory processing have examined how individual neu-
rons respond to temporally varying stimuli, the current 
challenge is to decipher how sensory information is 


===== Page 7 =====
394    Part IV / Perception
Ultraviolet
Infrared
Rod
498 nm
Green cone
533 nm
Red cone
564 nm
Blue cone
437 nm
Relative absorbance
Wavelength (nm)
A
B
Red cone
activation
Green cone
activation
Yellow 
Blue cone
activation
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Figure 17–5  Human perception of colors results from the 
simultaneous activation of three different classes of photo-
receptors in the retina.
A. The visible spectrum of light spans wavelengths of 390 to 
670 nm. Individual photoreceptors are sensitive to a broad 
range of wavelengths, but each is most responsive to light 
in a particular spectral band. Thus, cone cells are classified 
as red, green, or blue type photoreceptors. Changes in the 
relative activation of each of the three cone types account 
for the perception of specific colors. (Adapted from Dowling 
1987.)
B. The neural coding of color and brightness in the retina can be 
portrayed as a three-dimensional vector in which the strength 
of activation of each cone type is plotted along one of the three 
axes. Each point in the vector space represents a unique pattern 
of activation of the three cone types. Direction in the vector indi-
cates the relative activity of each cone type and the color seen. 
In the example shown here, strong activation of red cones along 
with moderate stimulation of green cones and weak activation 
of blue cones produces the perception of yellow. The length of 
the vector from the origin to the point represents the intensity or 
brightness of light in that region of the retina.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    395
Figure 17–6  The firing rates of sensory neurons encode 
the stimulus magnitude. The two plots indicate that the neu-
ral coding of stimulus intensity is faithfully transmitted from 
peripheral receptors to cortical centers that mediate conscious 
sensation. (Adapted, with permission, from Mountcastle,  
Talbot, and Kornhuber 1966.)
A. The number of action potentials per second recorded from 
a touch receptor in the hand is proportional to the amplitude 
of skin indentation. Each dot represents the response of the 
receptor to pressure applied by a small probe. The relationship 
between the neural firing rate and the pressure stimulus is 
linear. This receptor does not respond to stimuli weaker than 
200 μm, its touch threshold.
B. Estimates made by human subjects of the magnitude of 
sensation produced by pressure on the hand increase lin-
early as a function of skin indentation. The relation between 
a subject’s estimate of the intensity of the stimulus and its 
physical strength resembles the relation between the dis-
charge frequency of the sensory neuron and the stimulus 
amplitude.
distributed across populations of neurons responding 
to the same event at the same time.
Receptor Population Codes Transmit Sensory 
Information to the Brain
The receptor potential generated by an adequate stim-
ulus produces a local depolarization or hyperpolariza-
tion of the sensory receptor neuron whose amplitude 
is proportional to the stimulus intensity. However, 
the sense organs are located at distances far enough 
from the central nervous system that passive propa-
gation of receptor potentials is insufficient to transmit 
signals there. To communicate sensory information to 
the brain, a second step in neural coding must occur. 
The receptor potential produced by the stimulus must 
be transformed into sequences of action potentials 
that can be propagated along axons. The analog sig-
nal of stimulus magnitude in the receptor potential is 
transformed into a digital pulse code in which the fre-
quency of action potentials is proportional to the inten-
sity of the stimulus (Figure 17–6A). This is spike train 
encoding.
Neuron response (total spikes/stimulus)
Amplitude of skin indentation (µm)
Intensity of skin indentation
Normalized estimation of magnitude
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
A  Neural code of stimulus magnitude
B  Perceived sensation intensity
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
The recognition of an analog-to-digital transforma-
tion dates back to 1925 when Edgar Adrian and Yngve 
Zotterman discovered the all-or-none properties of the 
action potential in sensory neurons. Despite the simple 
recording instruments available at that time, Adrian 
and Zotterman discovered that the frequency of  
firing—the number of action potentials per second—
varies with the strength of the stimulus and its dura-
tion; stronger stimuli evoke larger receptor potentials 
that generate a greater number and a higher frequency 
of action potentials. This signaling mechanism is 
termed rate coding.
In later years, as recording technology improved 
and digital computers allowed precise quantification 
of the timing of action potentials, Vernon Mountcastle 
and his colleagues demonstrated a precise correlation 
between sensory thresholds and neural responses, as 
well as the parametric relationship between neural 
firing rates and the perceived intensity of sensations 
(Figure 17–6B). They also found that the intensity of a 
stimulus is represented in the brain by all active neu-
rons in the receptor population. This type of population 
code depends on the fact that individual receptors in a 


===== Page 9 =====
396    Part IV / Perception
sensory system differ in their sensory thresholds or in 
their affinity for particular molecules.
Most sensory systems have low- and high-threshold 
receptors. When stimulus intensity changes from weak 
to strong, low-threshold receptors are first recruited, 
followed by high-threshold receptors. For example, 
rod cells in the retina are activated by very low light 
levels and reach their maximal receptor potentials and 
firing rates in dim daylight. Cone cells do not respond 
in very dim light but do report differences in daylight 
brightness. The combination of the two types of pho-
toreceptors allows us to perceive light intensity over 
several orders of magnitude. Parallel processing by 
low- and high-threshold receptors thus extends the 
dynamic range of a sensory system.
Distributed patterning of firing in neural ensem-
bles allows the use of vector algebra to quantify how 
stimulus properties are distributed across populations 
of active neurons. For example, although humans pos-
sess only three types of cone cells in the retina, we 
can clearly identify colors across the entire spectrum 
of visible light. In Figure 17–5B, we see that the color 
yellow can be synthesized in the mind by specific com-
binations of activity in red, green, and blue cone cells 
(Figure 17–5B). Likewise, the color magenta results 
from other combinations of the same photoreceptor 
classes. Mathematically, the perceived hue can be rep-
resented in a three-dimensional vector space in which 
the strengths of activation of each receptor class are 
combined to yield a unique sensation.
High-dimensional multineuronal representation of 
stimuli across large populations of neurons is beginning 
to be analyzed as new techniques are developed for 
simultaneous recording and imaging of activity in neu-
ral ensembles. Ideally, the firing rates of each neuron in 
a population can be plotted in a coordinate system with 
multiple axes such as modality, location, intensity, and 
time. The neural components along these axes combine 
to form a vector that represents the population’s activ-
ity. The vector interpretation is useful because it makes 
available powerful analytic techniques.
The possibilities for information coding through 
temporal patterning within and between neurons in a 
population are enormous. For example, the timing of 
action potentials in a presynaptic neuron can deter-
mine whether the postsynaptic cell fires. Two action 
potentials that arrive near synchronously will alter the 
postsynaptic neuron’s probability of firing more than 
would action potentials arriving at different times. The 
relative timing of action potentials between neurons 
also has a profound effect on mechanisms of learning 
and synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentia-
tion and depression at synapses (Chapter 54).
Sequences of Action Potentials Signal the Temporal 
Dynamics of Stimuli
The instantaneous firing patterns of sensory neurons 
are as important to sensory perception as the total num-
ber of spikes fired over long periods. Steady rhythmic 
firing in nerves innervating the hand is perceived as 
steady pressure or vibration depending upon which 
touch receptors are activated (Chapter 19). Bursting 
patterns may be perceived as motion. The patterning 
of spike trains plays an important role in encoding 
temporal fluctuations of the stimulus, such as the fre-
quency of vibration or auditory tones, or changes in 
rate of movement. Humans can report changes in sen-
sory experience that correspond to alterations within 
a few milliseconds in the firing patterns of sensory 
neurons.
Sensory systems detect contrasts, changes in the 
temporal and spatial patterns of stimulation. If a stim-
ulus persists unchanged for several minutes without a 
change in position or amplitude, the neural response 
and corresponding sensation diminishes, a condi-
tion called receptor adaptation. Receptor adaptation is 
thought to be an important neural basis of perceptual 
adaptation, whereby a constant stimulus fades from 
consciousness. Receptors that respond to prolonged 
and constant stimulation—known as slowly adapting 
receptors—encode stimulus duration by generating 
action potentials throughout the period of stimulation 
(Figure 17–7A). In contrast, rapidly adapting receptors 
respond only at the beginning and end of a stimulus; 
they cease firing in response to constant amplitude stim-
ulation and are active only when the stimulus intensity 
increases or decreases (Figure 17–7B). Rapidly and slowly 
adapting sensors illustrate another important princi-
ple of sensory coding: Neurons signal important prop-
erties of stimuli not only when they fire but also when 
they slow or stop firing.
The temporal properties of a changing stimulus 
are encoded as changes in the firing pattern, including 
the interspike intervals, of sensory neurons. For exam-
ple, the touch receptors illustrated in Figure 17–7 fire 
at higher rates when a probe initially contacts the skin 
than when the pressure is maintained. The time inter-
val between spikes is shorter when the skin is indented 
rapidly than when pressure is applied gradually. The 
firing rate of these neurons is proportional to both 
the speed at which the skin is indented and the total 
amount of pressure applied. During steady pressure, 
the firing rate slows to a level proportional to skin 
indentation (Figure 17–7A) or ceases entirely (Figure 
17–7B). Firing of both neurons stops after the probe is 
retracted.


