===== Page 1 =====
956    Part V / Movement
Pathological Neural Activity Can Be Regulated by 
Deep Brain Stimulation and Antiseizure BMIs
BMIs have been developed to help people with dis-
orders involving pathological neural activity in the 
brain, such as Parkinson disease and epilepsy. People 
with Parkinson disease benefit by having hand and 
arm tremor reduced. At present, there is no cure for 
Parkinson disease, and many people become resistant 
to pharmacological treatments. A deep brain stimula-
tor (DBS) can help these people by delivering electrical 
pulses to targeted areas in the brain to disrupt the aber-
rant neural activity.
DBS is controlled by a neurostimulator implanted 
in the chest, with wires to stimulating electrodes in 
deep brain nuclei (eg, the subthalamic nucleus). The 
nuclei are continuously stimulated with these elec-
trodes in order to alter the aberrant neural activity. 
This method can often greatly reduce Parkinson disease–
related tremor for years. A DBS applied to different 
brain areas can also help people with essential tremor, 
dystonia, chronic pain, major depression, and obsessive-
compulsive disorder.
Millions of people experiencing epileptic seizures 
are currently treated with antiseizure medications or 
neurosurgery, both of which often result in incomplete 
or impermanent seizure reduction. Antiseizure BMIs 
have shown considerable promise for further improv-
ing quality of life. These fully implanted BMIs operate 
by continuously monitoring neural activity in a brain 
region determined to be involved with seizures. They 
identify unusual activity that is predictive of seizure 
onset and then respond within milliseconds to disrupt 
this activity by electrically stimulating the same or a 
different brain region. This closed-loop response can 
be fast enough that seizure symptoms are not felt and 
seizures do not occur.
Replacement Part BMIs Can Restore Lost Brain 
Processing Capabilities
BMIs are capable of restoring more than lost sensory 
or motor capabilities. They are, in principle, capable of 
restoring internal brain processing. Of the four catego-
ries of BMIs, this is the most futuristic. An example is 
a “replacement part” BMI. The central idea is that if 
enough is known about the function of a brain region, 
and if this region is damaged by disease or injury, then 
it may be possible to replace this brain region.
Once the normal input activity to a brain region 
is measured (see next section), the function of the lost 
brain region could then be modeled in electronic hard-
ware and software, and the output from this substitute 
processing center would then be delivered to the next 
brain region as though no injury had occurred. This 
would involve, for example, reading out neural activ-
ity with electrodes, mimicking the brain region’s com-
putational functions with low-power microelectronic 
circuits, and then writing in electrical neural activity 
with stimulating electrodes.
This procedure might also be used to initiate and 
guide neural plasticity. A replacement part BMI that 
is currently being investigated focuses on restoring 
memory by replacing parts of the hippocampus that 
are damaged due to injury or disease. Another poten-
tial application would be to restore the lost functional-
ity of a brain region damaged by stroke.
These systems represent the natural evolution of 
the BMI concept, a so-called “platform technology” 
because a large number of systems can be envisioned 
by mixing and matching various write-in, computa-
tional, and read-out components. The number of neu-
rological diseases and injuries that BMIs should be able 
to help address ought to increase as our understanding 
of the functions of the nervous system and the sophis-
tication of the technology continue to grow.
Measuring and Modulating Neural Activity Rely on 
Advanced Neurotechnology
Measuring and modulating neural activity involves 
four broad areas of electronic technologies applied to 
the nervous system (so-called neurotechnology). The 
first area is the type of neural sensor; artificial neural 
sensors are designed with different levels of invasive-
ness and spatial resolution (Figure 39–2). Sensors that 
are external to the body, such as an electroencephalogram 
(EEG) cap, have been used extensively in recent dec-
ades. The EEG measures signals from many small metal 
disks (electrodes) applied to the surface of the scalp 
across the head. Each electrode detects average activ-
ity from a large number of neurons beneath it.
More recently, implantable electrode-array tech-
niques, such as subdural electrocorticography (ECoG) 
and finely spaced micro-ECoG electrodes, have been 
used. Since ECoG electrodes are on the surface of the 
brain and are thus much closer to neurons than EEG 
electrodes, ECoG has higher spatial and temporal reso-
lution and thus provides more information with which 
to control BMIs.
Most recently, arrays of penetrating intracortical 
electrodes, which we focus on in this chapter, have been 
used. The intracortical electrode arrays are made of sil-
icon or other materials and coated with biocompatible 
materials. The arrays are implanted on the surface of 
the brain, with the electrode tips penetrating 1 to 2 mm 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    957
Figure 39–2  Brain–machine interfaces use different types of 
neural sensors. Electrical neural signals can be measured with 
various techniques ranging from electroencephalography (EEG) 
electrodes on the surface of the skin, to electrocorticography 
(ECoG) electrodes on the surface of the brain, to intracortical 
electrodes implanted in the outer 1 to 2 mm of cortex. The 
signals that can be measured range from the average of many 
neurons, to averages across fewer neurons, and finally to 
action potentials from individual neurons. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Blabe et al. 2015.)
into the cortex. They have the ability to record action 
potentials from individual neurons, as well as local 
field potentials from small clusters of neurons near 
each electrode tip. The electrodes are able to record 
high-fidelity signals because they are inserted into the 
brain, bringing the electrode tips within micrometers 
of neurons. This is beneficial for BMI performance 
because individual neurons are the fundamental 
information-encoding units in the nervous system, 
and action potentials are the fundamental units of the 
digital code that carries information from the input to 
the output region of a neuron. Moreover, intracortical 
electrodes can deliver electrical microstimulation to 
either disrupt neural activity (eg, DBS) or write in sur-
rogate information (eg, proprioceptive or somatosen-
sory information).
The second area of neurotechnology is scaling up 
the number of neurons measured at the same time. 
While one neuron contains some information about a 
person’s intended movement, tens to hundreds of neu-
rons are needed to move a BMI more naturally, and 
even more neurons are needed to approach naturalis-
tic levels of motor function. Although it is possible to 
place electrode arrays in many areas across the brain, 
thereby gaining more information from multiple areas, 
a key challenge is to measure activity from thousands 
of neurons within each individual brain area. Many 
efforts are underway to achieve this goal, including use 
of electrode arrays with many tiny shafts, each with 
hundreds of electrode contacts along its length; many 
tiny electrodes that are not physically wired together, 
but are instead inserted into the brain as stand-alone 
islands that transmit data outside of the head and 
receive power wirelessly; and optical imaging technol-
ogies that can capture the activity of hundreds or more 
neurons by detecting how each neuron’s fluorescence 
changes over time.
The third area is low-power electronics for sig-
nal acquisition, wireless data communications, and 
wireless powering. In contrast to the BMI systems 
described above, which implant a passive electrode 
array in which each electrode is wired to the out-
side world by a connector passing through the skin, 
future BMIs will be fully implanted like DBS systems. 
Electronic circuits are needed to amplify neural sig-
nals, digitize them, process them (eg, to detect when 
EEG
ECoG
Intracortical
electrodes
Intracortical electrodes
ECoG
EEG


===== Page 3 =====
958    Part V / Movement
an action potential occurred or to estimate local field 
potential power), and transmit this information to a 
nearby receiver incorporated into a prosthetic arm, 
for example. Power consumption must be minimized 
for two reasons. First, the more power is consumed, 
the more power a battery or a wireless charging sys-
tem would need to provide. Batteries would therefore 
need to be larger and replaced more often, and deliv-
ering power wirelessly is challenging. Second, using 
power generates heat, and the brain can only tolerate a 
small temperature increase before there are deleterious 
effects. These trade-offs are similar to those of smart 
phones, which represent the current best technology 
available for low-power electronics.
The final area is so-called supervisory systems. 
Software running on electronic hardware is at the 
heart of BMIs. Some software implements the math-
ematical operations of the neural decoding, while 
other software must tend to aspects of the BMI’s over-
all operation. For example, the supervisory software 
should monitor whether or not a person wishes to use 
the prosthesis (eg, if the person is sleeping); if neural 
signals have changed, thereby requiring recalibration 
of the decoder; and overall BMI performance and 
safety.
Having discussed the range of different BMIs and 
neurotechnologies being developed, in the rest of this 
chapter we focus on motor and communication BMIs. 
We first describe different types of decoding algo-
rithms and how they work. We then describe recent 
progress in BMI development toward assisting para-
lyzed people and amputees. Next, we consider how 
sensory feedback can improve BMI performance and 
how BMIs can be used as an experimental paradigm to 
address basic scientific questions about brain function. 
Finally, we conclude with a cautionary note about ethi-
cal issues that can arise with BMIs.
BMIs Leverage the Activity of Many Neurons 
to Decode Movements
Various aspects of movement—including position, 
velocity, acceleration, and force—are encoded in the 
activity of neurons throughout the motor system 
(Chapter 34). Even though our understanding of 
movement encoding in the motor system is incom-
plete, there is usually a reliable relationship between 
aspects of movement and neural activity. This reli-
able relationship allows us to estimate the desired 
movement from neural activity, a key component of 
a BMI.
To study movement encoding, one typically con-
siders the activity of an individual neuron across 
repeated movements (referred to as “trials”) to the 
same target. The activity of the neuron can be averaged 
across many trials to create a spike histogram for each 
target (Figure 39–3A). By comparing the spike histo-
grams for different targets, one can characterize how 
the neuron’s activity varies with the movement pro-
duced. One can also assess using the spike histograms 
whether the neuron is more involved in movement 
preparation or movement execution.
In contrast, estimating a subject’s desired move-
ment from neural activity (referred to as movement 
decoding) needs to be performed on an individual 
trial while the neural activity is being recorded. The 
activity of a single neuron cannot unambiguously 
provide such information. Thus, the BMI must moni-
tor the activity of many neurons on a single trial  
(Figure 39–3B) rather than one neuron on many trials. 
A desired movement can be decoded from the neural 
activity associated with either preparation or execu-
tion of the movement. Whereas preparation activity 
is related to the movement goal execution activity is 
related to the moment-by-moment details of move-
ment (Chapter 34).
Millions of neurons across multiple brain areas 
work together to produce a movement as simple as 
reaching for a cup. Yet in many BMIs, desired move-
ments can be decoded reasonably accurately from the 
activity of dozens of neurons recorded from a single brain 
area. Although this may seem surprising, the fact is that 
the motor system has a great deal of redundancy—many 
neurons carry similar information about a desired 
movement (Chapter 34). This is reasonable because 
millions of neurons are involved in controlling the con-
tractions of dozens of muscles. Thus, most of the neu-
rons in regions of dorsal premotor cortex and primary 
motor cortex controlling arm movement are informa-
tive about most arm movements.
When decoding a movement, the activity of one 
neuron provides only incomplete information about 
the movement, whereas the activity of many neurons 
can provide substantially more accurate information 
about the movement. This is true for activity associ-
ated with both movement preparation and execution. 
There are two reasons why using multiple neurons is 
helpful for decoding. First, a typical neuron alone can-
not unambiguously determine the intended movement 
direction. Consider a neuron whose activity (during 
either preparation or execution) is related to move-
ment direction via a cosine function, known as a tuning 
curve (Figure 39–4A). If this neuron fires at 30 spikes 
per second, the intended movement direction could 
be either 120° or 240°. However, by recording from a 
second neuron whose tuning curve is different from 
that of the first neuron, the movement direction can be 


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 39–3  Movement encoding uses the activity of 
individual neurons averaged across experimental trials, 
whereas movement decoding uses the activity of many 
neurons on individual experimental trials.
A. Activity of one neuron recorded in the dorsal premotor 
cortex of a monkey preparing and executing leftward arm 
movements (left) and rightward arm movements (right). Char-
acterizing the movement encoding of a neuron involves deter-
mining how the activity of the neuron on repeated leftward 
or rightward movements (each row of spike trains) relates to 
aspects of arm movement. Below is the spike histogram for 
this neuron for leftward and rightward movements, obtained 
by averaging neural activity across trials. This neuron shows a 
greater level of preparation activity for leftward movements and 
a greater level of execution activity for rightward movements. 
Many neurons in the dorsal premotor cortex and primary motor 
cortex show movement-related activity in both the preparation 
and execution epochs like the neuron shown.
B. Neural activity for many neurons recorded in the dorsal 
premotor cortex for one leftward movement (left) and one 
rightward movement (right). The spike trains for neuron 1 corre-
spond to those shown in part A. Spike counts are taken during 
the preparation epoch, typically in a large time bin of 100 ms or 
longer to estimate movement goal. In contrast, spike counts 
are taken during the execution epoch typically in many smaller 
time bins, each lasting tens of milliseconds. Using such short 
time bins provides the temporal resolution needed to estimate 
the moment-by-moment details of the movement.
C. Neural decoding involves extracting movement information 
from many neurons on a single experimental trial. In the sub-
ject’s workspace, there are eight possible targets (circles). Dis-
crete decoding (see Figure 39–5) extracts the target location; 
the estimated target is filled in with gray. In contrast, continu-
ous decoding (see Figure 39–6) extracts the moment-by-
moment details of the movement; the orange dot represents 
the estimated position at one moment in time.
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
Neuron 10
Neuron 3
A  Single neuron, multiple trials
B  Multiple neurons, single trial
C  Neural decoding
Trial 1
Trial 11
200 ms
200 ms
200 ms
t=1 t=2
t=1 t=2
200 ms
25 spikes/s
Trial 1
Preparation
Execution
Preparation
Execution
Preparation
Execution
Preparation
Execution
Trial 2
Trial 10
Trial 11
Dorsal
premotor
cortex
Dorsal
premotor
cortex
Trial 12
Trial 20
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
Neuron 10
t=1
t=2
Continuous decoding
Discrete decoding
t=1t=2
Continuous decoding
Discrete decoding
Trial 3
Trial 13
Neuron 3
Spike histogram


===== Page 5 =====
960    Part V / Movement
Figure 39–4  More than one neuron is needed for accurate 
movement decoding.
A. The tuning curve of one neuron defines how the neuron’s 
activity varies with movement direction. If this neuron shows 
activity of 30 spikes/s, it could correspond to movement in the 
120° or 240° direction.
B. A second neuron (green) with a different tuning curve 
shows activity of 5 spikes/s, which could correspond to 
movement in the 60° or 120° direction. The only movement 
direction consistent with the activity of both neurons is 120°, 
which is determined to be the decoded direction.
C. Because neural activity is “noisy” (represented as a vertical 
displacement of the dashed lines), it is usually not possible to 
conclusively determine the movement direction from the  
activity of two neurons. Here, no one movement direction is 
consistent with the activity of both neurons.
A  One neuron
B  Two neurons (noiseless)
C  Two neurons (noisy)
0
120
180
240
360
10
20
30
Direction (degrees)
Firing rate (spikes/s)
60
300
Decoded
direction
Neuron 2
activity
Neuron 1
activity
Neuron 1
activity
Neuron 2
activity
Neuron 1
activity
Noise
Noise
0
120
180
240
360
Direction (degrees)
60
300
0
120
180
240
360
60
300
Direction (degrees)
more accurately determined. If the second neuron fires 
at 5 spikes per second, corresponding to a movement 
in either the 60° or 120° direction, the only movement 
direction that is consistent between the two neurons is 
120° (Figure 39–4B). Thus, by recording from these two 
neurons simultaneously, the intended reach direction 
can be determined more accurately than by record-
ing from one neuron. (However, two neurons do not 
necessarily provide a perfect estimate of the intended 
reach direction due to noise, as described next.)
The second reason why decoding a movement 
from the activity of several neurons gives greater accu-
racy is because a neuron’s activity level usually varies 
across repeated movements in the same direction. This 
variability is typically referred to as spiking “noise.” 
Let us say that due to spiking noise the first neuron 
fires at slightly less than 30 spikes per second and the 
second neuron fires at slightly more than 5 spikes per 
second (Figure 39–4C). Under these conditions, no sin-
gle movement direction is consistent with the activity 
level of both neurons. Instead, a compromise must be 
made between the two neurons to determine a move-
ment direction that is as consistent as possible with their 
activities. By extending this concept to more than two 
neurons, the movement direction can be decoded even 
more accurately as the number of neurons increases.
Decoding Algorithms Estimate Intended 
Movements From Neural Activity
Movement decoders are a central component of 
BMIs. There are two types of BMI decoders: discrete 
and continuous (Figure 39–3C). A discrete decoder esti-
mates one of several possible movement goals. Each 
of these movement goals could correspond to a letter 
on a keyboard. A discrete decoder solves a classifica-
tion problem in statistics and can be applied to either 
preparation activity or execution activity. A continuous 
decoder estimates the moment-by-moment details of 
a movement trajectory. This is important, for exam-
ple, for reaching around obstacles or turning a steer-
ing wheel. A continuous decoder solves a regression 
problem in statistics and is usually applied to execu-
tion activity rather than preparation activity because 
the moment-by-moment details of a movement can 
be more accurately estimated from execution activity 
(Chapter 34).
Motor BMIs must produce movement trajecto-
ries as accurately as possible to achieve the desired 
movement and typically use a continuous decoder 
to do this. In contrast, communication BMIs are con-
cerned with enabling the individual to transmit infor-
mation as rapidly as possible. Thus, the speed and 
accuracy with which movement goals (or keys on a 
keyboard) can be selected are of primary importance. 
Communication BMIs can use a discrete decoder to 
directly select a desired key on a keyboard or a con-
tinuous decoder to continuously guide the cursor to 
the desired key, where only the key eventually struck 
actually contributes to information conveyance. This 
seemingly subtle distinction has implications that 
influence the type of neural activity required and 
therefore the brain area that is targeted, as well as the 
type of decoder that is used.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    961
Figure 39–5  Discrete decoding.
A. Calibration phase. A population activity space is shown for 
two neurons, where each axis represents the firing rate of one 
neuron. On each trial (ie, movement repetition), the activity of 
the two neurons together defines one point in the population 
activity space. Each point is colored by the movement goal, 
which is known during the calibration phase. Decision bounda-
ries (dashed lines) are determined by a statistical model 
to optimize discrimination among the movement goals. The 
decision boundaries define a region in the population activity 
space for each movement goal.
B. Ongoing use phase. During this phase, the decision bounda-
ries are fixed. If we record new neural activity (square) for 
which the movement goal is unknown, the movement goal is 
determined by the region in which the neural activity lies. In 
this case, the neural activity lies in the region corresponding to 
the leftward target, so the decoder would guess that the sub-
ject intended to move to the leftward target.
Neural decoding involves two phases: calibra-
tion and ongoing use. In the calibration phase, the 
relationship between neural activity and movement 
is characterized by a statistical model. This can be 
achieved by recording neural activity while a para-
lyzed person attempts to move, imagines moving, or 
passively observes movements of a computer cursor or 
robotic limb. Once the relationship has been defined, 
the statistical model can then be used to decode new 
observed neural activity (ongoing use phase). The goal 
during the ongoing use phase is to find the movement 
that is most consistent with the observed neural activity 
(Figure 39–4B,C).
Discrete Decoders Estimate Movement Goals
We first define a population activity space, where each 
axis represents the firing rate of one neuron. On each 
trial (ie, movement repetition), we can measure the fir-
ing rate of each neuron during a specified period, and 
together they yield one point in the population activity 
space. Across many trials, involving multiple move-
ment goals, there will be a scatter of points in the pop-
ulation activity space. If the neural activity is related 
to the movement goal, then the points will be sepa-
rated in the population activity space according to the 
movement goal (Figure 39–5A). During the calibration 
phase, decision boundaries that partition the population 
A  Calibration phase
B  Ongoing use phase
0
20
40
20
0
0
40
Down
Right
Up
Left
Down
Right
Up
Left
Boundaries
moved to optimize
discrimination
Boundaries
ﬁxed
New
activity
Neuron 1 (spikes/s)
Neuron 2 (spikes/s)
0
20
40
20
40
Neuron 1 (spikes/s)
Neuron 2 (spikes/s)
activity space into different regions are determined 
by a statistical model. Each region corresponds to one 
movement goal.
During the ongoing use phase, we measure 
new neural activity for which the movement goal is 
unknown (Figure 39–5B). The decoded movement goal 
is determined by the region in which the neural activity 
lies. For example, if the neural activity lies within the 
region corresponding to the leftward target, then the 
discrete decoder would guess that the subject intended 
to move to the leftward target on that trial. It is possi-
ble that the subject intended to move to the rightward 
target, even though the recorded activity lies within 
the region corresponding to the leftward target. In this 
case, the discrete decoder would incorrectly estimate 
the subject’s intended movement goal. Decoding accu-
racy typically increases with an increasing number of 
simultaneously recorded neurons.
Continuous Decoders Estimate Moment-by-Moment 
Details of Movements
Arm position, velocity, acceleration, force, and other 
aspects of arm movement can be decoded using the 
methods described here with varying levels of accu-
racy. For concreteness, we will discuss decoding move-
ment velocity because it is one of the quantities most 
strongly reflected in the activity of motor cortical 


===== Page 7 =====
962    Part V / Movement
neurons and is the starting point for the design of most 
BMI systems.
Consider a population of neurons whose level of 
activity indicates the movement velocity (ie, speed and 
direction). During the calibration phase, a “pushing 
vector” is determined for each neuron (Figure 39–6A). A 
pushing vector indicates how a neuron’s activity influ-
ences movement velocity. Various continuous decoding 
algorithms differ in how they determine the push-
ing vectors. One of the earliest decoding algorithms, 
the population vector algorithm (PVA), assigns each 
neuron’s pushing vector to point along the neuron’s 
preferred direction (see Figure 34–22A). A neuron’s 
preferred direction is defined as the direction of move-
ment for which the neuron shows the highest level of 
activity (ie, peak of curves in Figure 39–4). Much of 
the pioneering work on BMIs used the PVA. However, 
the PVA does not take into account the properties of the 
spiking noise (ie, its variance and covariance across 
neurons), which influences the accuracy of the decoded 
movements. A more accurate decoder, the optimal lin-
ear estimator (OLE), incorporates the properties of the 
spiking noise to determine the pushing vectors.
During the ongoing use phase, the pushing vec-
tors are each scaled by the number of spikes emitted 
by the corresponding neuron at each time step (Figure 
39–6B). At each time step, the decoded movement is 
the vector sum of the scaled pushing vectors across all 
neurons. The decoded movement represents a change 
in position during one time step (ie, velocity). The 
BMI cursor (or limb) position (Figure 39–6C) is then 
updated according to the decoded movement.
To further improve decoding accuracy, the esti-
mation of velocity at each time step should take into 
account not only current neural activity (as illustrated 
in Figure 39–6), but also neural activity in the recent 
past. The rationale is that movement velocity (and 
other kinematic variables) changes gradually over 
time, and so neural activity in the recent past should 
Figure 39–6  (Opposite) Continuous decoding.
A. During the calibration phase, a pushing vector is determined 
for each of 97 neurons. Each vector represents one neuron 
and indicates how one spike from that neuron drives a change 
in position per time step (ie, velocity). Thus, the units of the 
plot are millimeters per spike during one time step. Different 
neurons can have pushing vectors of different magnitudes and 
directions.
B. During ongoing use, spikes are recorded from the same 
neurons as in panel A during movement execution. At each 
time step, the new length of an arrow is obtained by starting 
with its previous length in panel A and scaling it by the number 
of spikes produced by the neuron of the same color during that 
time step. If a neuron does not fire, there is no arrow for that 
neuron during that time step. The decoded movement (black 
arrow) is the vector sum of the scaled pushing vectors, repre-
senting a change in position during one time step (ie, velocity). 
For a given neuron, the direction of its scaled pushing vectors 
is the same across all time steps. However, the magnitudes of 
the scaled pushing vectors can change from one time step to 
the next depending on the level of activity of that neuron.
C. The decoded movements from panel B are used to update 
the position of a computer cursor (orange dot), robotic limb, or 
paralyzed limb at each time step.
be informative about the movement velocity. This 
can be achieved by temporally smoothing the neural 
activity before applying a PVA or OLE or by using a 
Kalman filter to define a statistical model describing 
how movement velocity (or other kinematic variables) 
changes smoothly over time. With a Kalman filter, the 
estimated velocity is a combination of the scaled push-
ing vectors at the current time step (as in Figure 39–6B) 
and the estimated velocity at the previous time step. 
Indeed, continuous decoding algorithms that take into 
account neural activity in the recent past have been 
shown to provide higher decoding accuracy than those 
that do not. The Kalman filter and its extensions are 
widely used in BMIs and among the most accurate 
continuous decoding algorithms available.
Increases in Performance and Capabilities 
of Motor and Communication BMIs Enable 
Clinical Translation
Patients with paralysis wish to perform activities of 
daily living. For people with ALS or upper spinal cord 
injury who are unable to speak or to move their arms, 
the most desired tasks are often the ability to commu-
nicate, to move a prosthetic (robotic) arm, or to move 
the paralyzed arm by stimulating the musculature. 
Having described how neural signals can be read out 
from motor areas of the brain and how these electrical 
signals can be decoded to arrive at BMI control signals, 
we now describe recent progress toward restoring 
these abilities.
The majority of laboratory studies are carried out 
in able-bodied nonhuman primates, although paralysis 
is sometimes transiently induced in important control 
experiments. Three types of experimental paradigms 
are in broad use, differing in the exact way in which 
arm behavior is instructed and visual feedback is pro-
vided during BMI calibration and ongoing use. Setting 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    963
A  Calibration phase
B  Ongoing use phase
C  Decoded cursor movements
5 mm/spike
5 mm
5 mm
0 ms
20 ms
40 ms
60 ms
0–20 ms
20–40 ms
40–60 ms
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
Neuron 97
Individual neuron
pushing vectors
Decoded
movement
Neuron 3
2 spikes
1 spike
2 spikes
2 spikes
4 spikes
5 spikes
1 spike
2 spikes
3 spikes


===== Page 9 =====
964    Part V / Movement
Figure 39–7  A communication brain–machine interface can 
control a computer cursor using a discrete decoder based 
on neural activity during the preparation epoch.
A. After a monkey touched a central target (large yellow 
square) and fixated a central point (red +), a peripheral target 
(small yellow square) appeared and the monkey prepared 
to reach to it. Spike counts were taken during the preparation 
epoch and fed into a discrete decoder. The duration of the 
period in which spike counts are taken (ie, width of light blue 
shading) affects decoding performance and information  
transfer rate (ITR) (see panel B). Based on the spike counts 
(blue square), the discrete decoder guessed the target the 
monkey was preparing to reach to.
B. Decoding accuracy (black) and information transfer rate (ITR, 
bits/s; red) are shown for different trial lengths and numbers of 
targets. Trial length was equal to the duration of the period in which 
spike counts were taken (varied during the experiment) plus 190 
ms (fixed during the experiment). The latter provided time for visual 
information of the peripheral target to reach the premotor cortex 
(150 ms), plus the time to decode the target location from neural 
activity and render the decoded target location on the screen  
(40 ms). (Adapted, with permission, from Santhanam et al. 2006.)
these differences aside, we focus below on how BMIs 
function and perform. We also highlight recent pilot 
clinical trials with people with paralysis.
Subjects Can Type Messages Using  
Communication BMIs
To investigate how quickly and accurately a commu-
nication BMI employing a discrete decoder and prepa-
ration activity can operate, monkeys were trained to 
fixate and touch central targets and prepare to reach to 
a peripheral target that could appear at one of several 
different locations on a computer screen. Spikes were 
recorded using electrodes implanted in the premotor 
cortex. The number of spikes occurring during a par-
ticular time window during the preparation epoch was 
used to predict where the monkey was preparing to 
reach (Figure 39–7A). If the decoded target matched 
the peripheral target, a liquid reward was provided to 
indicate a successful trial.
By varying the duration of the period in which 
spike counts are taken and the number of possible tar-
gets, it was possible to assess the speed and accuracy 
2 targets
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Decoding accuracy (% correct)
Neurons
200 300 400 500
4 targets
200 300 400 500
8 targets
200 300 400 500
Trial length (ms)
16 targets
200 300 400 500
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
ITR (bps)
Target
onset
Time
Discrete decoder
A  Experimental setup
B Single-trial decoding accuracy decreases and
ITR increases as more target locations are used
Down
Right
Up
Left
Neuron 1 (spikes/s)
Neuron 2
(spikes/s)
of target selections (Figure 39–7B). Decoding accuracy 
tended to increase with the period in which spike 
counts are taken because spiking noise is more easily 
averaged out in longer periods.
An important metric for efficient communication 
is information transfer rate (ITR), which measures 
how much information can be conveyed per unit time. 
A basic unit of information is a bit, which is specified 
by a binary value (0 or 1). For example, with three 
bits of information, one can specify which of 23 = 8  
possible targets or keys to press. Thus, the metric for 
ITR is bits per second (bps). ITR increases with the 
period in which spike counts are taken, then declines. 
The reason is that ITR takes into account both how accu-
rately and how quickly each target is selected. Beyond 
some point of diminishing returns of a longer period, 
accuracy fails to increase rapidly enough to overcome 
the slowdown in target-selection rate accompanying a 
longer period.
Overall performance (ITR) increases with the num-
ber of possible targets, despite a decrease in decoding 
accuracy, because each correct target selection conveys 
more information. Fast and accurate communication 


