===== Page 1 =====
492    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–19  Local interneurons in the spinal cord integrate 
descending and afferent nociceptive pathways.
A. Nociceptive afferent fibers, local interneurons, and descend-
ing fibers interconnect in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (see 
also Figure 20–3B). Nociceptive fibers terminate on second-
order projection neurons. Local GABAergic and enkephalin-
containing inhibitory interneurons exert both pre- and 
postsynaptic inhibitory actions at these synapses. Serotonergic 
and noradrenergic neurons in the brain stem activate the local 
interneurons and also suppress the activity of the projection 
neurons. Loss of these inhibitory controls contributes to  
ongoing pain and pain hypersensitivity.
B. Regulation of nociceptive signals at dorsal horn synapses.  
1. Activation of a nociceptor leads to the release of  
glutamate and neuropeptides from the primary sensory 
neuron, producing an excitatory postsynaptic potential in the 
projection neuron. 2. Opiates decrease the duration of the 
postsynaptic potential, probably by reducing Ca2+ influx, and 
thus decrease the release of transmitter from the primary 
sensory terminals. In addition, opiates hyperpolarize the 
dorsal horn neurons by activating a K+ conductance and thus 
decrease the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential in the 
dorsal horn neuron.
Norepinephrine
Serotonin
Nociceptor
sensory
neuron
Projection
neuron
Morphine
Morphine
Control
No sensory input
Sensory input
Neuropeptides
Ca2+
Glutamate
1  Sensory input alone
2  Sensory input + opiates/opioids
Control
Ca2+
Enkephalin
Enkephalin
No sensory input + opiates
Sensory input + opiates
Enkephalin
Enkephalin
Control
B  Effects of opiates and opioids on nociceptor signal transmission
Nociceptor
A  Nociceptor circuitry in the dorsal horn 
Opiate
Control
Projection
neuron
Enkephalin
interneuron
To higher 
centers
+
–
–
+


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    493
Opiates also act on receptors in the cerebral cor-
tex. There is evidence, for example, that opiates can 
influence the affective component of the pain expe-
rience by an action in the anterior cingulate gyrus. 
Most interestingly, there is considerable evidence 
that placebo analgesia involves endorphin release 
and can be reversed by naloxone. This finding 
emphasizes that responses to a placebo do not indi-
cate that the pain was somehow imaginary. Moreo-
ver, placebo analgesia is a component of the overall 
analgesic action of any pain-relieving drug, includ-
ing morphine, provided that the patient believes that 
the treatment will be effective. On the other hand, 
some other psychological interventions to relieve 
pain, namely hypnosis, do not appear to involve 
release of endorphins.
Tolerance to and Dependence on Opioids Are 
Distinct Phenomena
The chronic use of morphine invites major problems, 
most notably tolerance and psychological depend-
ence (addiction) (Chapter 43). The repeated use of 
morphine for pain relief can cause patients to develop 
resistance to the analgesic effects of the drug, such 
that progressively higher drug doses are required to 
achieve the same therapeutic effect. One theory holds 
that tolerance results from uncoupling of the opioid 
receptor from its G protein transducer. However, as 
the binding of naloxone to µ-opioid receptors can pre-
cipitate withdrawal symptoms in tolerant subjects, it 
appears that the opioid receptor is still active in the 
tolerance state. Tolerance may therefore also reflect a 
cellular response to the activation of opioid receptors, 
a response that counteracts the effects of the opiate 
and resets the system. It follows that when the opiate 
is abruptly removed or naloxone is administered, this 
compensatory response is unmasked and withdrawal 
results.
Such physiological tolerance differs from depend-
ence/addiction, which is a psychological craving for 
the drug, one that is associated with its misuse and that 
contributes to opiate use disorders. Given the alarm-
ing increases in opiate-related deaths, either because of 
misuse and overdose of prescription opioids or a host 
of socioeconomic factors, further studies of the mecha-
nisms that contribute to the development of and dis-
tinguish between tolerance and addiction are essential. 
Unquestionably, morphine and other opiate drugs are 
very useful in the management of postoperative pain. 
Whether they are equally effective for the management 
of chronic pain in noncancer patients remains contro-
versial and needs further study.
Highlights
  1.  Peripheral nociceptive axons, with cell bodies 
in dorsal root ganglia, include small-diameter 
unmyelinated (C) and myelinated (Aδ) afferents. 
Larger diameter Aβ afferents respond only to 
innocuous stimulation but, following injury, can 
activate central nervous system pain circuitry.
  2.  All nociceptors use glutamate as their excitatory 
neurotransmitter; many also express an excita-
tory neuropeptide cotransmitter, such as sub-
stance P or CGRP.
  3.  Nociceptors are also molecularly distinguished 
by their expression of different receptors sensi-
tive to temperature, plant products, mechani-
cal stimuli, or ATP. As many of these molecules, 
including the Nav1.7 subtype of voltage-gated 
Na+ channels, are exclusively expressed in sen-
sory neurons, their selective pharmacological 
targeting suggests a novel approach to analgesic 
drug development.
  4.  Nociceptors terminate in the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord where they excite interneurons and 
projection neurons. Neuropeptides are also 
released from the peripheral terminals of nocice-
ptors and contribute to neurogenic inflammation, 
including vasodilatation of and extravasation 
from peripheral vessels. The development of 
antibodies to CGRP, to block vasodilation, is a 
new approach to managing migraine.
  5.  A major brain target of dorsal horn projection 
neurons is the ventroposterolateral thalamus, 
which processes location and intensity features 
of the painful stimulus. Other neurons target 
the parabrachial nucleus (PB) of the dorsolat-
eral pons. PB neurons, in turn, project to limbic 
regions of the brain, which process affective/
emotional features of the pain experience.
  6.  Allodynia, pain produced by an innocuous stim-
ulus, results in part from peripheral sensitization 
of nociceptors. Peripheral sensitization occurs 
when there is tissue injury and inflammation and 
involves NSAID-sensitive production of prosta-
glandins, which lower the threshold for activat-
ing nociceptors. A great advantage of NSAIDs 
is that they act in the periphery, illustrating the 
importance of efforts to develop pharmacother-
apies, such as antibodies to NGF, which cannot 
cross the blood–brain barrier, thus reducing their 
likelihood of having adverse side effects in the 
central nervous system.
  7.  Hyperalgesia (exacerbated pain in response to 
a painful stimuli) and allodynia also arise from 


===== Page 3 =====
494    Part IV / Perception
altered activity in the dorsal horn—a central sen-
sitization process that contributes to spontane-
ous activity of pain-transmission neurons and 
amplification of nociceptive signals. Glutamate 
activation of spinal cord NMDA receptors and 
activation of microglia and astrocytes contribute, 
in particular, to the neuropathic pains that can 
occur after peripheral nerve injury. Understand-
ing the consequences of central sensitization is 
critical to preventing the transition from acute to 
chronic pain.
  8.  Under normal conditions, input carried by large-
diameter, nonnociceptive afferents can reduce 
the transmission of nociceptive information to 
the brain by engaging GABAergic inhibitory cir-
cuits in the dorsal horn. This inhibitory control is 
the basis of the pain relief produced by vibration 
and transcutaneous electrical stimulation. How-
ever, when injury induces central sensitization, 
Aβ input mediates mechanical allodynia.
  9.  Opiates are the most effective pharmacologi-
cal tool for the management of severe pain. 
The inhibitory action of opiates and the related 
endogenous opioid peptides result from reduced 
neurotransmitter release or by hyperpolariza-
tion of postsynaptic neurons. All opioid actions 
can be blocked by the opiate receptor antagonist 
naloxone.
10.  Endogenous opioids, including enkephalin and 
dynorphin, and their opioid receptor targets are 
not expressed only in pain-relevant areas of the 
brain. As a result, systemic administration of opi-
ates is associated with many adverse side effects, 
including constipation, respiratory depression, 
and activation of the reward system. The latter 
can lead to psychological dependence and even-
tual misuse. Many of these adverse side effects 
limit opiate use for long-term pain control.
11.  The brain not only receives nociceptive informa-
tion leading to a perception of pain, but also reg-
ulates the output of the spinal cord to reduce pain 
by an endorphin-mediated pain control system. 
Electrical stimulation of the midbrain periaque-
ductal gray can engage a descending inhibitory 
control system, likely involving endorphins, 
which reduces the transmission of pain messages 
from the spinal cord to the brain.
12.  The pain relief produced by some psychological 
manipulations (e.g., placebo analgesia) involves 
endorphin release; other manipulations, such as 
hypnosis, do not.
13.  Tolerance and psychological dependence can 
arise after prolonged opiate use. Tolerance is 
manifested as a requirement for higher doses 
of the opiate to achieve the same physiological 
endpoint. Psychological dependence, in contrast, 
involves activation of the brain’s reward system 
and the development of craving that can lead to 
misuse of opiates. Development of nonreward-
ing opioid analgesics, which can regulate the 
sensory-discriminative but not the emotional 
features of the pain experience, may significantly 
impact the ongoing opioid epidemic.
 Allan I. Basbaum 
Selected Reading
Basbaum AI, Bautista DM, Scherrer G, Julius D. 2009 Cellular 
and molecular mechanisms of pain. Cell 139:267–284.
Basbaum AI, Fields HL. 1984. Endogenous pain control sys-
tems: brainstem spinal pathways and endorphin circuitry. 
Annu Rev Neurosci 7:309–338.
Dib-Hajj SD, Geha P, Waxman SG. 2017. Sodium channels in 
pain disorders: pathophysiology and prospects for treat-
ment. Pain 158(Suppl 1):S97–S107.
Grace PM, Hutchinson MR, Maier SF, Watkins LR. 2014. 
Pathological pain and the neuroimmune interface. Nat 
Rev Immunol 14:217–231.
Ji RR, Chamessian A, Zhang YQ. 2016. Pain regulation by non-
neuronal cells and inflammation. Science 354:572–577.
Peirs C, Seal RP. 2016. Neural circuits for pain: recent 
advances and current views. Science 354:578–584.
Tracey I. 2017. Neuroimaging mechanisms in pain: from dis-
covery to translation. Pain 158:S115–S122.
References
Akil H, Mayer DJ, Liebeskind JC. 1976. Antagonism of 
stimulation-produced analgesia by naloxone, a narcotic 
antagonist. Science 191:961–962.
Bautista DM, Jordt SE, Nikai T, et al. 2006. TRPA1 mediates 
the inflammatory actions of environmental irritants and 
proalgesic agents. Cell 124:1269–1282.
Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, et al. 2007. The menthol 
receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmen-
tal cold. Nature 44:204–208.
Benedetti F. 2014. Placebo effects: from the neurobiological 
paradigm to translational implications. Neuron 84:623–637.
Bliss TV, Collingridge GL, Kaang BK, Zhuo M. 2016. Synap-
tic plasticity in the anterior cingulate cortex in acute and 
chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:485–496.
Caterina MJ, Schumacher MA, Tominaga M, Rosen TA, 
Levine JD, Julius D. 1997. The capsaicin receptor: a 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    495
heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature 
389:816–824.
Colloca L, Ludman T, Bouhassira D, et al. 2017. Neuropathic 
pain. Nat Rev Dis Primers 3:17002.
Cox JJ, Reimann F, Nicholas AK, et al. 2006. An SCN9A chan-
nelopathy causes congenital inability to experience pain. 
Nature 444:894–898.
Craig AD, Bushnell MC. 1994. The thermal grill illusion: 
unmasking the burn of cold pain. Science 265:252–255.
Darland T, Heinricher MM, Grandy DK. 1988. Orphanin 
FQ/nociceptin: a role in pain and analgesia, but so much 
more. Trends Neurosci 21:215–221.
De Biasi S, Rustioni A 1990. Ultrastructural immunocy-
tochemical localization of excitatory amino acids in 
the somatosensory system. J Histochem Cytochem 38: 
1745–1754.
De Felice M, Eyde N, Dodick D, et al. 2013. Capturing the 
aversive state of cephalic pain preclinically. Ann Neurol 
74:257–265.
Dejerine J, Roussy G. 1906. Le syndrome thalamique. Rev 
Neurol 14:521–532.
Dhaka A, Viswanath V, Patapoutian A. 2006. Trp ion chan-
nels and temperature sensation. Annu Rev Neurosci 
29:135–161.
Fields H. 1987 Pain. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Flor H, Nikolajsen L, Jensen TS. 2006. Phantom limb pain: a 
case of maladaptive CNS plasticity? Nature Rev Neurosci 
7:873–881.
Günther T, Dasgupta P, Mann A, et al. 2017. Targeting multi-
ple opioid receptors—improved analgesics with reduced 
side effects? Br J Pharmacol 2018:2857–2868.
Han L, Ma C, Liu Q, et al. 2013. A subpopulation of nocicep-
tors specifically linked to itch. Nat Neurosci 16:174–182.
Hosobuchi Y. 1986. Subcortical electrical stimulation for 
control of intractable pain in humans: report of 122 cases 
1970–1984. J Neurosurg 64:543–553.
Jordt SE, Bautista DM, Chuang HH, et al. 2004. Mustard oils 
and cannabinoids excite sensory nerve fibres through the 
TRP channel ANKTM1. Nature 427:260–265.
Jordt SE, McKemy DD, Julius D. 2003. Lessons from peppers 
and peppermint: the molecular basis of thermosensation. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:487–492.
Kelleher JH, Tewari D, McMahon SB. 2017. Neurotrophic fac-
tors and their inhibitors in chronic pain treatment. Neuro-
biol Dis 97:127–138.
Kuner R, Flor H. 2016. Structural plasticity and reorganisa-
tion in chronic pain. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:20–30.
Lane NE, Schnitzer TJ, Birbara CA, et al. 2010. Tanezumab 
for the treatment of pain from osteoarthritis of the knee. 
N Engl J Med 363:1521–1531.
Lenz FA, Gracely RH, Romanoski AJ, Hope EJ, Rowland LH, 
Dougherty PM. 1995. Stimulation in the human soma-
tosensory thalamus can reproduce both the affective and 
sensory dimensions of previously experienced pain. Nat 
Med 1:910–913.
Mantyh PW, Rogers SD, Honore P, et al. 1997. Inhibition 
of hyperalgesia by ablation of lamina I spinal neurons 
expressing the substance P receptor. Science 278:275–279.
Matthes HW, Maldonado R, Simonin F, et al. 1996. Loss of 
morphine-induced analgesia, reward effect and with-
drawal symptoms in mice lacking the µ-opioid-receptor 
gene. Nature 383:819–823.
McDonnell A, Schulman B, Ali Z, et al. 2016. Inherited eryth-
romelalgia due to mutations in SCN9A: natural history, 
clinical phenotype and somatosensory profile. Brain 
39:1052–1065.
Melzack R, Wall PD. 1965. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. 
Science 150:971–979.
Merzenich MM, Jenkins WM. 1993. Reorganization of cor-
tical representations of the hand following alterations of 
skin inputs induced by nerve injury, skin island transfers, 
and experience. J Hand Ther 6:89–104.
Perl ER. 2007. Ideas about pain, a historical review. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 8:71–80.
Raja SN, Campbell JN, Meyer RA. 1984. Evidence for dif-
ferent mechanisms of primary and secondary hyperal-
gesia following heat injury to the glabrous skin. Brain 
107:1179–1188.
Ross SE, Mardinly AR, McCord AE, et al. 2010. Loss of inhibi-
tory interneurons in the dorsal spinal cord and elevated 
itch in Bhlhb5 mutant mice. Neuron 65:886–898.
Sorge RE, Mapplebeck JC, Rosen S, et al. 2015. Different 
immune cells mediate mechanical pain hypersensitivity 
in male and female mice. Nat Neurosci 18:1081–1083.
Talbot JD, Marrett S, Evans AC, Meyer E, Bushnell MC, 
Duncan GH. 1991. Multiple representations of pain in 
human cerebral cortex. Science 251:1355–1358.
Todd AJ. 2010. Neuronal circuitry for pain processing in the 
dorsal horn. Nat Rev Neurosci. 11:823–836.
Tominaga M, Caterina MJ. 2004. Thermosensation and pain. 
J Neurobiol 61:3–12.
Tracey I, Mantyh PW. 2007. The cerebral signature for pain 
perception and its modulation. Neuron 55:377–391.
Tso AR, Goadsby PJ. 2017. Anti-CGRP monoclonal anti-
bodies: the next era of migraine prevention? Curr Treat 
Options Neurol 19:27.
Wercberger R. Basbaum AI. 2019. Spinal cord projection 
neurons: A superficial, and also deep analysis. Curr Opin 
Physiol 11:109–115.
Woo SH, Ranade S, Weyer AD, et al. 2014. Piezo2 is required 
for 
Merkel-cell 
mechanotransduction. 
Nature 
509: 
622–626.
Woolf CJ. 1983. Evidence for a central component of post-
injury pain hypersensitivity. Nature 306:686–688.
Yaksh TL, Fisher C, Hockman T, Wiese A. 2017. Current and 
future issues in the development of spinal agents for the 
management of pain. Curr Neuropharmacol 15:232–259.
Zeilhofer HU, Wildner H, Yévenes GE. 2012. Fast synaptic 
inhibition in spinal sensory processing and pain control. 
Physiol Rev 92:193–235.


===== Page 5 =====
21
The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing
complex visual environments is an extraordinary com-
putational achievement that artificial vision systems 
have yet to duplicate. Vision is used not only for object 
recognition but also for guiding our movements, and 
these separate functions are mediated by at least two 
parallel and interacting pathways.
The existence of parallel pathways in the visual 
system raises one of the central questions of cognition, 
the binding problem: How are different types of infor-
mation carried by discrete pathways brought together 
into a coherent visual image?
Visual Perception Is a Constructive Process
Vision is often incorrectly compared to the operation of 
a camera. A camera simply reproduces point-by-point 
the light intensities in one plane of the visual field. 
The visual system, in contrast, does something funda-
mentally different. It interprets the scene and parses it 
into distinct components, separating foreground from 
background. The visual system is less accurate than a 
camera at certain tasks, such as quantifying the abso-
lute level of brightness or identifying spectral color. 
However, it excels at tasks such as recognizing a charg-
ing animal (or a speeding car) whether in bright sun-
light or at dusk, in an open field or partly occluded by 
trees (or other cars). And it does so rapidly to let the 
viewer respond and, if necessary, escape.
A potentially unifying insight reconciling the vis-
ual system’s remarkable ability to grasp the bigger pic-
ture with its inaccuracy regarding details of the input 
is that vision is a biological process that has evolved 
in step with our ecological needs. This insight helps 
Visual Perception Is a Constructive Process
Visual Processing Is Mediated by the Geniculostriate 
Pathway
Form, Color, Motion, and Depth Are Processed in Discrete 
Areas of the Cerebral Cortex
The Receptive Fields of Neurons at Successive Relays in the 
Visual Pathway Provide Clues to How the Brain Analyzes 
Visual Form
The Visual Cortex Is Organized Into Columns of  
Specialized Neurons
Intrinsic Cortical Circuits Transform Neural Information
Visual Information Is Represented by a Variety of Neural 
Codes
Highlights
We are so familiar with seeing, that it takes a leap of imagi-
nation to realize that there are problems to be solved. But 
consider it. We are given tiny distorted upside-down images 
in the eyes and we see separate solid objects in surround-
ing space. From the patterns of stimulation on the retina we 
perceive the world of objects and this is nothing short of a 
miracle.
—Richard L. Gregory, Eye and Brain, 1966
M
ost of our impressions  of the world and 
our memories of it are based on sight. Yet the 
mechanisms that underlie vision are not at all 
obvious. How do we perceive form and movement? 
How do we distinguish colors? Identifying objects in 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    497
explain why the visual system is so efficient at extract-
ing useful information such as the identities of objects 
independent of lighting conditions, while giving less 
importance to aspects like the exact nature of the ambi-
ent light. Moreover, vision does so using previously 
learned rules about the structure of the world. Some 
of these rules appeared to have become wired into our 
neural circuits over the course of evolution. Others are 
more plastic and help the brain guess at the scene pre-
sented to the eyes based on the individual’s past expe-
rience. This complex, purposeful processing happens 
at all levels of the visual system. It starts even at the 
retina, which is specialized to pick out object bounda-
ries rather than creating a point-by-point representa-
tion of uniform surfaces.
This constructive nature of visual perception has 
only recently been fully appreciated. Earlier thinking 
about sensory perception was greatly influenced by 
the British empiricist philosophers, notably John Locke, 
David Hume, and George Berkeley, who thought of per-
ception as an atomistic process in which simple sensory 
elements, such as color, shape, and brightness, were 
assembled in an additive way, component by compo-
nent. The modern view that perception is an active and 
creative process that involves more than just the infor-
mation provided to the retina has its roots in the phi-
losophy of Immanuel Kant and was developed in detail 
in the early 20th century by the German psychologists 
Max Wertheimer, Kurt Koffka, and Wolfgang Köhler, 
who founded the school of Gestalt psychology.
The German term Gestalt means configuration or 
form. The central idea of the Gestalt psychologists is 
that what we see about a stimulus—the perceptual 
interpretation we make of any visual object—depends 
not just on the properties of the stimulus but also on 
its context, on other features in the visual field. The 
Gestalt psychologists argued that the visual system 
processes sensory information about the shape, color, 
distance, and movement of objects according to com-
putational rules inherent in the system. The brain has a 
way of looking at the world, a set of expectations that 
derives in part from experience and in part from built-
in neural wiring.
Max Wertheimer wrote: “There are entities where 
the behavior of the whole cannot be derived from its 
individual elements nor from the way these elements 
fit together; rather the opposite is true: the proper-
ties of any of the parts are determined by the intrinsic 
structural laws of the whole.” In the early part of the 
20th century, the Gestalt psychologists worked out the 
laws of perception that determine how we group ele-
ments in the visual scene, including similarity, proxim-
ity, and good continuation.
We see a uniform six-by-six array of dots as either 
rows or columns because of the visual system’s ten-
dency to impose a pattern. If the dots in each row are 
similar, we are more likely to see a pattern of alternat-
ing rows (Figure 21–1A). If the dots in each column 
are closer together than those in the rows, we are more 
disposed to see a pattern of columns (Figure 21–1B). 
The principle of good continuation is an important 
basis for linking line elements into unified shapes 
(Figure 21–1C). It is also seen in the phenomenon of 
contour saliency, whereby smooth contours tend to 
pop out from complex backgrounds (Figure 21–1D). 
The Gestalt features that we are disposed to pick out 
are also ones that characterize objects in natural scenes. 
Statistical studies of natural scenes show that object 
boundaries are likely to contain visual elements that 
lie in close proximity, are continuous across intersec-
tions, or form smooth contours. It is tempting to specu-
late that the formal features of objects in natural scenes 
created evolutionary pressure on our visual systems to 
develop neural circuits that have made us sensitive to 
those features.
Separating the figure and background in a visual 
scene is an important step in object recognition. At dif-
ferent moments, the same elements in the visual field 
can be organized into a recognizable figure or serve as 
part of the background for other figures (Figure 21–2). 
This process of segmentation relies not only on certain 
geometric principles, but also on cognitive influences 
such as attention and expectation. Thus, a priming 
stimulus or an internal representation of object shape 
can facilitate the association of visual elements into a 
unified percept (Figure 21–3). This internal representa-
tion can take many different forms reflecting the wide 
range of time scales and mechanisms of neural encod-
ing. It could consist of transient reverberating spiking 
activity selective to a shape or a decision, lasting a frac-
tion of a second, or the selective modulation of synap-
tic weights during a particular context of a task or an 
expected shape, or circuit changes that could comprise 
a long-term memory.
The brain analyzes a visual scene at three levels: low, 
intermediate, and high (Figure 21–4). At the lowest level, 
which we consider in the next chapter (Chapter 22), 
visual attributes such as local contrast, orientation, 
color, and movement are discriminated. The interme-
diate level involves analysis of the layout of scenes 
and of surface properties, parsing the visual image 
into surfaces and global contours, and distinguishing 
foreground from background (Chapter 23). The high-
est level involves object recognition (Chapter 24). Once 
a scene has been parsed by the brain and objects rec-
ognized, the objects can be matched with memories of 


===== Page 7 =====
Figure 21–1  Organizational rules of visual perception.  To 
link the elements of a visual scene into unified percepts, the 
visual system relies on organizational rules such as similarity, 
proximity, and good continuation.
A. Because the dots in alternating rows have the same color, 
an overall pattern of blue and white rows is perceived.
B. The dots in the columns are closer together than those in 
the rows, leading to the perception of columns.
C. Line segments are perceptually linked when they are col-
linear. In the top set of lines, one is more likely to see line seg-
ment a as belonging with c rather than d. In the bottom set, a 
and c are perceptually linked because they maintain the same 
curvature, whereas a and b appear to be discontinuous.
D. The principle of good continuation is also seen in contour 
saliency. On the right, a smooth contour of line elements pops 
out from the background, whereas the jagged contour on the 
left is lost in the background. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Field, Hayes, and Hess 1993. Copyright © 1993 Elsevier Ltd.)
Figure 21–2  Object recognition depends on segmentation 
of a scene into foreground and background. Recognition 
of the white salamanders in this image depends on the brain 
“locating” the white salamanders in the foreground and the 
brown and black salamanders in the background. The image 
also illustrates the role of higher influences in segmentation: 
One can consciously select any of the three colors as the 
foreground. (Reproduced, with permission, from M.C. Escher’s 
“Symmetry Drawing E56” © 2010 The M.C. Escher Company-
Holland. All rights reserved. www.mcescher.com.)
C  Good continuation
D  Contour saliency 
B  Proximity
A  Similarity
a
a
b
b
d
c
c


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    499
Figure 21–3  Expectation and perceptual 
task play a critical role in what is seen. It 
is difficult to separate the dark and white 
patches in this figure into foreground and 
background without additional information. 
This figure immediately becomes recogniz-
able after viewing the priming image on  
page 501. In this example, higher-order 
representations of shape guide lower-order 
processes of surface segmentation.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from  
Porter 1954. Copyright 1954 by the Board of 
Trustees of the University of Illinois. Used 
with permission of the University of Illinois 
Press.)
shapes and their associated meanings. Vision also has 
an important role in guiding body movement, particu-
larly hand movement (Chapter 25).
In vision, as in other cognitive operations, vari-
ous features—motion, depth, form, and color—occur 
together in a unified percept. This unity is achieved 
not by one hierarchical neural system but by multiple 
areas in the brain that are fed by parallel but interact-
ing neural pathways. Because distributed processing 
is one of the main organizational principles in the neu-
robiology of vision, one must have a grasp of the ana-
tomical pathways of the visual system to understand 
fully the physiological description of visual processing 
in later chapters.
In this chapter, we lay the foundation for under-
standing the neural circuitry and organizational princi-
ples of the visual pathways. These principles apply quite 
broadly and are relevant not only for the multiple areas of 
the brain concerned with vision but also for other types of 
sensory information processing by the brain.
Visual Processing Is Mediated by the 
Geniculostriate Pathway
The brain’s analysis of visual scenes begins in the two 
retinas, which transform visual input using a strategy 
of parallel processing (Chapter 22). This important 
neural computation strategy is utilized at all stages of 
the visual pathway as well as in other sensory areas. 
The pixel-like bits of visual input falling on individual 
photoreceptors—rods and cones—are analyzed by 
retinal circuits to extract some 20 local features, such 
as the local contrasts of dark versus light, red versus 
green, and blue versus yellow. These features are com-
puted by different populations of specialized neural 
circuits forming independent processing modules that 
separately cover the visual field. Thus, each point in 
the visual field is processed in multiple channels that 
extract distinct aspects of the visual input simultane-
ously and in parallel. These parallel streams are then 
sent out along the axons of the retinal ganglion cells, 
the projection neurons of the retina, which form the 
optic nerves.
From the eye, the optic nerve extends to a midline 
crossing point, the optic chiasm. Beyond the chiasm, 
the fibers from each temporal hemiretina proceed to 
the ipsilateral hemisphere along the ipsilateral optic 
tract; fibers from the nasal hemiretinas cross to the 
contralateral hemisphere along the contralateral optic 
tract (Figure 21–5). Because the temporal hemiretina of 
one eye sees the same half of the visual field (hemi-
field) as the nasal hemiretina of the other, the partial 
decussation of fibers at the chiasm ensures that all 
the information about each hemifield is processed in 
the visual cortex of the contralateral hemisphere. The 
layout of the pathway also forms the basis for useful 
diagnostic information. As a consequence of the par-
ticular anatomy of this visual pathway, lesions at differ-
ent points along the pathway lead to visual deficits with 
different geometric shapes (Figure 21–5) that can be dis-
tinguished reliably through clinical examination. The 
deficit could be entirely monocular; if present in both 
eyes, it could affect noncorresponding or correspond-
ing parts of the visual field in the two eyes; it could be 
restricted to either the upper or the lower visual field or 
may extend into both, etc. Thus, the shape of the deficit 
could give valuable clues about type and location of the 


===== Page 9 =====
500    Part IV / Perception
Figure 21–4  A visual scene is analyzed at three levels.  Simple 
attributes of the visual environment are analyzed (low-level  
processing), and these low-level features are then used to 
parse the visual scene (intermediate-level processing): Local 
visual features are assembled into surfaces, objects are segre-
gated from background (surface segmentation), local orientation  
is integrated into global contours (contour integration), and 
surface shape is identified from shading and kinematic cues. 
Finally, surfaces and contours are used to identify the object 
(high-level processing). (M.C. Escher’s “Day and Night”.  
© 2020 The M.C. Escher Company—The Netherlands. All rights 
reserved. www.mcescher.com)
Surface depth
Surface segmentation
Object identiﬁcation
Shape discrimination
Object motion/
Shape from kinematic cues
Contrast
Disparity
Surface properties
Movement direction
Color
Contour integration
Orientation
Low-level 
processing
Intermediate-level 
processing
High-level 
processing


