===== Page 1 =====
1476    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–2  Ambiguous figures. If you stare at the figure  
on the left (the Rubin figure), you sometimes see a vase and 
sometimes two faces looking at each other. If you stare at  
the figure on the right (the Necker cube), you see a three-
dimensional cube, but the front face of the cube is  
sometimes seen at the bottom left and sometimes at the top 
right. In each figure, the brain finds two equally good, but mutu-
ally exclusive, interpretations of what is there. Our conscious 
perception spontaneously alternates between these two 
interpretations.
and delusional beliefs of patients with certain cogni-
tive disorders were once dismissed as beyond under-
standing. Cognitive neuroscience provides us with a 
framework for understanding how these experiences 
and beliefs can arise from specific alterations in normal 
cognitive mechanisms.
Differences Between Conscious and 
Unconscious Processes in Perception Can Be 
Seen in Exaggerated Form After Brain Damage
The relationship between sensory stimulation and 
perception is far from direct. Perception can change 
without any change in sensory stimulation, as illus-
trated by ambiguous figures such as the Rubin figure 
and the Necker cube (Figure 59–2). Conversely, a big 
change in sensory stimulation can occur without the 
observer being aware of this change—the perception 
remains constant. A compelling example of this is 
change blindness.
To demonstrate change blindness, two versions of 
a complex scene are constructed. In one well-known 
example developed by Ron Rensink, the picture con-
sists of a military transport plane standing on an air-
port runway. In one of the two versions, an engine is 
missing. If these two pictures are shown in alternation 
on a computer screen, but critically interspersed with 
a blank screen, it can take minutes to notice the dif-
ference even though it is immediately obvious when 
pointed out. (See Figure 25-8 for another example.)
In light of these phenomena, we can explore the 
neural activity associated with changes in perception 
when there is no change in sensory stimulation. Like-
wise, we can discover whether changes in sensory 
input are registered in the brain even if not repre-
sented in consciousness. We can ask whether there is 
some qualitative difference between the neural activity 
associated with conscious as opposed to unconscious 
processes.
Two important results have emerged from studies 
of the neural activity associated with specific types of 
conscious percepts. First, certain kinds of percepts are 
related to neural activity in specific areas of the brain. 
Those brain areas that are specialized for recognition 
of certain kinds of objects (eg, faces, words, land-
scapes) or for certain visual features (eg, color, motion) 
are more active when the object or the feature is con-
sciously perceived (Figure 59–3). For example, when 
we perceive the faces in the Rubin figure, there is more 
activity in the area of the fusiform gyrus, which is spe-
cialized for the processing of faces.
This observation also applies to deviant percep-
tion (hallucinations). After degeneration of the periph-
eral visual system leading to blindness, some patients 
experience intermittent visual hallucinations (Charles 
Bonnet syndrome). These hallucinations vary from one 
patient to another: Some patients see colored patches, 
others see grid-like patterns, and some even see faces. 
Dominic ffytche found that these hallucinations are 
associated with increased activity in the secondary 
visual cortex, and the content of the hallucination is 
related to the specific locus of activity (Figure 59–4). 
Schizophrenic patients frequently experience com-
plex auditory hallucinations, which usually have the 
form of voices talking to or about the patient. These 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1477
Figure 59–3  Neural activity associated with ambiguous 
visual information. An ambiguous stimulus was created by 
simultaneously presenting a face to one eye and a house to 
the other eye. Brain activity was measured while subjects 
observed these images. Subjects were instructed to press a 
button whenever a spontaneous switch in perception occurred 
(because of binocular rivalry). When the face is perceived (left), 
activity increases in the fusiform face area (FFA); when the 
house is perceived (right), activity increases in the parahip-
pocampal place area (PPA). (Abbreviation: MRI, magnetic reso-
nance imaging.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Tong et al. 
1998. Copyright © 1998 by Cell Press.)
FFA
PPA
FFA
PPA
House
Time from reported perceptual switch (s)
Face
% MRI signal
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
4
8
12
–8
–4
0
4
8
12
–8
–4
House
Face
Stimulus
Percept
PPA
FFA
hallucinations are associated with activity in the audi-
tory cortex.
These observations suggest that conscious experi-
ence may result from activity in certain cortical regions. 
This idea is difficult to test experimentally, but in the 
1950s, the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield found that 
electrical stimulation of the cortex in patients undergo-
ing neurosurgery can generate a conscious experience. 
More recently, it has been found that transcranial mag-
netic stimulation of the cortex in the region of V5/MT 
can lead to seeing moving light flashes.
The second important conclusion drawn from stud-
ies that seek to correlate neural activity and specific 
percepts is that activity in a specialized area is neces-
sary but not sufficient to yield conscious experience. For 
example, in the change blindness paradigm, subjects are 
often unaware of large changes in the picture they are 
viewing. If the change involves a face, activity is elicited 
in the fusiform gyrus whether or not the subject is aware 
of the change. But when the sensory change is also per-
ceived consciously, there is, in addition, activity in the 
parietal and frontal cortices (Figure 59–5).
These observations are relevant to our understand-
ing of unilateral neglect. Since objects on the left side 
still elicit neural activity in the visual cortex, it may 
be that the damage in the right parietal cortex simply 
prevents the formation of conscious representations of 
objects on the left side of space. Nevertheless, this sen-
sory activity can support an unconscious inference in 
patients that they would not want to live in the house 
that is burning on the left side.
Stimuli that do not enter awareness can also elicit 
overt responses. A face with a fearful expression elic-
its a fear response in the autonomic nervous system, 
measured as an increase in skin conductance (galvanic 
response) because of sweating. This response occurs 
even if the face is immediately followed by another 
visual stimulus, such that the face is not consciously 
perceived. There may be an advantage to having a 
rapid but low-resolution system for recognizing dan-
gerous things. We jump first; only later, on the basis of 
a slow, high-resolution system, are we able to identity 
the object that made us jump (Chapter 48). Damage in 
one or the other of these two recognition systems can 
explain certain otherwise puzzling neurological and 
psychiatric disorders.
Prosopagnosia is a perceptual disorder in which 
faces are no longer recognizable. The patient knows 


===== Page 3 =====
1478    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–4  Neural activity associated with visual halluci-
nations. Some patients with damage to the retina experience 
visual hallucinations. The location of the neural activity and 
the content of the hallucination are related. The experience of 
colors, patterns, objects, or faces is associated with heightened 
activity (red) in specific regions of inferior temporal cortex. The 
blue area is the fusiform gyrus. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from ffytche et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 Springer Nature.)
Subject 1
Subject 3
Subject 2
Subject 4
he is looking at a face but cannot recognize the face, 
even a beloved face known for years. The problem 
is specific to faces, since the patient may still be able 
to recognize the person from their clothes, gait, and 
voice. However, patients with prosopagnosia are able 
to identify faces unconsciously. They show autonomic 
responses to familiar faces and do better than chance 
when asked to guess whether or not a face shown to 
them belongs to a person who is familiar. In fact, their 
awareness of the autonomic (emotional) responses 
elicited by a face may enable them to judge familiarity.
Capgras syndrome, a delusion that is occasion-
ally observed in schizophrenic patients and in some 
patients suffering from brain injury or dementia, 
produces a more unsettling experience. These patients 
firmly believe that someone close to them, usually a 
husband or wife, has been replaced by an impostor. 
They claim that the person, although similar if not 
identical in appearance, is in fact someone else. Often, 
this delusion is acted on with the demand that the 
impostor leave the house.
Hadyn Ellis and Andy Young have suggested that 
this bizarre delusion is the mirror phenomenon of 
prosopagnosia. According to this view, the circuitry 
for face recognition is intact, but the circuitry that 
mediates the emotional response to the face is not. 
As a result, patients recognize the person in front of 
them but, because the emotional response is lacking, 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1479
Figure 59–5  Brain activity with and without aware-
ness. Activity in the fusiform face area increases when the face 
viewed by subjects changes, whether subjects are unaware of 
the change or conscious of it. When subjects are aware of the 
change, activity in parietal and frontal cortex also increases. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Beck et al. 2001.)
Fusiform gyrus
A  Unconscious detection
B  Conscious report
Parietal cortex
Frontal cortex
Parietal cortex
feel that there is something fundamentally wrong. This 
account has been partially confirmed by the observa-
tion that these patients do not have normal autonomic 
responses to familiar faces.
This explanation implies that Capgras delusions 
are not the consequence of disordered thinking but of 
disordered experience. A patient sees the face of his 
wife without having the normal emotional response. 
The conclusion that this is not his wife but an impostor 
is a cognitive response to this abnormal experience, the 
mind’s attempt to explain the experience.
The Control of Action Is Largely Unconscious
The sense that we are in control of our own actions is a 
major component of consciousness. But are we aware 
of all aspects of our own actions? David Milner and Mel 
Goodale studied a patient known as D.F. who demon-
strates a striking lack of awareness of certain aspects of 
her own actions. As a result of damage to her inferior 
temporal lobe caused by carbon monoxide poisoning, 
D.F. suffers from form agnosia—she is unable to identify 
the shapes of things. She cannot distinguish a square 
from an oblong card and cannot describe the orienta-
tion of a slot. Yet when she picks up the oblong card 
to place it through the slot, she orients her hand and 
forms her grasp appropriately because of the uncon-
scious operation of visuomotor circuits (Figure 59–6).
This sort of unconscious guidance is not unique to 
patients with brain damage. It is simply revealed more 
starkly in the case of D.F. because the system that nor-
mally brings visual information about shape into con-
sciousness is impaired. Indeed, we can all make rapid 
and accurate grasping movements without being 
aware of the perceptual and motor information that 
is being used to control these movements. Sometimes, 
we are not even aware of having made the movement. 
This largely unconscious system for visually guided 
reaching and grasping is analogous to, and probably 
overlaps with, the rapid but poor-resolution system 
associated with fear responses.
Although we may not be aware of the perceptual 
and motor details of actions like reaching and grasping, 


===== Page 5 =====
1480    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–6  Action can be controlled by unconscious  
stimuli. A patient, D.F., with damage to the inferior temporal 
cortex, is unable to recognize objects based on their shape 
(form agnosia). She cannot align the tablet with the orienta-
tion of the slot (perceptual matching) because she is not con-
sciously aware of the orientation of either the tablet or the slot. 
However, when she is asked to put the tablet through the slot 
in a quick movement, she orients her hand rapidly and accu-
rately. Presumably, the movement is driven by visuomotor  
computations of which the subject is unaware. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Milner and Goodale 1995.)
Figure 59–7  We experience our actions and their effects as 
bound together in time. When subjects are asked to press a 
button that triggers a sound 250 ms later, they experience their 
action and the sound as occurring closer together (subjective 
time) than they actually are (objective time). In contrast, when 
their finger moves involuntarily through trans cranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) of motor cortex, the movements and the 
sound are experienced as further apart compared to objective 
time. Temporal binding occurs only when the movement is 
intended and deliberate and thus is a marker of the experience 
of agency. (Based on Haggard, Clark, and Kalogeras 2002.)
Insertion of
card into slot
Control
Subject with damage to
ventral visual stream
Perceptual
orientation
matching
we are vividly aware of being in control of some of our 
actions—we are aware of a difference between actions 
that we cause and those that happen involuntarily. 
Benjamin Libet studied the phenomenon of voluntary 
action in controlled experiments. He asked his subjects 
to lift a finger “whenever they felt the urge to do so” 
and to report the time at which they had this urge. 
His subjects had no difficulty in reliably reporting the 
time of this subjective experience. At the same time, 
Libet used electroencephalography to measure the 
“readiness potential,” a change in brain activity that 
occurs up to 1 second before a subject makes any vol-
untary movement. The time at which subjects reported 
feeling the urge to lift a finger occurred hundreds 
of milliseconds after the beginning of this readiness 
potential. This result has generated much discussion 
among philosophers as well as neuroscientists con-
cerning the existence of free will. If brain activity can 
predict an action before a person is aware of having the 
urge to perform that action, does this mean that our 
experience of freely willing actions is an illusion?
Although Libet’s result has been widely repli-
cated, the relevance of his experimental protocol for 
our understanding of free will remains controversial. 
Lifting one finger is not an action that we often per-
form. Actions usually have goals. For example, we 
might press a button in order to ring a bell. When our 
actions are followed by the goal we expect, we feel 
that we are in control of our actions. It is this subjec-
tive experience that gives us a sense of agency, of being 
the cause of events. Applying Libet’s paradigm to such 
actions, Patrick Haggard discovered the phenomenon 
of “intentional binding.” When a deliberate movement 
(pressing a button) is followed by its intended goal 
(hearing a tone), these events are experienced subjec-
tively as bound together in time (Figure 59–7).
This temporal binding of our actions to their goals 
provides an empirical marker of our sense of agency, 
since a stronger sense of agency is associated with a 
greater degree of binding. If a movement occurs pas-
sively, caused for example by magnetic stimulation to 
the brain, then intentional binding is decreased; we 
actually perceive the time between movement and out-
come as longer than the actual physical time.
Our sense of agency is closely linked to our belief 
in free will and to the idea that people can be held 
Subjective time
Objective time
Tone
Tone
Tone
Action
250 ms
Voluntary 
action
Involuntary 
action
Action
Action


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1481
Figure 59–8  Actions can be modified unconsciously. Subjects 
are asked to draw a straight line with a computer mouse. They can 
see the line on the screen but not their hand movement. The com-
puter is programmed to systematically distort the line displayed 
on the screen. In the result shown here, the subject had to move 
his hand 10° to the left to produce a vertical line on the screen. 
Subjects are not aware of making such adjustments. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Fourneret and Jeannerod 1998. Copyright 
© 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd.)
responsible for their actions when these are performed 
deliberately. Intentional binding is increased when 
associated with outcomes that have moral conse-
quences. It is reduced for actions that have been com-
manded by others, rather than performed freely. These 
results do not address the question of whether or not 
free will exists, but they suggest that our conscious 
experience of acting freely has a major role in creating 
social norms of responsibility. Such norms are critical 
for maintaining social cohesion.
Unconscious inference occurs in the motor domain 
as well as the sensory domain. Our experience of 
agency is created from two components: our prior 
expectations and the sensory consequences of the 
outcome of the action. We are surprised if the actual 
sensations do not match what we expect, as when we 
pick up an object that is much lighter than anticipated 
(Chapter 30). If the outcome confirms our expectations, 
however, we pay little attention to the actual sensory 
evidence—we experience what we expected to happen 
rather than what actually happened.
Pierre Fourneret and Marc Jeannerod asked sub-
jects to draw a vertical line using a computer’s mouse. 
The subjects could not see their hand and so could not 
see that the computer created a distortion in the line 
displayed on the screen. The striking result was that 
subjects were not aware that they had moved their 
hand at an angle of 10° to the left to produce the vertical 
Graphics
tablet
Onset of
perturbation 
Line
displayed
Actual hand 
movement
10
Adjustment made 
unconsciously
Target
Computer
Start point 
line on the screen (Figure 59–8). This lack of awareness 
occurred for deviations of up to 15°. When subjects 
were instructed not to look at the screen but simply 
repeat the movement they had just made, they did not 
reproduce the deviant movement they had made but 
instead drew the straight-ahead movement that they 
believed they had made. It would seem that as long as 
the goal is realized (drawing a straightforward line), 
we experience the expected sensory feedback, not the 
actual sensory feedback.
This phenomenon helps us understand some 
otherwise bizarre experiences. For example, after the 
amputation of a limb, some patients may experience a 
phantom limb. They still experience the urge to move 
the missing limb, and they can select specific move-
ments they want the missing limb to make. Their 
sensorimotor systems predict the proprioceptive sen-
sations they would feel if they were to move an intact 
limb, and it is these predicted sensations that underlie 
the sensation of a moving phantom limb.
After a limb has been paralyzed due to stroke, 
some patients believe that they are still able to move 
the limb (anosognosia for hemiplegia). Here, again, 
such patients can select the movements they want to 
make and are aware of their expectations about the 
movement. Despite the lack of sensory evidence that 
follows their attempt to initiate the movement, they 
believe that the movement did occur.


===== Page 7 =====
1482    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
The Conscious Recall of Memories Is a  
Creative Process
For most of us, memory is the conscious imaginative 
reliving of a past experience. If we take no account of 
subjective experience (the behaviorist stance), however, 
memory is a process by which our past experience alters 
future behavior. Our behavior is often affected by past 
experience, but without conscious recall of the memory 
or awareness of the influence it is having on us. Once 
again, this type of experience is seen most strikingly in 
patients with damage to specific areas of the brain.
Some patients become densely amnesic after dam-
age to the medial regions of the temporal lobe. They 
show no decline in intellect as measured by IQ tests 
but cannot remember anything for more than a few 
minutes. Although devastating, this memory impair-
ment is actually rather circumscribed. The problem 
is largely manifested in declarative memory, and most 
severely in a type of declarative memory called epi-
sodic memory, the ability to recollect events in one’s life 
(Chapter 54). Procedural memory, in which conscious-
ness has a minor role (Chapter 53), remains intact. 
Thus, patients can still remember motor skills such as 
riding a bicycle and can often learn new motor skills 
at a normal rate. This selective effect of brain damage 
can lead to dramatic dissociations. A patient who has 
been learning some new skill every day for a week will 
deny ever having performed the task before. He is then 
surprised to find how skillful he has become.
A widely used protocol tests subjects’ ability to 
recall lists of words they have memorized, a task that 
taps a form of declarative memory. In the recall phase, 
a subject is presented with a list of the words that were 
on the study list plus new words. An amnesic patient 
has great difficulty with this type of task and may 
misclassify most of the previously seen words as new 
since she cannot recall seeing them before. Neverthe-
less, the brain activity elicited by reading old words is 
different from that elicited by the new words: There is 
unconscious recognition of a difference, equivalent to 
that shown by patients with unilateral neglect or pros-
opagnosia. Normal subjects usually find this task easy, 
but they too will occasionally misclassify old words 
as new; as with amnesiacs, evoked brain responses 
in normal subjects register the distinction lost to con-
scious recall (Figure 59–9).
Occasionally, a subject misclassifies a new word as 
an old one. This misclassification amounts to a false 
memory. Such misclassifications are most likely to 
occur when the new word is semantically related to 
one or more of the old words. If the list of old words 
contained big, great, huge, then the new word large is 
Figure 59–9  Brain activity shows the imprint of forgotten 
memories. Subjects were presented with a list of words, 
including some that had been presented earlier and some that 
were new. When asked to identify the words presented earlier, 
subjects correctly identified some of the old words but forgot 
others. Immediately after the visual presentation of a word, 
there is a brief fluctuation in the evoked potential in the brain. 
Evoked responses in the parietal region of the brain reflect 
whether or not the words had been seen before, even when 
subjects did not consciously recognize the words. The pattern 
produced by old words, whether recognized or not, is different 
from that produced by the new words. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Rugg et al. 1998. Copyright © 1998 Springer Nature.)
0
500 ms
New test items
Previously seen but 
unrecognized
test items
2 µV
likely to be identified as old. One explanation for this 
is that the perception of the new word large has been 
unconsciously primed by the previous presentation of 
the old words. Thus, the new word large is processed 
easily and quickly, and because the subject is aware of 
this, he concludes the word must be familiar and clas-
sifies it as old.
This observation emphasizes that memory is a 
creative process. Our conscious memories are con-
structed from both conscious recall and unconscious 
knowledge. To guard against false memories, as with 
false percepts, we use our knowledge about the world 
to determine which memories are plausible.
In some patients, the process by which memories 
are screened can become dramatically disturbed. If asked 
what happened yesterday, most patients with amne-
sia will say that they cannot remember, but a few will 
give elaborate accounts that do not correspond to real-
ity. Such false memories are called confabulations and can 
sometimes be extremely implausible. For example,  
one patient said that he had met Harold Wilson  


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1483
(a former British Prime Minister) and discussed a 
building job they were both working on.
The creative mechanisms needed to reconstruct 
memories of past episodes are also involved when 
imagining events that might happen in the future. In 
amnesic patients with damage to the hippocampus, the 
ability to imagine new events is markedly impaired.
Behavioral Observation Needs to Be 
Supplemented With Subjective Reports
By the middle of the 20th century, it had become clear 
that the classic behaviorist approach was inadequate 
for the exploration of many psychological processes. 
Language acquisition, selective attention, and working 
memory cannot be understood in terms of relations 
between stimuli and responses, however complex the 
relationships postulated.
The demonstration that some cognitive processes 
are unconscious requires that we move even further 
from behaviorism. If we want to explore the whole 
range of conscious and unconscious cognitive pro-
cesses, we will not be able to do so by focusing on 
overt behavior alone. We cannot assume that a subject 
making purposeful, goal-directed actions is necessar-
ily aware of the stimuli eliciting the action or even 
of the action itself. We must supplement behavioral 
observations with subjective reports. We have to ask 
the subject, “Did you see the stimulus? Did you move 
your hand?”
One hundred years ago, introspection was the 
major method for obtaining data in psychology. How 
else could one study consciousness? But different 
schools of psychology obtained different results and, 
as John B. Watson emphasized, there seemed to be no 
objective way of deciding who was right. How can you 
independently confirm subjective experience? Thus, 
the method fell into disrepute. During the decades in 
which psychology was dominated by behaviorism, 
subjective reports were not considered an appropri-
ate source of data. As a result, methods for recording 
subjective reports lag far behind methods for record-
ing overt behavior. Regrettably, many studies of cogni-
tive processes still do not require reports of subjective 
experience from subjects because of the long tradition 
of excluding such reports.
The one domain of psychology in which subjective 
reports continued to be used was psychophysics, the 
study of the relationship between sensation (physi-
cal energy) and perception (psychological experience) 
introduced by Fechner in 1860. Such studies give 
robust and reliable results and have created some of 
the few laws in psychology, such as Weber’s law (the 
just-noticeable difference between two stimuli is pro-
portional to the magnitude of the stimuli). In these 
studies, subjects are typically asked “Did you see the 
stimulus?” or “How confident are you that you saw 
the stimulus?”
Signal detection theory, developed in the 1950s, 
provides a robust methodology for measuring the abil-
ity to detect a stimulus (discriminability, d′) indepen-
dently of any reporting biases (Chapter 17). If your 
discriminability is high, then you will successfully 
detect small changes in the stimuli. More recently, there 
has been increasing interest in the second question, 
“How confident are you that you saw the stimulus?” 
Reporting one’s confidence requires metacognition, the 
ability to reflect on our cognitive processes. This abil-
ity has an important role in the control of behavior. For 
example, if we realize that we are not performing some 
task very well, we might slow down and pay more 
attention to what we are doing.
The ability to reflect on our perception can be meas-
ured objectively. Likewise, the ability to reflect on the 
quality of our cognitive processes can also be assessed 
quantitatively. If your metacognitive accuracy is high, 
then you will successfully discriminate between 
your right and wrong answers. In other words, a cor-
rect detection will usually be associated with a high 
degree of confidence, whereas an incorrect detection 
will be associated with a low degree of confidence. 
However, your metacognitive accuracy need not be 
related to your signal detection ability. You could be 
good at detecting signals while at the same time poor 
at knowing whether your answers are likely to be right 
or wrong. In fact, patients with damage to anterior pre-
frontal cortex retain the ability to detect visual signals 
but show a marked deficit in metacognitive accuracy.
Verbal reports cannot, of course, be used in signal 
detection experiments with laboratory animals or pre-
verbal infants. One alternative is to identify aspects of 
behaviors that reflect confidence. For example, if we 
are confident that we left our keys somewhere in the 
living room, we will spend more time looking there 
before we switch to the hall. Louise Goupil and Sid 
Kouider applied this insight to the study of metacogni-
tion in preverbal infants. The infants had to remember 
which of two boxes had contained a toy that was later 
removed without their knowledge. They spent more 
time searching inside the correct box. The infants were 
also more likely to ask an adult for help to open the 
correct box. These effects did not occur after long inter-
vals. This behavior suggests that the infants had some 
insight into their current state of knowledge. They 
knew when they could no longer remember which was 


===== Page 9 =====
1484    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–10  Imagining a face or a place correlates 
with activity in specific areas of the brain. Subjects were 
scanned while they viewed or imagined faces and houses. 
In the first block of trials, subjects alternately viewed a face 
or a house. When viewing a face, brain activity increases in 
the fusiform face area of the inferior temporal lobe (FFA). 
When viewing a house, brain activity increases in the 
parahippocampal place area of the inferior temporal cortex 
(PPA). In the next block of trials, subjects alternately imagined 
a face and a house. The same brain regions are active during 
both the imagining and direct viewing of faces and houses, 
although the activity is less pronounced during the imagined 
viewing. (Reproduced, with permission, from O’Craven and 
Kanwisher 2000. Copyright © 2000 MIT.)
the correct box. Similar experiments suggest that rats 
and monkeys also have some metacognitive abilities.
Verification of Subjective Reports Is Challenging
Reports of subjective experience, such as confidence, 
serve like a meter. Just as an electrical meter converts 
electrical resistance into the position of a pointer on a dial 
(reading 100 ohms), so a subject converts a light stimulus 
into the report of a color (“I see red”). But there is a criti-
cal way in which the meter is not like a person. The meter 
does not experience red and cannot communicate mean-
ing. And, although the meter might be faulty, it can never 
pretend to see red when it is really seeing blue. Most of 
the time, we presume that subjective reports are true, 
that is, the subject is trying as far as possible to give an 
accurate description of his experience. But how can we be 
sure that we can rely on these subjective reports?
Viewed
Imagined
Viewed
Imagined
PPA activity (% signal change)
FFA activity (% signal change)
0
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
–.5
–1
0
1.5
1
.5
–.5
The problem of verifying subjective reports can 
partially be addressed with the use of brain imaging. 
Brain imaging studies have shown that neural activ-
ity occurs in localized areas of the brain during mental 
activity that is not associated with any overt behavior. 
The content of such mental activity, such as imagining 
or daydreaming, can be known only from the subject’s 
reports.
If we scan a subject while he says he is imagining 
moving his hand, activity will be detected in many 
parts of the motor system. In most motor regions, 
this activity is less intense than the activity associ-
ated with an actual movement, but it is well above 
resting levels. Similarly, if a subject reports that she is 
imagining a face she has recently seen, activity can be 
detected in the fusiform gyrus, the “face recognition 
area” (Figure 59–10). In these examples, the location of 
the observed neural activity detected by the scanner 


