===== Page 1 =====
444    Part IV / Perception
movement enhances the sensations produced by the 
dots. Because the Braille dots are spaced approximately 
3 mm apart, a distance greater than the receptive field 
diameter of an SA1 fiber, each dot stimulates a differ-
ent set of SA1 fibers. An SA1 fiber fires a burst of action 
potentials as a dot enters its receptive field and is silent 
once the dot leaves the field (Figure 19–7). Specific 
combinations of SA1 fibers that fire synchronously 
signal the spatial arrangement of the Braille dots. RA1 
fibers also discriminate the dot patterns, enhancing the 
signals provided by SA1 fibers.
Although 
Pacinian 
corpuscles 
(RA2 
fibers) 
respond to scanning Braille dots over the skin, their 
spike trains do not reflect the periodicity of dots in the 
Braille patterns. Instead, they signal the skin vibrations 
evoked by motion of the Braille dots over the skin. Sli-
man Bensmaia and colleagues recently found that 
when fine textures such as fabrics are tested with this 
method, RA2 afferents signal the periodicity of threads 
in the weave by generating their spike trains in phase 
with these surface features. SA1 fibers are less respon-
sive to motion of textiles because the thread size is usu-
ally too small to indent the skin at sufficient amplitude. 
Nevertheless, all three types of tactile afferents contrib-
ute to human percepts of roughness and smoothness.
Slowly Adapting Fibers Detect Object  
Pressure and Form
The most important function of SA1 and SA2 fibers is 
their ability to signal skin deformation and pressure. 
The sensitivity of SA1 receptors to edges, corners, 
points, and curvature provides information about an 
object’s compliance, shape, size, and surface texture. 
We perceive an object as hard or rigid if it indents the 
skin when we touch it, and soft if we deform the object.
Paradoxically, as an object’s size and diameter 
increase, its surface curvature decreases. The responses 
of individual SA1 fibers are weaker and the result-
ing sensations feel less distinct. For example, the tip 
of a pencil pressed 1 mm into the skin feels sharp, 
unpleasant, and highly localized at the contact point, 
whereas a 1-mm indentation by the eraser feels blunt 
and broad. The weakest sensation is evoked by a flat 
surface pressed against the finger pad.
To understand why these objects evoke different 
sensations, we need to consider the physical events 
that occur when the skin is touched. When a pencil tip 
is pressed against the skin, it dimples the surface at the 
contact point and forms a shallow, sloped basin in the 
surrounding region (approximately 4 mm in radius). 
Although the indentation force is concentrated in the 
center, the surrounding region is also perturbed by 
local stretch, called tensile strain. SA1 receptors at 
both the center and the surrounding “hillsides” of skin 
are stimulated, firing spike trains proportional to the 
degree of local stretch.
If a second probe is pressed close to the first one, 
more SA1 fibers are stimulated but the neural response 
of each fiber is reduced because the force needed to 
displace the skin is shared between the two probes. 
Ken Johnson and his colleagues have shown that as 
more probes are added within the receptive field, the 
response intensity at each sensory ending becomes 
progressively weaker because the displacement forces 
on the skin are distributed across the entire contact 
zone. Thus, the skin mechanics result in a case of “less 
is more.” Individual SA1 fibers respond more vigor-
ously to a small object than to a large one because 
the force needed to indent the skin is concentrated at 
a small contact point. In this manner, each SA1 fiber 
integrates the local skin indentation profile within its 
receptive field.
The sensitivity of SA1 receptors to local strain 
on the skin enables them to detect edges, the places 
where an object’s curvature changes abruptly. SA1 fir-
ing rates are many times greater when a finger touches 
an edge than when it touches a flat surface because 
the force applied by an object boundary displaces the 
skin asymmetrically, beyond the edge as well as at the 
edge. This asymmetric distribution of force enhances 
responses from receptive fields located along the edges 
of an object. As edges are often perceived as sharp, we 
tend to grasp objects on flat or gently curved surfaces 
rather than by their edges.
The SA2 fibers that innervate Ruffini endings 
respond more vigorously to stretch of the skin than to 
indentation, because of their anatomical location along 
the palmar folds or at the finger joints. They provide 
information about the shape of large objects grasped 
with the entire hand, the “power grasp” in which an 
object is pressed against the palm.
The SA2 system may play a central role in stere-
ognosis—the recognition of three-dimensional objects 
using touch alone—as well as other perceptual tasks 
in which skin stretch is a major cue. Benoni Edin has 
shown that SA2 innervation of the hairy skin on 
the dorsum of the hand plays a substantial role in the 
perception of hand shape and finger position. The 
SA2 fibers aid the perception of finger joint angle by 
detecting skin stretch over the knuckles, or in the web-
bing between the fingers. The Ruffini endings near 
these joints are aligned such that different groups of 
receptors are stimulated as the fingers move in specific 
directions (Figure 19–5A, bottom panel). In this man-
ner, the SA2 system provides a neural representation 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    445
Figure 19–7  Responses of touch receptors to Braille dots 
scanned by the fingers.  The Braille symbols for the letters A 
through R were mounted on a drum that was repeatedly rotated 
against the fingertip of a human subject. Following each revolu-
tion, the drum was shifted upward so that another portion of the 
symbols was scanned across the finger. Microelectrodes placed 
in the median nerve of this subject recorded the responses 
of the mechanoreceptive fibers innervating the fingertip. The 
action potentials discharged by the nerve fibers as the Braille 
symbols moved over the receptive field are represented in these 
records by small dots; each horizontal row of dots represents the 
responses of the fiber to a single revolution of the drum. The SA1 
receptors register the sharpest image of the Braille symbols, 
representing each Braille dot with a series of action potentials 
and falling silent when the spaces between Braille symbols pro-
vide no stimulation. RA1 receptors provide a blurred image of 
the Braille symbols because their receptive fields are larger, but 
the individual dot patterns are still recognizable. Neither RA2 nor 
SA2 receptors are able to encode the spatial characteristics  
of the Braille patterns because their receptive fields are larger 
than the dot spacing. The high firing rate of the RA2 fibers 
reflects the keen sensitivity of Pacinian corpuscles to vibration. 
(Abbreviations: RA1, rapidly adapting type 1; RA2, rapidly adapt-
ing type 2; SA1, slowly adapting type 1; SA2, slowly adapting 
type 2.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Phillips, Johansson, 
and Johnson 1990. Copyright © 1990 Society for Neuroscience.)
10 mm
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
Receptive ﬁeld
200 µm
shift
Stimulus
surface
SA1
RA1
SA2
RA2


===== Page 3 =====
446    Part IV / Perception
of skin stretch over the entire hand, a proprioceptive 
rather than exteroceptive function.
The SA2 fibers also provide proprioceptive infor-
mation about hand shape and finger movements when 
the hand is empty. If the fingers are fully extended and 
abducted, we feel the stretch in the palm and proximal 
phalanges as the glabrous skin is flattened. Similarly, if 
the fingers are fully flexed, forming a fist, we feel the 
stretch of the skin on the back of the hand, particularly 
over the metacarpal-phalangeal and proximal inter-
phalangeal joints. Humans use this proprioceptive 
information to preshape their hand to grasp objects 
efficiently, opening the fingers just wide enough to 
clear the object and grasp it skillfully without too 
much force.
Rapidly Adapting Fibers Detect Motion  
and Vibration
Tests of vibration sense form an important compo-
nent of the neurological exam. Touching the skin with 
a tuning fork that oscillates at a particular frequency 
evokes a periodic buzzing sensation because most 
touch receptors fire synchronized, periodic trains of 
action potentials in phase with the stimulus frequency  
(Figure 19–8A2). Vibration sense is a useful measure-
ment of dynamic sensitivity to touch, particularly in 
cases of localized nerve damage.
The RA2 receptor, the Pacinian corpuscle, is the 
most sensitive mechanoreceptor in the somatosensory 
system. It is exquisitely responsive to high-frequency 
(30–500 Hz) vibratory stimuli and can detect vibra-
tion of 250 Hz in the nanometer range (Figure 19–8B2). 
The ability of Pacinian corpuscles to filter and amplify 
high-frequency vibration allows us to feel conditions 
at the working surface of a tool in our hand as if our 
fingers themselves were touching the object under 
the tool. The clinician uses this exquisite sensitivity to 
guide a needle into a blood vessel and to probe tissue 
stiffness. The auto mechanic uses vibratory sense to 
position wrenches on unseen bolts. We can write in the 
dark because we feel the vibration of the pen as it con-
tacts the paper and transmits the frictional forces from 
the surface roughness to our fingers.
Although Pacinian corpuscles have the lowest 
vibration thresholds for frequencies greater than 40 Hz 
(Figure 19–8B2), vibratory stimuli of higher amplitude 
also excite SA1 and RA1 fibers, even if their evoked 
spike trains are weaker than those of Pacinian affer-
ents. Figure 19–9A illustrates the evoked firing patterns 
of 15 different peripheral nerve fibers stimulated at  
20 Hz at weak, moderate, and high amplitudes. 
Although these fibers differ in sensitivity to vibration, 
their spike trains have certain important characteris-
tics in common. First, each neuron fires at a particular 
phase of the vibratory cycle, usually when the probe 
indents the skin, and its phasic pattern of spikes repli-
cates the vibratory frequency: when stimulated at 20 Hz, 
the spike bursts recur at intervals of approximately 
50 ms. The patterning of the spike trains is further 
reinforced because the population of fibers fires syn-
chronously, enabling the frequency information to be 
preserved centrally due to synaptic integration.
The total number of spikes per burst also increases 
as the stimulus amplitude rises, allowing each fiber to 
multiplex signals of vibratory frequency and intensity: 
the frequency information is conveyed by the temporal 
pattern of the spike train, and the vibratory amplitude 
is encoded by the total number of spikes fired per 
second by each fiber, as well as the total spike output 
of the ensemble of activated fibers. Finally, note that 
the spike trains of each neuron are very similar in time 
course and spike count from trial to trial for each con-
dition, indicating the high reliability of sensory signal-
ing provided by tactile afferent fibers. This reliability 
and predictability of sensory coding make vibration a 
particularly useful technique for assessing the sense of 
touch.
Both Slowly and Rapidly Adapting Fibers Are 
Important for Grip Control
In addition to their role sensing the physical proper-
ties of objects, touch receptors provide important 
information concerning hand actions during skilled 
movements. Roland Johansson and Gören Westling 
used microneurography to determine the role of touch 
receptors when objects are grasped in the hand. By 
placing microelectrodes in the median nerve, they 
were able to record the firing patterns of touch fibers 
as an object was initially contacted by the fingers, and 
when it was grasped between the thumb and index fin-
ger, lifted, held above a table, lowered, and returned 
to rest.
They found that all four classes of touch fibers 
respond to grasp and that each fiber type monitors a 
particular function. The RA1, RA2, and SA1 fibers are 
normally silent in the absence of tactile stimuli. They 
detect contact when an object is first touched (Figure 
19–10). The SA1 fibers signal the amount of grip force 
applied by each finger, and the RA1 fibers sense how 
quickly the grasp is applied. The RA2 fibers detect 
the small shock waves transmitted through the object 
when it is lifted from the table and when it is returned. 
We know when an object makes contact with the table 
top because of these vibrations and therefore can 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    447
A  Neural coding of vibration 
Connective 
tissue laminae
Axon
2  RA2 ﬁber
Steady pressure
1  Pacinian corpuscle
Action
potentials
Stimulus
Sinusoidal vibration (110 Hz)
Action
potentials
Stimulus
1  Human perceptual thresholds 
B  Thresholds for detection of vibration
Threshold amplitude (µm)
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
1
10
100
1000
Active grip
of large handle
Vibratory frequency (Hz)
100
10
1
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Vibratory frequency (Hz)
2 Neural thresholds
Human thresholds
Merkel cell (SA1)
Meissner corpuscle (RA1)
Pacinian corpuscle (RA2)
Figure 19–8  Rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fibers have the 
lowest threshold for vibration.  Vibration is the sensation pro-
duced by sinusoidal stimulation of the skin, as by the hum of an 
electric motor, the strings of a musical instrument, or a tuning 
fork used in the neurological examination.
A. 1. The Pacinian corpuscle consists of concentric, fluid-filled 
lamellae of connective tissue that encapsulate the terminal of 
an RA2 fiber. This structure is uniquely suited to the detection 
of motion. Sensory transduction in the RA2 fiber occurs in 
stretch-sensitive cation channels linked to the inner lamellae 
of the capsule. 2. When steady pressure is applied to the skin, 
the RA2 fiber fires a burst at the start and end of stimulation. 
In response to sinusoidal stimulation (vibration), the fiber fires 
at regular intervals such that each action potential signals one 
cycle of the stimulus. Our perception of vibration as a rhythmi-
cally repeating event results from the simultaneous activation 
of many RA2 units, which fire in synchrony. (Adapted from  
Talbot et al. 1968.)
B. 1. Psychophysical thresholds for detection of vibration depend 
on the stimulation frequency. As shown here, humans can detect 
vibrations as small as 30 nm at 200 Hz when grasping a large 
object; the threshold is higher at other frequencies and when 
tested with small probes. (Adapted, with permission, from Brisben, 
Hsiao, and Johnson 1999.) 2. Human thresholds for vibration, 
measured by a small probe tip indenting the skin, match those of 
the most sensitive touch fibers in each frequency range. Each type 
of mechanosensory fiber is most sensitive to a specific range of 
frequencies. Slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) fibers are the most sen-
sitive population below 5 Hz, rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers 
between 10 Hz and 50 Hz, and RA2 fibers above 50 Hz and  
400 Hz. (Adapted, with permission, from Mountcastle, LaMotte, 
and Carli 1972, and Johansson, Landström, and Lundström 1982.)


===== Page 5 =====
448    Part IV / Perception
Figure 19–9  Suprathreshold vibration activates multiple 
classes of touch receptors.
A. Rasters of spike trains recorded from 15 different soma-
tosensory fibers in macaque monkeys stimulated by 20-Hz 
vibratory stimuli with amplitudes of 35 (left), 130 (center), 
and 250 µm (right). The alternating shaded and white bands 
indicate the responses of individual slowly adapting type 1 
(SA1), rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1), and rapidly adapting 
type 2 (RA2) touch fibers to five presentations of the same 
stimulus. Neural responses are grouped in bursts of one or 
more spikes that occur in phase with the indentation phase 
of each vibratory cycle. The total number of spikes per cycle 
in each fiber is correlated with the amplitude of the vibra-
tion; the total number of spikes fired across this population 
also reflects the vibratory amplitude. Although the individual 
neurons differ in the intensity of their responses, the spike 
trains of each touch fiber are very similar from trial to trial 
and occur synchronously between neurons. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Muniak et al. 2007. Copyright © 2007  
Society for Neuroscience.)
B. S-I cortical responses to 20-Hz vibration. Rasters of spike 
trains evoked in two neurons in area 3b (top) and two neurons 
in area 1 (bottom) of S-I cortex of a macaque monkey. The 
shaded area indicates the period of vibratory stimulation. As 
in the peripheral nerves, S-I cortical neurons respond to low-
frequency vibration with bursts of impulses in phase with the 
stimulation rate. Note that the spike trains vary somewhat from 
trial to trial and are less periodic in area 1 than in area 3b. The 
periodicity of firing is even less pronounced in S-II cortex (see 
Figure 19–21) than in S-I. (Abbreviations: RA, rapidly adapting; 
SA, slowly adapting.) (Adapted, with permission, from Salinas 
et al. 2000. Copyright © 2000 Society for Neuroscience.)
B  S-I Cortical neurons
50 ms
0.5 s
100 µm
A  Peripheral nerve ﬁbers
20 Hz vibration
20 Hz
SA1
RA1
SA
RA
SA
Area 1
Area 3b
RA
RA2
manipulate the object without looking at it. The RA1 
and RA2 fibers cease responding after grasp is estab-
lished. The SA2 fibers signal flexion or extension of 
the fingers during grasp or release of the object and 
thereby monitor the hand posture as these movements 
proceed.
Signals from the hand that report on the shape, size, 
and texture of an object are important factors govern-
ing the application of force during grasping. Johansson 
and his colleagues found that we lift and manipulate 
an object with delicacy—with grip forces that just 
exceed the forces that result in overt slip—and that 
the grip force is adjusted automatically to compensate 
for differences in the frictional coefficient between the 
fingers and object surface. Subjects predict how much 
force is required to grasp and lift an object and modify 
these forces based on tactile information provided by 
SA1 and RA1 afferents. Objects with smooth surfaces 
are grasped more firmly than those with rough tex-
tures, properties coded by RA1 afferents during initial 
contact of the hand with an object. The significance of 
the tactile information in grasping is seen in cases of 
nerve injury or during local anesthesia of the hand; 
patients apply unusually high grip forces, and coordi-
nation between the grip and load forces applied by the 
fingers is poor.
The information supplied by the RA1 receptors 
to monitor grasping actions is critical for grip control, 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    449
Figure 19–10  Sensory information from the hand during 
grasping and lifting. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Johansson 1996.)
A. The subject grasps and lifts a block between the thumb and 
fingertips, holds it above a table, and then returns it to the rest-
ing position. The normal (grip) force secures the object in the 
hand, and the tangential (load) force overcomes gravity. The 
grip force is adapted to the surface texture and weight of the 
object.
B. The grip and load forces are monitored with sensors in the 
object. These forces are coordinated following contact with 
the object, stabilize as lift begins, and relax in concert after the 
object is returned to the table.
C. All four mechanoreceptors detect hand contact with the 
object, but each monitors a different aspect of the action as the 
task progresses. SA1 fibers encode the grip force and SA2  
fibers the hand posture. RA1 fibers encode the rate of force 
application and movement of the hand on the object. RA2  
fibers sense vibrations in the object during each task phase: 
at hand contact, lift-off, table contact, and release of grasp. 
(Abbreviations: RA1, rapidly adapting type 1; RA2, rapidly 
adapting type 2; SA1, slowly adapting type 1; SA2, slowly 
adapting type 2.)
A  Lifting task
Movement
Load force
Load
force
Grip
force
Object
height
Lift
Grasp
Hold
Lower
Relax 
Table 
contact
Release
RA1
RA2
SA1
SA2
SA2
B  Action sensors
C  Neural responses
Grip
force
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Hand
contact
Start of 
lift


===== Page 7 =====
450    Part IV / Perception
allowing us to hold on to objects when perturbations 
cause them to slip unexpectedly. RA1 fibers are silent 
during steady grasp and usually remain quiet until the 
object is returned to rest and the grasp released. How-
ever, if the object is unexpectedly heavy or jolted by 
external forces and begins to slip from the hand, the 
RA1 fibers fire in response to the small tangential slip 
movements of the object. The net result of this RA1 
activity is that grip force is increased by signals from 
the motor cortex.
Tactile Information Is Processed in the Central 
Touch System
Sensory afferent fibers innervating the hand transmit 
tactile and other somatosensory information to the 
central nervous system through the median, ulnar, 
and superficial radial nerves. These nerves termi-
nate ipsilaterally in spinal segments C6 to T1; other 
branches of these fibers project through the ipsilateral 
dorsal columns directly to the medulla, where they 
make synaptic connections to neurons in the cune-
ate nucleus, the lateral division of the dorsal column 
nuclei (Figure 19–11).
Spinal, Brain Stem, and Thalamic Circuits Segregate 
Touch and Proprioception
Fibers in the dorsal columns, and neurons in the dor-
sal column nuclei, are organized topographically, with 
the upper body (including the hand) represented later-
ally in the cuneate fascicle and nucleus and the lower 
body represented medially in the gracile fascicle and 
nucleus. The somatosensory submodalities of touch 
and proprioception are also segregated functionally 
in these regions, as individual spinal and brain stem 
neurons receive synaptic inputs from afferents of a 
single type, and neurons of distinct types are spatially 
separated. The rostral third of the dorsal column nuclei 
is dominated by neurons that process proprioceptive 
information from muscle afferents; tactile inputs pre-
dominate more caudally. Modality segregation is a 
consistent feature of the projection pathways to the 
primary somatosensory cortex.
Neurons in the dorsal column nuclei project their 
axons across the midline in the medulla to form the 
medial lemniscus, a prominent fiber tract that transmits 
tactile and proprioceptive information from the con-
tralateral side of the body through the pons and mid-
brain to the thalamus. As a result of this crossing (or 
decussation) of sensory fibers, the left side of the brain 
receives somatosensory input from mechanoreceptors 
on the right side of the body, and vice versa. In tran-
sit, the somatotopic representation of the body in the 
medial lemniscus and within the thalamus becomes 
inverted; the topographic map of the body displays the 
face medially, the lower body laterally, and the upper 
body and hands in between.
Tactile and proprioceptive information from the 
hand and other regions of the body is processed in dis-
tinct subnuclei of the thalamus. Touch signals from the 
limbs and trunk are sent via the medial lemniscus to 
the ventral posterior lateral (VPL) nucleus, while those 
from the face and mouth are conveyed to the ventral 
posterior medial (VPM) nucleus. Proprioceptive infor-
mation from muscles and joints, including those of the 
hand, is transmitted to the ventral posterior superior 
(VPS) nucleus. These nuclei send their outputs to differ-
ent subregions of the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex. 
The VPL and VPM nuclei transmit cutaneous informa-
tion primarily to area 3b of the primary somatosensory 
Figure 19–11  (Opposite) Somatosensory information from 
the limbs and trunk is conveyed to the thalamus and cer-
ebral cortex by two ascending pathways. Brain slices along 
the neuraxis from the spinal cord to the cerebrum illustrate the 
anatomy of the two principal pathways conveying somatosen-
sory information to the cerebral cortex. The two pathways are 
separated until they reach the pons, where they are juxtaposed.
Dorsal column—medial lemniscal system (orange). Touch 
and limb proprioception signals are conveyed to the spinal cord 
and brain stem by large-diameter myelinated nerve fibers and 
transmitted to the thalamus in this system. In the spinal cord, 
the fibers for touch and proprioception divide, one branch  
going to the ipsilateral spinal gray matter and the other ascend-
ing in the ipsilateral dorsal column to the medulla. The second-
order fibers from neurons in the dorsal column nuclei cross the 
midline in the medulla and ascend in the contralateral medial 
lemniscus toward the thalamus, where they terminate in the 
lateral and medial ventral posterior nuclei. Thalamic neurons in 
these nuclei convey tactile and proprioceptive information to 
the primary somatosensory cortex.
Anterolateral system (brown). Pain, itch, temperature, and 
visceral information is conveyed to the spinal cord by small-
diameter myelinated and unmyelinated fibers that terminate in 
the ipsilateral dorsal horn. This information is conveyed across 
the midline by neurons within the spinal cord and transmitted 
to the brain stem and the thalamus in the contralateral ante-
rolateral system. Anterolateral fibers terminating in the brain 
stem compose the spinoreticular and spinomesencephalic 
tracts; the remaining anterolateral fibers form the spinothalamic 
tract.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    451
Medulla
Spinal cord
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Touch
Pain
Somatic sensory cortex
(postcentral gyrus)
Forearm and
hand area
Trunk
Leg and
foot
Lateral
sulcus
Face
Internal
capsule
Thalamus
Ventral posterior
lateral and 
medial nuclei
Spinomesencephalic 
tract
Medial lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Spinothalamic tract
Principal
trigeminal
nucleus
Spinoreticular tract
Gracile nucleus
Gracile fascicle
Cuneate fascicle
Dorsal root
ganglion cells
Anterolateral system
Cuneate nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus (N.V.) and tract
Sensory decussation
Dorsal column
medial lemniscal
system
Dorsal anterior
insular cortex


===== Page 9 =====
452    Part IV / Perception
3
1
2
A  Somatosensory cortex
B  Coronal section
40
39
Central sulcus
Lateral 
sulcus
Posterior
parietal
S-I
B
S-II
S-II
3a
3b
1
Lateral 
sulcus
Central 
sulcus
Internal 
capsule
5
Primary motor 
cortex
2
7
Thalamus
Figure 19–12  The somatosensory areas of the cerebral cor-
tex in the human brain.
A. The somatosensory areas of cortex lie in the parietal lobe 
and consist of three major divisions. The primary somatosen-
sory cortex (S-I) forms the anterior part of the parietal lobe. 
It extends throughout the postcentral gyrus beginning at the 
bottom of the central sulcus, extending posteriorly to the 
postcentral sulcus, and into the medial wall of the hemisphere 
to the cingulate gyrus (not shown). The S-I cortex comprises 
four distinct cytoarchitectonic regions: Brodmann’s areas 3a, 
3b, 1, and 2. The secondary somatosensory cortex (S-II) is 
located on the upper bank of the lateral sulcus (Sylvian fis-
sure) and on the parietal operculum; it covers Brodmann’s 
area 43. The posterior parietal cortex surrounds the intrapari-
etal sulcus on the lateral surface of the hemisphere, extend-
ing from the postcentral sulcus to the parietal-occipital sulcus 
and medially to the precuneus. The superior parietal lobule 
(Brodmann’s areas 5 and 7) is a somatosensory area; the infe-
rior parietal lobule (areas 39 and 40) receives both somatosen-
sory and visual inputs.
B. A coronal section through the postcentral gyrus illustrates 
the anatomical relationship of S-I, S-II, and the primary motor 
cortex (area 4). S-II lies adjacent to area 2 in S-I and extends 
medially along the upper bank of the lateral sulcus to the 
insular cortex. The primary motor cortex lies rostral to area 3a 
within the anterior wall of the central sulcus.
cortex (S-I), whereas the VPS nucleus conveys proprio-
ceptive information principally to area 3a.
The Somatosensory Cortex Is Organized Into 
Functionally Specialized Columns
Conscious awareness of touch is believed to originate 
in the cerebral cortex. Tactile information enters the 
cerebral cortex through the primary somatosensory 
cortex (S-I) in the postcentral gyrus of the parietal lobe. 
The primary somatic sensory cortex comprises four 
cytoarchitectural areas: Brodmann’s areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 
2 (Figure 19–12). These areas are interconnected such 
that processing of sensory information in S-I involves 
both serial and parallel processing.
In a series of pioneering studies of the cerebral cor-
tex, Vernon Mountcastle discovered that S-I cortex is 
organized into vertical columns or slabs. Each column 
is 300 to 600 μm wide and spans all six cortical lay-
ers from the pial surface to the white matter (Figure 
19–13). Neurons within a column receive inputs from 
the same local area of skin and respond to the same 
class or classes of touch receptors. A column there-
fore comprises an elementary functional module of 
the neocortex; it provides an anatomical structure that 
organizes sensory inputs to convey related informa-
tion about location and modality.
The columnar organization of the cortex is a direct 
consequence of intrinsic cortical circuitry, the projec-
tion patterns of thalamocortical axons, and migration 
pathways of neuroblasts during cortical development. 
The pattern of connections within a column is ori-
ented vertically, perpendicular to the cortical surface. 
Thalamocortical axons terminate primarily on clus-
ters of stellate cells in layer IV, whose axons project 
vertically toward the surface of the cortex, as well as 
on star pyramid cells. Thus, thalamocortical inputs 
are relayed to a narrow column of pyramidal cells 
that are contacted by the layer IV cell axons. The api-
cal dendrites and axons of cortical pyramidal cells in 
other cortical layers are also largely oriented vertically, 
parallel to the thalamocortical axons and stellate cell 
axons (Figure 19–14). This allows the same information 
to be processed by a column of neurons throughout the 
thickness of the cortex.
Pyramidal neurons form the principal excitatory 
class of somatosensory cortex; they compose approxi-
mately 80% of S-I neurons. Pyramidal neurons in 


