===== Page 1 =====
1300    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
undergoing brain surgery for medical reasons, such as 
severe epilepsy, when electrode implantation is used 
to localize the site of seizure generation. In one study, 
intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) signals 
were measured using subdural electrodes placed in 
the medial temporal lobe and other areas of cortex. 
A subject first learned associations between pairs of 
words and then had to retrieve memories of those 
associations. The retrieval of memories was associated 
with neural activity in the hippocampus, coupled with 
neural activity in temporal association cortex, a region 
involved in language and multisensory integration. 
This coupled neural activity was associated with a reac-
tivation of cortical patterns that were initially observed 
when participants first memorized word pairs. This 
finding provides a link between the neural activity 
observed in the hippocampus during initial encod-
ing of a memory and the later coupled activity in the 
temporal association cortex during retrieval. Related 
observations of reactivation of encoding patterns dur-
ing retrieval have been reported in numerous human 
functional imaging studies, documenting the ubiquity 
of such effects. As with encoding of episodic memory, 
retrieval involves a complex interaction between the 
medial temporal lobe and distributed cortical regions, 
including frontoparietal networks and other high-level 
association areas.
Episodic Memory Contributes to Imagination and 
Goal-Directed Behavior
Memory enables us to use our past experience to pre-
dict future events, thus promoting adaptive behav-
ior. Like retrieval of memories, imagination of future 
events involves construction of details from memory. 
The first report of a possible connection between 
memory and imagination came from the case study 
of patient K.C., as reported by Endel Tulving in 1985. 
Patient K.C. displayed typical and devastating amne-
sia as a result of damage to his hippocampus and 
medial temporal lobe. Similar to patient H.M., he had 
a complete lack of episodic memory while language 
and nonepisodic functions were unimpaired. Tulving’s 
studies revealed further that such brain damage was 
associated with the loss of the ability to imagine events 
in the future. When asked what he would be doing the 
next day, K.C. was unable to provide details.
The importance of the hippocampus in imagin-
ing future events is also seen with fMRI studies. Such 
studies examined brain activity of healthy individu-
als, comparing activity when subjects were asked to 
remember an event from the past (eg, think of your 
birthday last year) with activity when they imagined 
events in the future (eg, imagine a beach vacation next 
summer). The subjects were asked to report any vivid 
details of the event that came to mind. The MRI scans 
showed a striking overlap in the network of brain 
regions that were active during memory retrieval and 
imagination of future events. This network included 
the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, posterior cingu-
late cortex, retrosplenial cortex, and lateral parietal and 
temporal areas (Figure 52–7).
Further evidence supporting the view that episodic 
memory and hippocampal function are necessary for 
planning future behavior comes from a study on human 
performance of a spatial navigation task using virtual 
reality simulations. High-resolution fMRI and multivoxel 
pattern analysis (Chapter 6) showed that activity in the 
hippocampus was related to simulation of navigation 
goals. Moreover, hippocampal activity during planning 
covaried with goal-related activity in prefrontal, medial 
temporal, and medial parietal cortex (Figure 52–8).
Episodic memory encoding and storage are also 
influenced by the adaptive value of events. Alison 
Adcock and colleagues showed that the anticipation 
of a potential reward can enhance memory by elicit-
ing coordinated activity between the medial temporal 
lobe and midbrain regions that are rich in dopamine 
neurons. Reward can also retroactively enhance mem-
ories. When human participants navigate a maze for 
a reward, they have better memory for neutral events 
that happened right before the reward. The ability to 
retroactively shape episodic memory based on out-
comes is important because the relevance of a spe-
cific episode may only become known after the fact. 
Together with the role of episodic memory in con-
structing the retrieval of past events and in imagining 
and simulating future events, the findings on reward 
support the view that a major function of episodic 
memory is to guide adaptive behaviors.
The Hippocampus Supports Episodic Memory by 
Building Relational Associations
In addition to the broad role of the hippocampus in 
episodic memory, future thinking, and goal-directed 
behavior, studies of rodents first pointed to a role for the 
hippocampus in spatial navigation (Chapter 54), find-
ings that were later supported by studies of nonhuman 
primates and humans. In rodents, single neurons in the 
hippocampus encode specific spatial information, and 
lesions of the hippocampus interfere with the animal’s 
memory for spatial location. Functional imaging of the 
brain in healthy humans shows that activity increases 
in the right hippocampus when spatial information 
is recalled and in the left hippocampus when words, 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1301
Figure 52–7  Brain regions supporting retrieval of memories 
for past events and imagination of future events. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Schacter, Addis, and Buckner 2007.)
A. Subjects were instructed to either remember a personally 
experienced event in their past or imagine a plausible event 
in their future while lying inside a functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging scanner. Events are elicited by a cue word (eg, 
“beach” or “birthday”). Subjective ratings of event phenom-
enology (eg, vividness and emotionality of the episode) and 
detailed event descriptions are often obtained in an interview 
following the scanning in order to confirm that an episodic 
event was successfully generated.
B. The core brain system that mediates past and future thinking 
is consistently activated while remembering the past, when envi-
sioning the future, and during related forms of mental simulation. 
Prominent components of this network include medial prefrontal 
regions, posterior regions in the medial and lateral parietal cor-
tex (extending into the precuneus and retrosplenial cortex), the 
lateral temporal cortex, and the medial temporal lobe. Moreover, 
regions within this core brain system are functionally correlated 
with each other and with the hippocampus. This core brain sys-
tem is thought to function adaptively to integrate information 
about relationships and associations from past experiences to 
construct mental simulations about possible future events.
B
A
Lateral
parietal
cortex
Medial
prefrontal
cortex
Precuneus/
retrosplenial
cortex
I remember taking a
daytrip last summer
and walking on the
beach.
I imagine picking
out a puppy at the
pet shop next year.
Cue
Lateral
temporal
cortex
Medial
temporal
lobe
Hippocampus
objects, or people are recalled. These physiological 
findings are consistent with the clinical observation 
that lesions of the right hippocampus differentially 
give rise to problems with spatial orientation, whereas 
lesions of the left hippocampus differentially cause 
deficits in verbal memory.
The fact that the hippocampus supports spatial 
processing, semantic memory, and episodic memory 
raises questions about how the hippocampus con-
tributes to such different behaviors. One compelling 
theory, proposed by Howard Eichenbaum and Neal 
Cohen, suggests that the hippocampus provides a 
general mechanism for forming and storing complex 
multimodal associations. According to this view, the 
hippocampus binds in memory the separate elements 
of experiences, encoding events as relational maps of 


===== Page 3 =====
1302    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Figure 52–8  Neural circuits supporting  
memory-based goal-directed navigation.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Brown  
et al. 2016.)
A. Human participants navigate to goals in a 
virtual reality environment while being scanned 
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. 
They first explore the space and learn where 
goals are located and then are tested on their 
ability to navigate to specific goals.
B. Navigational planning elicits goal-related activ-
ity in a core network including the hippocampus, 
medial temporal lobe, parahippocampal cortex 
(PHC), and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).
Figure 52–9  The hippocampus supports relational pro-
cessing underlying episodic memory. A conceptual illus-
tration of a memory space designating three key types of 
relational processing: events, episodes, and networks. The 
schematic illustrates processing of two distinct episodes 
(Episode A and Episode B), which have both distinct and over-
lapping elements. For example, the episodes might be two 
distinct visits to an Italian restaurant on separate evenings 
with the same friend. The evenings are experienced as dis-
tinct (different days, different weather, different moods), yet 
they share some overlap (the company of the same friend at 
the same restaurant). Events (1) are defined as items (objects, 
behaviors) that are associated with the context in which they 
occurred (denoted here as events 1 to 6 in each episode, such 
as the specific table you sat at, the food you ordered, etc.). 
Episodes (2) are defined in this view as the temporal organiza-
tion of these events. While most of the items in each episode 
are unique, some of them overlap (here, items 3 and 4; in the 
example, your friend and the restaurant). Relational networks 
(3) are formed via associations between events and episodes 
by way of the overlapping events, supporting the capacity for 
links between indirectly related events. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Eichenbaum and Cohen 2014. Copyright © 
2014 Elsevier Inc.)
Overhead view of goals
A
Navigation toward goals
Goal
Navigator view
B
OFC
PHC
Hippocampus
Medial OFC
Start
items within spatial and temporal contexts, thus 
composing a “memory space” that can distinguish 
distinct episodes, or sequences of events, even when 
the same (or similar) events occur in different episodes 
(Figure 52–9). As discussed later in this chapter, the 
view that the hippocampus encodes relations offers 
insights into the mechanism by which memories are 
built and explains why, in some cases, the hippocam-
pus may contribute to memory processes that are not 
consciously accessible but do encode relations.
Episode A
Events:
items in
context
1
Episodes:
temporal
organization
2
Networks:
integration and
inference
3
Episode B
1
1
2
2
3
4
3
5
6
4
5
6


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1303
AMN
AMN
control
M.S.
control
M.S. 
10
8
6
4
2
0
Percent font-speciﬁc priming
B
A
Figure 52–10  The right occipital cortex is required for visual 
priming for words. (Adapted from Vaidya et al. 1998.)
A. Structural magnetic resonance imaging depicts the near-
complete removal of the right occipital cortex in a patient, M.S., 
who suffered pharmacologically intractable epilepsy with a right 
occipital cortical focus.
B. Font-specific priming is a form of visual priming in which the 
individual is better able to identify a briefly flashed word when 
the type font is identical to an earlier presentation, compared 
to identification when the font is different. Priming is measured 
as performance when the font is the same minus performance 
when the font is different. Font-specific priming is intact in 
amnesic patients (AMN) and their controls as well as in the 
controls for patient M.S., but not in M.S. himself. The patient 
M.S. has normal explicit memory, even for visual cues (data  
not shown), but lacks implicit memory for specific properties  
of visually presented words.
Implicit Memory Supports a Range of 
Behaviors in Humans and Animals
Just as there are many ways in which explicit memory 
guides behavior, there are also many ways in which 
nonexplicit forms of memory, those without conscious 
awareness, can influence behavior. Implicit memory 
refers to forms of knowledge that guide behavior with-
out conscious awareness. Priming, for example, is the 
automatic influence of exposure to one cue on process-
ing of a later cue.
Priming can be classified as conceptual or per-
ceptual. Conceptual priming provides enhanced access 
to task-relevant semantic knowledge because that 
knowledge has been used before. It is correlated with 
decreased activity in left prefrontal regions that sub-
serve initial retrieval of semantic knowledge. In con-
trast, perceptual priming occurs within a specific sensory 
modality and depends on cortical modules that oper-
ate on sensory information about the form and struc-
ture of words and objects.
Damage to unimodal sensory regions of cortex 
impairs modality-specific perceptual priming. For 
example, one patient with an extensive surgical lesion 
of the right occipital lobe failed to demonstrate visual 
priming for words but had normal explicit memory 
(Figure 52–10). This condition is the reverse of that 
found in amnesic patients such as H.M., suggesting 
that the neural mechanisms of priming are distinct 
from those for explicit memory. The fact that percep-
tual priming can be intact in patients with amnesia due 
to medial temporal damage further suggests that it is 
distinct from explicit memory.
Different Forms of Implicit Memory Involve 
Different Neural Circuits
Other forms of implicit memory subserve the learn-
ing of habits and motor, perceptual, and cognitive 
skills and the formation and expression of conditioned 
responses. In general, these forms of implicit memory 
are characterized by incremental learning, which pro-
ceeds gradually with repetition and, in some cases, is 
driven by reinforcement.
The learning of habits, motor skills, and condi-
tioned responses can take place independently of 
the medial temporal lobe system. For example, H.M. 
was able to acquire new visuomotor skills, like the 
mirror-tracing task (see Figure 52–3). Therefore, early 
theories posited that these forms of memory gener-
ally do not depend on the medial temporal lobe but, 
rather, depend on the basal ganglia and cerebellum 
(see Chapters 37 and 38). However, subsequent work 
suggested that this is not a general rule and that the 
medial temporal lobe is required for forms of implicit 
learning that store relational associations, even when 
such associations are learned through repetition and 
appear to take place without conscious awareness.
It is now thought that several kinds of incremental 
implicit learning involve the medial temporal lobes. 
For example, Turk-Browne and colleagues investi-
gated implicit learning of regularities between visual 
cues, called statistical learning. In a typical statistical 
learning task, human subjects are presented with a 


===== Page 5 =====
1304    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
stream of sounds or images that follow a structured 
sequence or “grammar” of repetitions. Learning of 
the sequence is typically measured by a faster reaction 
time to repeated compared to nonrepeated sequences. 
At first glance, it would appear that statistical learn-
ing should not involve the medial temporal lobe: The 
learning is nonverbal, it does not require conscious 
thought and is therefore implicit, and it is assumed to 
reflect the accumulated computation of probabilistic 
relationships across multiple episodes, rather than the 
specific memory of one episode. Yet fMRI studies show 
that the hippocampus is active during statistical learn-
ing, and damage to the medial temporal lobe has been 
found to impair performance on this implicit task.
Statistical learning is an example of how learn-
ing takes place through repetition. New perceptual, 
motor, or cognitive abilities are also learned through 
repetition. With practice, performance becomes more 
accurate and faster, and these improvements general-
ize to learning novel information. Skill learning moves 
from a cognitive stage, where knowledge is repre-
sented explicitly and the learner must pay a great deal 
of attention to performance, to an autonomous stage, 
where the skill can be executed without much con-
scious attention. As an example, driving a car initially 
requires that one be consciously aware of each com-
ponent of the skill, but after practice, one no longer 
attends to the individual components.
The learning of sensorimotor skills depends on 
numerous brain regions that vary with the specific 
associations being learned. As we learned in Chapter 38, 
these include the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and neo-
cortex. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia in patients with 
Parkinson and Huntington disease impairs learning of 
motor skills. Patients with cerebellar lesions also have 
difficulties acquiring some motor skills. Functional 
imaging of healthy individuals during sensorimotor 
learning shows changes in the activity of the basal gan-
glia and cerebellum and their connectivity with corti-
cal regions. Danielle Bassett and colleagues have used 
network-analysis algorithms applied to whole-brain 
fMRI data to characterize dynamic changes in network 
functional connectivity that take place during motor 
skill learning. Finally, skilled behavior can depend on 
structural changes in motor neocortex, as seen by the 
expansion of the cortical representation of the fingers 
in musicians (Chapter 53).
Habits emerge from the repeated association of 
cues or actions with rewarding outcomes. Habit learn-
ing in humans is studied with tasks that involve incre-
mental learning of stimulus–reward associations. In a 
typical task, subjects perform a series of trials in which 
they are asked to choose among visual cues and receive 
trial-by-trial feedback on their choice. The relationship 
between the cues and the feedback varies probabilisti-
cally over the course of the task so that participants 
must keep updating their responses based on the feed-
back. Because learning takes place over numerous tri-
als, explicit memory of any one specific trial may not 
be as useful for successful performance as the gradual 
accumulation of feedback-driven learning of stimulus–
outcome associations.
fMRI studies demonstrate that incremental learn-
ing of stimulus–reward associations depends on the 
striatum, the area of the basal ganglia that receives 
input from neocortex, and its modulatory dopamin-
ergic inputs. Patients with a loss of striatal dopamine, 
as occurs in Parkinson disease, are less effective at 
learning based on trial-by-trial reinforcement. These 
findings are consistent with other studies that indi-
cate dopamine has an important role in modulating 
cortico-striatal circuitry for reinforcement learning (see 
Chapter 38).
At first glance, stimulus-reward learning appears 
to be precisely the sort of learning that does not 
depend on the medial temporal lobe: It is implicit 
rather than explicit, and it occurs gradually rather 
than through an explicit memory for a single event. 
Indeed, early theories posited that learning probabil-
istic stimulus–reward associations does not depend on 
the medial temporal lobe. However, subsequent work 
has revealed that the hippocampus does contribute to 
stimulus–reward learning under some circumstances, 
such as when the task demands learning of more com-
plex stimulus–stimulus associations (Figure 52–11). 
The contribution of the hippocampus to implicit learn-
ing takes place via interactions with other cortical and 
subcortical circuits. fMRI studies show functional con-
nectivity between the hippocampus and the striatum 
in support of learning across a variety of tasks. Interac-
tions between the hippocampus and the striatum are 
sometimes competitive and sometimes cooperative, 
depending on the demands of the task.
Implicit Memory Can Be Associative or 
Nonassociative
Some forms of implicit memory have also been studied 
in nonhuman animals, and these animal studies have 
distinguished two types of implicit memory: nonasso-
ciative and associative. With nonassociative learning, an 
animal learns about the properties of a single stimulus. 
With associative learning, the animal learns about the 
relationship between two stimuli or between a stimulus 
and a behavior. We consider the cellular mechanisms of 
implicit memory in animals in the next chapter.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1305
Figure 52–11  Learning stimulus–response associations 
involves both the striatum and the hippocampus. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Duncan et al. 2018.)
A. Participants use trial-by-trial reinforcement to learn to predict 
outcomes (rain or sun) based on cues (colorful shapes). The cues 
have a probabilistic relation to each weather outcome that the 
viewer learns by trial and error. The weather can be predicted 
based either on each individual cue or on the combined presen-
tation of the two cues (their configuration). Reinforcement learn-
ing models can discern which strategy each subject uses.
B. The striatum is known to play a critical role in learning to 
update choices based on reinforcement. When subjects learn 
about the configuration, this same task also elicits activity 
in the hippocampus and increased coupling of activity in the 
hippocampus and the striatum. Scatter plots show that the 
extent to which subjects use a configural learning strategy 
correlates with blood oxygenation level–dependent activity in 
the hippocampus and with functional coupling between the 
hippocampus and the striatum. The images show activity in 
hippocampus and the nucleus accumbens (NAcc), a region in 
the ventral portion of the striatum that responds to rewarding 
stimuli. (Abbreviation: fMRI, functional magnetic resonance 
imaging.)
A
Conﬁgural reinforcement learning task
B
Hippocampus
Ventral striatum / NAcc
Sun
Rain
Correct!
–0.02
–0.1
0
0.1
0
0.02
fMRI signal intensity
(hippocampus)
–0.4
0
0.4
Coupled fMRI activity
(hippocampus-striatum)
Learning strategy (behavior)
–0.1
0
0.1
Sun
Rain
Correct!
Nonassociative learning results when a subject is 
exposed once or repeatedly to a single type of stim-
ulus. Two forms of nonassociative learning are com-
mon in everyday life: habituation and sensitization. 
Habituation is a decrease in a response that occurs 
when a benign stimulus is presented repeatedly. For 
example, most people in the United States are startled 
when they first hear the sound of a firecracker on Inde-
pendence Day, but as the day progresses, they become 
accustomed to the noise and do not respond. Sensitiza-
tion (or pseudo-conditioning) is an enhanced response 
to a wide variety of stimuli after the presentation of an 
intense or noxious stimulus. For example, an animal 
will respond more vigorously to a mild tactile stimulus 
after receiving a painful pinch. Moreover, a sensitizing 
stimulus can override the effects of habituation, a pro-
cess called dishabituation. For example, after the startle 
response to a noise has been reduced by habituation, 


===== Page 7 =====
1306    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
one can restore the intensity of response to the noise by 
delivering a strong pinch.
With sensitization and dishabituation, the tim-
ing of stimuli is not important because no association 
between stimuli must be learned. In contrast, with two 
forms of associative learning, the timing of the stim-
uli to be associated is critical. Classical conditioning 
involves learning a relationship between two stimuli, 
whereas operant conditioning involves learning a rela-
tionship between the organism’s behavior and the con-
sequences of that behavior.
Classical conditioning was first described in the 
early 1900s by the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov. 
The essence of classical conditioning is the pairing of 
two stimuli: a conditioned stimulus and an uncondi-
tioned stimulus. The conditioned stimulus (CS), such 
as a light, a tone, or a touch, is chosen because it pro-
duces either no overt response or a weak response 
usually unrelated to the response that eventually will 
be learned. The unconditioned stimulus (US), such 
as food or a shock, is chosen because it normally pro-
duces a strong and consistent response (the uncondi-
tioned response), such as salivation or withdrawal of 
a limb. Unconditioned responses are innate; they are 
produced without learning. Repeated presentation of 
a CS followed by a US gradually elicits a new or differ-
ent response called the conditioned response.
One way of explaining conditioning is that 
repeated pairing of the CS and US causes the CS to 
become an anticipatory signal for the US. With suffi-
cient experience, an animal will respond to the CS as 
if it were anticipating the US. For example, if a light is 
followed repeatedly by the presentation of meat, even-
tually the sight of the light itself will make the animal 
salivate. Thus, classical conditioning is one way an ani-
mal learns to predict events.
The probability that an established conditioned 
response will occur decreases if the CS is repeatedly 
presented without the US. This process is known as 
extinction. If a light that has been paired with food is 
later repeatedly presented in the absence of food, it 
will gradually cease to evoke salivation. Extinction is 
an important adaptive mechanism; it would be mala-
daptive for an animal to continue to respond to cues 
that are no longer meaningful. The available evidence 
indicates that extinction is not the same as forgetting; 
instead, something new is learned—the CS now sig-
nals that the US will not occur.
For many years, psychologists thought that clas-
sical conditioning resulted as long as the CS preceded 
the US within a critical time interval. According to this 
view, each time a CS is followed by a US (reinforcing 
stimulus), a connection is strengthened between the 
internal representations of the stimulus and response 
or between the representations of one stimulus and 
another. The strength of the connection was thought 
to depend on the number of pairings of CS and US. 
A substantial body of evidence now indicates that 
classical conditioning cannot be adequately explained 
simply by the fact that two events or stimuli occur one 
after the other (Figure 52–12). Indeed, it would not be 
adaptive to depend solely on sequence. Rather, all ani-
mals capable of associative conditioning, from snails 
to humans, remember the salient relationship between 
associated events. Thus, classical conditioning, and 
perhaps all forms of associative learning, enables ani-
mals to distinguish events that reliably occur together 
from those that are only randomly associated.
Lesions in several regions of the brain affect clas-
sical conditioning. One well-studied example is con-
ditioning of the protective eyeblink reflex, a form 
of motor learning. A puff of air to the eye naturally 
causes an eyeblink. A conditioned eyeblink can be 
established by pairing the puff with a tone that pre-
cedes the puff. Studies in rabbits indicate that the con-
ditioned response (an eyeblink in response to a tone) 
is abolished by a lesion at either of two sites. Damage 
to the vermis of the cerebellum abolishes the condi-
tioned response but does not affect the unconditioned 
response (eyeblink in response to a puff of air). Inter-
estingly, neurons in the same area of the cerebellum 
show learning-dependent increases in activity that 
closely parallel the development of the conditioned 
behavior. A lesion in the interpositus nucleus, a deep 
cerebellar nucleus, also abolishes the conditioned eye-
blink. Thus, both the vermis and the deep nuclei of the 
cerebellum play an important role in conditioning the 
eyeblink, and perhaps other simple forms of classical 
conditioning involving skeletal muscle movement.
Another well-studied example is fear condition-
ing, which depends on the amygdala. In fear condi-
tioning, a neutral cue, such as a tone, is paired with an 
aversive outcome, such as a shock. This pairing leads 
to a conditioned fear response in which the neutral 
tone alone elicits a behavioral reaction, such as freez-
ing. Fear conditioning depends on plasticity in the 
inputs to and connections between the subnuclei of the 
amygdala, particularly the basolateral amygdala, as 
we will discuss in the next chapter.
Operant Conditioning Involves Associating a 
Specific Behavior With a Reinforcing Event
A second major paradigm of associative learning, dis-
covered by Edgar Thorndike and systematically stud-
ied by B. F. Skinner and others, is operant conditioning 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1307
Figure 52–12  Classical conditioning depends on the 
degree of correlation of two stimuli. In this experiment with 
rats, a tone (the conditioned stimulus [CS]) was paired with 
an electric shock (the unconditioned stimulus [US]) in four out 
of 10 of the trials (red ticks). In some trial blocks, the shock 
was presented without the tone (green ticks). Suppression 
of lever-pressing to obtain food is a sign of freezing, a condi-
tioned defensive response. The degree of conditioning was 
evaluated by determining how effective the tone alone was 
in suppressing lever-pressing to obtain food. (Adapted from 
Rescorla 1968.)
A. Maximal conditioning occurred when the US was presented 
only with the CS.
B–C. Little or no conditioning occurred when the shock was 
presented without the tone almost as often as with it (40%). 
Some conditioning occurred when the shock occurred without 
the tone 20% of the time.
A  0% Unpaired shocks
Strength of conditioning
CS 
(tone)
US 
(shock)
B  20% Unpaired shocks
CS
US
C  40% Unpaired shocks
CS
US
(also called trial-and-error learning). In a typical labo-
ratory example of operant conditioning, a hungry rat 
or pigeon is placed in a test chamber in which the ani-
mal is rewarded for a specific action. For example, the 
chamber may have a lever protruding from one wall. 
Because of previous learning, or through play and ran-
dom activity, the animal will occasionally press the 
lever. If the animal promptly receives a positive rein-
forcer (eg, food) after pressing the lever, it will begin 
to press the lever more often than the spontaneous 
rate. The animal can be described as having learned 
that among its many behaviors (eg, grooming, rearing, 
and walking) one behavior is followed by food. With 
this information, the animal is likely to press the lever 
whenever it is hungry.
If we think of classical conditioning as the forma-
tion of a predictive relationship between two stimuli 
(the CS and the US), operant conditioning can be con-
sidered as the formation of a predictive relationship 
between an action and an outcome. Unlike classical 
conditioning, which tests the responsiveness of a reflex 
to a stimulus, operant conditioning tests behavior that 
occurs either spontaneously or without an identifi-
able stimulus. Thus, operant behaviors are said to be 
emitted rather than elicited. In general, actions that 
are rewarded tend to be repeated, whereas actions fol-
lowed by aversive, although not necessarily painful, 
consequences tend not to be repeated. Many experi-
mental psychologists think that this simple idea, called 
the law of effect, governs much voluntary behavior.
Operant and classical conditioning involve differ-
ent kinds of association—an association between an 
action and a reward or between two stimuli, respec-
tively. However, the laws of operant and classical 
conditioning are quite similar. For example, timing is 
critical in both. In operant conditioning, the reinforcer 
usually must closely follow the operant action. If the 
reinforcer is delayed too long, only weak conditioning 
occurs. Similarly, classical conditioning is generally 
poor if the interval between the CS and US is too long 
or if the US precedes the CS.
Associative Learning Is Constrained by the Biology 
of the Organism
Animals generally learn to associate stimuli that are 
relevant to their survival. For example, animals readily 
learn to avoid certain foods that have been followed 
by a negative reinforcement (eg, nausea produced by a 
poison), a phenomenon termed taste aversion.


===== Page 9 =====
1308    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Unlike most other forms of conditioning, taste aver-
sion develops even when the unconditioned response 
(poison-induced nausea) occurs after a long delay, up 
to hours after the CS (specific taste). This makes bio-
logical sense because the ill effects of infected foods 
and naturally occurring toxins usually follow inges-
tion only after some delay. For most species, including 
humans, taste-aversion conditioning occurs only when 
certain tastes are associated with illness. Taste aversion 
develops poorly if a taste is followed by a painful stim-
ulus that does not produce nausea. Also, animals do 
not develop an aversion to a visual or auditory stimu-
lus that has been paired with nausea.
Errors and Imperfections in Memory Shed 
Light on Normal Memory Processes
Memory allows us to revisit our personal past; pro-
vides access to a vast network of facts, associations, 
and concepts; and supports learning and adaptive 
behavior. But memory is not perfect. We often forget 
events rapidly or gradually, sometimes distort the 
past, and occasionally remember events that we would 
prefer to forget. In the 1930s, the British psychologist 
Frederic Bartlett reported experiments in which peo-
ple read and tried to remember complex stories. He 
showed that people often misremember many features 
of the stories, often distorting information based on 
their expectations of what should have happened. For-
getting and distortion can provide important insights 
into the workings of memory.
Memory’s imperfections have been classified 
into seven basic categories, dubbed the “seven sins of 
memory”: transience, absent-mindedness, blocking, 
misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence. 
Here, we focus on six of these.
Absent-mindedness results from a lack of attention 
to immediate experience. Absent-mindedness during 
encoding is a likely source of common memory fail-
ures such as forgetting where one recently placed an 
object. Absent-mindedness also occurs when we forget 
to carry out a particular task such as picking up grocer-
ies on the way home from the office, even though we 
initially encoded the relevant information.
Blocking refers to a temporary inability to access 
information stored in memory. People often have par-
tial awareness of a sought-after word or image but are 
nonetheless unable to recall the entire word accurately 
or completely. Sometimes, it feels like a blocked word 
is on “the tip of the tongue”—we are aware of the ini-
tial letter of the word, the number of syllables in it, or 
a like-sounding word. Determining which information 
is correct and which is incorrect requires a great deal of 
conscious effort.
Absent-mindedness and blocking are sins of omis-
sion: At a moment when we need to remember infor-
mation, it is inaccessible. However, memory is also 
characterized by sins of commission, situations in 
which some form of memory is present but wrong.
Misattribution refers to the association of a memory 
with an incorrect time, place, or person. False recogni-
tion, a type of misattribution, occurs when individu-
als report that they “remember” items or events that 
never happened. Such false memories have been docu-
mented in controlled experiments where people claim 
to have seen or heard words or objects that had not 
been presented previously but are similar in meaning 
or appearance to what was actually presented. Stud-
ies using positron emission tomography imaging and 
fMRI have shown that many brain regions show simi-
lar levels of activity during both true and false recog-
nition, which may be one reason why false memories 
sometimes feel like real ones.
Suggestibility refers to the tendency to incorporate 
new information into memory, usually as a result of 
leading questions or suggestions about what may have 
been experienced. Research using hypnotic suggestion 
indicates that various kinds of false memories can be 
implanted in highly suggestible individuals, such as 
remembering hearing loud noises at night. Studies 
with young adults have also shown that repeated sug-
gestions about a childhood experience can produce 
memories of events that never occurred. These find-
ings are important theoretically because they highlight 
that memory is not simply a “playback” of past experi-
ences (Box 52–1). Despite these important theoretical 
and practical implications, next to nothing is known 
about the neural bases of suggestibility.
Bias refers to distortions and unconscious influ-
ences on memory that reflect one’s general knowl-
edge and beliefs. People often misremember the past 
to make it consistent with what they presently believe, 
know, or feel. This idea is consistent with the idea of 
“predictive coding” supported by studies showing 
that even low-level neural mechanisms of perception 
and sensation are shaped by expectations. The specific 
brain mechanisms by which expectations influence 
memory are not well understood.
Persistence refers to obsessive memory, constant 
remembering of information or events that we might 
want to forget. Neuroimaging studies have illuminated 
some neurobiological factors that contribute to persis-
tent emotional memories. Some key results implicate 
the amygdala, the almond-shaped structure near the 
hippocampus long known to be involved in emotional 


