===== Page 1 =====
1460    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–10  Focal and generalized onset seizures propa-
gate via several pathways. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Lothman 1993b.)
A. Focal onset seizures can spread locally from a focus via 
intrahemispheric fibers (1) and more remotely to homotopic 
contralateral cortex (2) and subcortical centers (3). The second-
ary generalization of a focal onset seizure spreads to subcorti-
cal centers via projections to the thalamus (4). Widespread 
thalamocortical interconnections then contribute to rapid activa-
tion of both hemispheres.
B. In a generalized onset seizure, such as a typical absence sei-
zure, interconnections between the thalamus and cortex are a 
major route of seizure propagation.
of seizures, as demonstrated by patients who have 
seizures only while sleeping (nocturnal epilepsy) or 
during their menstrual period (catamenial epilepsy). 
If we could develop continuous monitoring methods 
to predict the timing of seizure generation (Box 58–2), 
acute intervention to deliver a drug or change neural 
activity patterns to prevent seizures might become 
a therapeutic option. However, EEG studies reveal 
great variability between patients in pre-ictal patterns. 
Continuous chronic stimulation of neural circuits is 
another method of modifying the excitability of epilep-
tic circuits. As an example of this approach, implanted 
vagal nerve stimulators have been modestly successful 
in treating pharmaco-resistant epilepsy that does not 
respond to other treatments.
The Spread of Seizure Activity Involves Normal 
Cortical Circuitry
If activity in the seizure focus is sufficiently intense, 
the electrical activity begins to spread to other brain 
regions. Spread of seizure activity from a focus gener-
ally follows the same axonal pathways as does normal 
cortical activity. Thus, thalamocortical, subcortical, 
and transcallosal pathways can all become involved in 
seizure spread. Seizure activity can propagate from a 
seizure focus to other areas of the same hemisphere or 
across the corpus callosum to involve the contralateral 
hemisphere (Figure 58–10). Once both hemispheres 
become involved, a focal onset seizure has become sec-
ondarily generalized. At this point, the patient gener-
ally experiences loss of consciousness. The spread of a 
partial seizure usually occurs rapidly over a few sec-
onds, but can also evolve over many minutes. Rapid 
generalization is more likely if a focal onset seizure 
begins in the neocortex than if it begins in the limbic 
system (in particular, the hippocampus and amygdala).
An interesting unanswered question is what ter-
minates a seizure. Remarkably, few mechanisms for 
the self-limiting return to the interictal state have been 
defined with certainty. One definite conclusion at this 
point is that termination is not due to cellular metabolic 
exhaustion, because under severe conditions clinical 
seizures may continue for hours (see below). During 
the initial 30 seconds or so of a focal onset seizure that 
secondarily generalizes, neurons in the involved areas 
undergo prolonged depolarization and fire continu-
ously (due to loss of the afterhyperpolarization that 
normally follows a paroxysmal depolarizing shift). As 
the seizure evolves, the neurons begin to repolarize 
and the afterhyperpolarization reappears. The cycles 
of depolarization and repolarization correspond to the 
clonic phase of the seizure (Figure 58–7A).
Spread
Seizure
focus
1
2
3
A  Focal seizure
B  Primary generalized seizure
Secondary generalization
Thalamus
4
Seizure
focus


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1461
The seizure is often followed by a period of 
decreased electrical activity, the postictal period, 
which may be accompanied by symptoms of confu-
sion, drowsiness, or even focal neurological deficits 
such as a hemiparesis (Todd paralysis). A neurological 
exam in the postictal period can lead to insights about 
the locus of the seizure focus when there is prolonged 
depression of one brain region or function, once other 
brain regions have regained normal function.
Generalized Onset Seizures Are Driven by 
Thalamocortical Circuits
Unlike the typical focal onset seizure, a generalized 
onset seizure abruptly disrupts normal brain activity in 
both cerebral hemispheres simultaneously. Generalized 
onset seizures and their associated epilepsies vary both 
in their manifestations and etiologies. Although the cel-
lular mechanisms of generalized onset seizures differ in 
a number of interesting respects from those of focal onset 
or secondarily generalized seizures, a generalized onset 
seizure can be difficult to distinguish clinically or by EEG 
from a focal onset seizure that rapidly generalizes.
The most studied type of generalized onset seizure 
is the typical absence seizure (petit mal), whose char-
acteristic EEG pattern (the 3-Hz spike-and-wave pat-
tern in Figure 58–11A) was first recognized by Hans 
Berger in 1933. F. A. Gibbs recognized the relationship 
of this EEG pattern to typical absence seizures (he aptly 
described the pattern as “dart and dome”) and attrib-
uted the mechanism to generalized cortical disturbance. 
The distinctive clinical features of typical absence sei-
zures have a clear correlation with the EEG activity.
The typical absence seizure begins suddenly, lasts 
10 to 30 seconds, and produces impaired awareness 
with only minor motor manifestations such as blink-
ing or lip smacking. Unlike a focal onset seizure that 
secondarily generalizes, generalized onset seizures 
are not preceded by an aura or followed by postictal 
symptoms. The spike-wave EEG pattern can be seen in 
all cerebral areas abruptly and simultaneously and is 
immediately preceded and followed by normal back-
ground activity. Very brief (1–5 seconds) runs of 3-Hz 
EEG activity without apparent clinical symptoms are 
common in patients with absence seizures, but if fre-
quent, they can affect their ability to carry out normal 
activities such as school performance.
In contrast to Gibbs’s hypothesis of diffuse cortical 
hyperexcitability, Penfield and Jasper noted that the EEG 
in typical absence seizures is similar to rhythmic EEG 
activity in sleep, so-called sleep spindles (Chapter 44). 
They proposed a “centrencephalic” hypothesis in which 
generalization was attributed to rhythmic activity (pac-
ing) by neuronal aggregates in the upper brain stem or 
thalamus that project diffusely to the cortex.
Research on animal models of generalized onset 
seizures and studies of the genetics of generalized 
epilepsy suggest that elements of both hypotheses 
are correct. In cats, parenteral injections of penicillin, 
a weak GABAA antagonist, produce behavioral unre-
sponsiveness associated with an EEG pattern of bilat-
eral synchronous slow waves (generalized penicillin 
epilepsy). During such a seizure, thalamic and cortical 
cells become synchronized through the same recipro-
cal thalamocortical connections that contribute to nor-
mal sleep spindles during slow-wave sleep.
Such seizures could in theory represent a form of 
diffuse hyperexcitability in the cortex. Recordings from 
individual cortical neurons show an increase in the 
rate of firing during a depolarizing burst that in turn 
produces a powerful GABAergic inhibitory feedback 
that hyperpolarizes the cell for approximately 200 ms 
after each burst (Figure 58–11C). This depolarization 
followed by inhibition differs fundamentally from the 
paroxysmal depolarizing shift in focal onset seizures in 
that GABAergic inhibition is preserved. In the typical 
absence seizure, the summated activity of the bursts 
produces the spike while the summated inhibition pro-
duces the wave of the spike-wave EEG pattern.
What are the properties of cells and networks 
that facilitate this generalized and synchronous activ-
ity? An early clue came from studies of the intrinsic 
bursting of thalamic relay neurons. Henrik Jahnsen 
and Rodolfo Llinas found that these neurons robustly 
express the T-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channel that 
is inactivated at the resting membrane potential but 
becomes available for activation when the cell is hyper-
polarized (Chapter 10). A subsequent depolarization 
then transiently opens the Ca2+ channel (thus its name, 
T-type), and the Ca2+ influx generates low-threshold 
Ca2+ spikes. Consistent with the hypothesis that T-type 
channels contribute to absence seizures, certain anti-
convulsant agents that block absence seizures, such 
as ethosuximide (Zarontin) and valproic acid (Depa-
kote), also block T-type channels. T-type channels are 
encoded by three related genes (Cav3.1–Cav3.3), with 
Cav3.1 the predominant type in the thalamus.
The circuitry of the thalamus seems ideally suited 
to the generation of generalized onset seizures. The 
pattern of thalamic neuron activity during sleep spin-
dles suggests a reciprocal interaction between thalamic 
relay neurons and GABAergic interneurons in the tha-
lamic reticular nucleus and perigeniculate nucleus 
(Figure 58–11B). Studies of thalamic brain slices by 
David McCormick and his colleagues indicate that 


===== Page 3 =====
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
Vm
Cortical neuron
A  Spike and wave activity in typical absence seizure 
C  Synchrony of neuronal activity in primary generalized (spike-wave) seizure
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
Vm
Thalamic neuron
T(Ca) current
1 s
GABA
gK
AMPA
1 s
50 µV
B  Thalamocortical projections
Cortex
Layer IV 
Layer V
Thalamus
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
Reticular
thalamic
nucleus
Thalamic
relay
nucleus
Figure 58–11  Generalized onset seizures have distinctive 
electroencephalogram (EEG) and single-neuron patterns.
A. This EEG from a 12-year-old patient with typical absence 
(petit mal) seizures shows the sudden onset of synchronous 
spikes at a frequency of 3 per second and wave activity lasting 
approximately 14 seconds. The seizure clinically manifested as 
a staring spell with occasional eye blinks. Unlike a focal onset 
seizure, there is no buildup of activity preceding the seizure and 
the electrical activity returns abruptly to the normal background 
level following the seizure. The discontinuity in the trace is due 
to removal of a 3-second period of recording. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Lothman and Collins 1990.)
B. Thalamocortical connections that participate in the genera-
tion of sleep spindles (Chapter 44) are thought to be essential 
for the generation of generalized onset seizures. Pyramidal 
cells in the cortex are reciprocally connected by excitatory 
synapses with thalamic relay neurons. GABAergic inhibitory 
interneurons in the reticular thalamic nucleus are excited by 
pyramidal cells in the cortex and by thalamic relay neurons and 
inhibit the thalamic relay cells. The interneurons are also recip-
rocally connected.
C. Neuronal activity of cortical and thalamic neurons becomes 
synchronized during a generalized onset seizure. The depolari-
zation is dependent on conductances in α-amino-3-hydroxy-
5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-type glutamate 
receptor-channels and T-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. The 
repolarization is due to γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated 
inhibition as well as voltage- and calcium-dependent K+ con-
ductances (gK). (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman 
1993a.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1463
the interneurons hyperpolarize the relay neurons, thus 
removing the inactivation of T-type Ca2+ channels. This 
action leads to an oscillatory response: A rebound burst 
of action potentials following each IPSP to which the 
T-type Ca2+ channels contribute stimulates the GABAer-
gic interneurons, resulting in another round of relay neu-
ron rebound firing. The relay neurons also excite cortical 
neurons, manifested in the EEG by a “spindle.” Both the 
T-type Ca2+ channel and the GABAB receptor-channel 
play an important role in the generation of this activity, 
which resembles human absence seizures (Chapter 44).
Mutations in voltage-gated Ca2+ channels have pro-
duced several mouse models of generalized epilepsy, 
including the so-called totterer mouse, which bears a 
mutation in the P/Q-type calcium channels involved 
in neurotransmitter release. Studies of these mutants 
by Jeffrey Noebels and his colleagues have revealed 
that the animals develop generalized onset seizures 
when they reach adolescence. EEGs in these animals 
show a paroxysmal spike-wave discharge and seizures 
that are characterized by an arrest of behavior and 
blockade by ethosuximide, similar to typical absence 
seizures in children. Thalamic neurons in these mice 
have elevated T-type Ca2+ channels that favor rebound 
bursting. Mutations of over 20 different genes for this 
phenotype have now been described in mice. Remark-
ably, many encode ion channel subunits or proteins 
involved in presynaptic transmitter release.
Locating the Seizure Focus Is Critical to the 
Surgical Treatment of Epilepsy
The pioneering studies of Wilder Penfield in Montreal 
in the early 1950s led to the recognition that removal 
of the temporal lobe in certain patients with focal 
onset seizures of hippocampal origin could reduce the 
number of seizures or even cure epilepsy. As surgical 
treatment for such patients became more common, 
it became clear that the surgical outcome is directly 
related to the adequacy of the resection. Thus, precise 
localization of the seizure focus in cases of focal onset 
seizures is essential. Electrical mapping of seizure foci 
originally relied on the surface EEG, which we have 
seen is biased toward particular sets of neurons in the 
cortex immediately adjacent to the skull. However, 
seizures intractable to conventional medical manage-
ment often begin in deep structures that show little or 
no abnormality on the surface EEG at the onset of the 
seizure. Thus, the surface EEG is somewhat limited in 
identifying the location of the seizure focus.
The development of magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) markedly improved the noninvasive anatomical 
mapping of seizure foci. This technique is now routine 
in the evaluation of epilepsies involving the temporal 
lobe, but also shows increasing promise for identify-
ing seizure foci in other locations. The scientific basis 
of anatomical mapping of seizure foci by MRI was the 
observation that a majority of patients with intrac-
table focal onset seizures with impaired awareness 
have atrophy and cell loss in the mesial portions of 
the hippocampal formation. There is a dramatic loss 
of neurons within the hippocampus (mesial temporal 
sclerosis), changes in dendritic morphology of surviv-
ing cells, and collateral sprouting of some axons. The 
anatomical resolution of modern MRI machines has 
allowed a noninvasive, quantitative assessment of the 
size of the hippocampus in epilepsy patients. Loss of 
volume of the hippocampus on one or another side of 
the brain generally correlates well with the localization 
of seizure foci in the hippocampus as determined by 
functional criteria using implanted depth electrodes.
The typical patient with mesial temporal epilepsy 
has unilateral disease, which leads to shrinkage of the 
hippocampus on one side that can be associated with 
apparent dilatation of the temporal horn of the lateral 
ventricle. Such a case is illustrated in Box 58–3. How-
ever, in many patients, abnormalities cannot be detected 
using anatomical MRI; thus, nonanatomical (functional) 
imaging techniques (fMRI) are used as well (Chapter 6).
Functional neuroimaging takes advantage of the 
changes in cerebral metabolism and blood flow that 
occur in the seizure focus during the ictal and interic-
tal periods. The electrical activity associated with a sei-
zure places a large metabolic demand on brain tissue. 
During a focal onset seizure, there is an approximately 
three-fold increase in glucose and oxygen utiliza-
tion. Between seizures, the seizure focus often shows 
decreased metabolism. Despite the increased metabolic 
demands, the brain is able to maintain normal adeno-
sine triphosphate (ATP) levels during a focal onset sei-
zure. On the other hand, the transient interruption of 
breathing during a generalized motor seizure causes a 
decrease in oxygen levels in the blood. This results in 
a drop in ATP concentration and an increase in anaer-
obic metabolism as indicated by rising lactate levels. 
This oxygen debt is quickly replenished in the postic-
tal period, and no permanent damage to brain tissue 
results from a single generalized seizure.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans of 
patients with focal onset seizures originating in the 
mesial temporal lobe frequently show interictal hypo-
metabolism, with metabolic changes extending to the 
lateral temporal lobe, ipsilateral thalamus, basal gan-
glia, and frontal cortex. PET scans using nonhydrolyz-
able glucose analogs have been particularly helpful 


===== Page 5 =====
1464    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–12  The patient is shown reading quietly 
in the period preceding the seizure (A), during the 
period when she reported a feeling of fear (B), and 
during the period when there was alteration of con-
sciousness and an audible scream (C). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Dr. Martin Salinsky.)
A 27-year-old woman had episodes of decreased respon-
siveness beginning at age 19. At first, she would stare 
off and appear confused during the episodes. Later, she 
developed an aura consisting of a feeling of fear. This 
fear was followed by altered consciousness, a wide-eyed 
stare, tightening of the left arm, and a scream that lasted 
for 14 to 20 seconds (Figure 58–12).
These spells were diagnosed as complex partial sei-
zures. The seizures occurred several times a week despite 
treatment with several antiepileptic drugs. She was una-
ble to work or drive due to frequent seizures. She had a 
history of meningitis at age 6 months, and throughout 
childhood she had experienced brief episodes of altered 
perception described as “like someone threw a switch.”
Based on an evaluation summarized in Figures 
58–13 and 58–14, a right amygdalohippocampectomy 
was performed. The patient was seizure-free following 
the operation and returned to full-time employment.
Box 58–3  Surgical Treatment of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy
in identifying seizure foci in patients with normal MRI 
scans and in some early childhood epilepsies. Unfortu-
nately, for unclear reasons, PET has been less reliable in 
localizing seizure foci in extratemporal areas such as the 
frontal lobe. An additional limitation is the expense of the 
PET scan and the short half-life of the isotopes (a nearby 
cyclotron is required). PET scanning can also be used to 
look for functional changes in neurotransmitter receptor 
binding and transport related to seizure activity.
A related technique that measures cerebral blood 
flow, single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT), has been used more frequently than PET. 
SPECT does not have the resolution of PET but can be 
performed in the nuclear medicine department of many 
large hospitals. Injection of radioisotopes and SPECT 
imaging at the time of a seizure (ictal SPECT) reveal a 
pattern of hypermetabolism followed by hypometabo-
lism in the seizure focus and surrounding tissue. Mag-
netoencephalography and functional MRI also offer 
further advantages in the mapping of seizure foci.
With rigorous selection of patients for epilepsy 
surgery, the cure rate for epilepsy with a well-defined 
A
B
C


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1465
Figure 58–13  The electroencephalogram (EEG) at the 
time of the photographs in Figure 58–12. Low-amplitude 
background rhythms occur in the beginning (left). At the 
point when the patient reported fear (B), there is a buildup 
of EEG activity at the onset of a focal onset seizure with 
impaired awareness, but this activity is confined to the 
EEG electrodes over the right hemisphere (electrodes 
9–16). At the point awareness is altered (C), the seizure 
activity has spread to the left hemisphere (electrodes 1–8). 
EEG spike-waves are particularly prominent in lead 9 over 
the right anterior temporal region. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Dr. Martin Salinsky.)
Figure 58–14  Enhanced mag-
netic resonance imaging reveals 
atrophy of the right hippocam-
pus (arrows on the right) and 
a normal left hippocampus 
(arrows on the left). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Dr. Martin 
Salinsky.)
2
B
C
3
4
5
6
7
8
5
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
13
1
2
3
4
1
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
9
14
15
16
seizure focus in the temporal lobe can approach 80%. 
Patients with complicating factors (eg, multiple foci) 
have lower success rates. However, even among these 
patients, the number and severity of seizures are usu-
ally reduced. Patients who have been “cured” of sei-
zures may still experience cognitive problems such as 
memory loss and social problems such as adjustments 
to more independent living and limited employment 
opportunities. These factors emphasize the need for 
treatment as early in life as feasible.
Prolonged Seizures Can Cause Brain Damage
Repeated Convulsive Seizures Are a  
Medical Emergency
As noted above, brain tissue can compensate for the 
metabolic stress of a focal onset seizure or the tran-
sient decrease in oxygen delivery during a single gen-
eralized tonic-clonic seizure. In a generalized seizure, 
stimulation of the hypothalamus leads to massive 


===== Page 7 =====
1466    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
activation of the “stress” response of the sympathetic 
nervous system. The increased systemic blood pressure 
and serum glucose initially compensate for increased 
metabolic demand, but these homeostatic mechanisms 
fail during prolonged seizures. The resulting systemic 
metabolic derangements, including hypoxia, hypoten-
sion, hypoglycemia, and acidemia, lead to a reduction 
in high-energy phosphates (ATP and phosphocreatine) 
in the brain and thus can be devastating to brain tissue.
Systemic complications such as cardiac arrhyth-
mias, pulmonary edema, hyperthermia, and muscle 
breakdown can also occur. The occurrence of repeated 
generalized seizures without return to full conscious-
ness between seizures, called status epilepticus, is 
a true medical emergency. This condition requires 
aggressive seizure management and general medi-
cal support because 30 or more minutes of continu-
ous convulsive seizures leads to brain injury or even 
death. Status epilepticus can involve nonconvulsive 
seizures for which the metabolic consequences are 
much less severe.
In addition to the dangers of status epilepticus, 
patients with poorly controlled seizures are also at risk 
for sudden death (sudden unexpected death in epi-
lepsy [SUDEP]), the leading cause of death in patients 
with uncontrolled seizures. The underlying mecha-
nisms for SUDEP are not completely understood, but 
recent studies by Richard Bagnall and colleagues as 
well as others suggest that cases of SUDEP have clini-
cally relevant mutations in the genes implicated in 
cardiac arrhythmia and epilepsy. Such data support an 
association between SUDEP and cardiac arrhythmias 
or interruption of brain stem circuits involved in res-
piratory control. This topic is appropriately the focus 
of intense current investigation.
Excitotoxicity Underlies Seizure-Related  
Brain Damage
Repeated seizures can damage the brain independently 
of cardiopulmonary or systemic metabolic changes, 
suggesting that local factors in the brain can result in 
neuronal death. The immature brain appears particu-
larly vulnerable to such damage, perhaps because of 
greater electrotonic coupling between neurons in the 
developing brain, less effective potassium buffering by 
immature glia, and decreased glucose transport across 
the blood–brain barrier.
In 1880, Wilhelm Sommer first noted the vulner-
ability of the hippocampus to such insults, with pref-
erential loss of the pyramidal neurons in the CA1 and 
CA3 regions. This pattern has been duplicated in exper-
imental animals by electrical stimulation of afferents to 
the hippocampus or by injection of excitatory amino 
acid analogs such as kainic acid. Interestingly, kainic 
acid causes local damage at the site of injection and 
also at the site of termination of afferents originating at 
the injection site.
These observations suggest that release of the 
excitatory transmitter glutamate during excessive 
stimulation such as a seizure can itself cause neuronal 
damage, a condition termed excitotoxicity. Because it 
has been difficult to detect increases in extracellular 
glutamate during status epilepticus, it appears that 
excitotoxicity results more from excessive stimulation 
of glutamate receptors than from tonic increases in 
extracellular glutamate. The histological appearance 
of acute excitotoxicity includes massive swelling of 
cell bodies and dendrites, the predominant locations 
of glutamate receptors and excitatory synapses.
Although the cellular and molecular mechanisms 
of excitotoxicity are still not fully understood, several 
features are clear. Overactivation of glutamate recep-
tors leads to an excessive increase in intracellular Ca2+ 
that can activate a self-destructive cellular cascade 
involving calcium-dependent enzymes, such as phos-
phatases, proteases, and lipases. Lipid peroxidation 
can also cause production of free radicals that damage 
vital cellular proteins and lead to cell death. The role 
of mitochondria in Ca2+ homeostasis and in control of 
free radicals may also be important. The pattern of cell 
death was first thought to reflect necrosis due to the 
autolysis of critical cellular proteins. However, the acti-
vation of “death genes,” characteristic of programmed 
cell death (apoptosis), may also be involved.
Seizure-related brain damage or excitotoxicity can 
be specific to certain types of cells in particular brain 
regions, perhaps due to protective factors, such as 
calcium-binding proteins in some cells and sensitizing 
factors, such as the expression of calcium-permeable 
glutamate receptors in other cells. For example, exci-
totoxicity induced in vitro by excessive activation of 
AMPA-type glutamate receptors preferentially affects 
interneurons that express AMPA-type receptors that 
have high Ca2+ permeability, providing a possible 
mechanism for their selective vulnerability.
Several outbreaks of “amnestic” shellfish poison-
ing provide a vivid example of the consequences of 
overactivation of glutamate receptors. Domoic acid, a 
glutamate analog not present in the brain, is a natural 
product of certain species of marine algae that flour-
ish during appropriate ocean conditions. Domoic acid 
can be concentrated by filter feeders such as shell-
fish. Ingestion of domoic-contaminated shellfish spo-
radically causes outbreaks of neurological damage, 
including severe seizures and memory loss (amnesia). 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1467
The area most sensitive to damage is the hippocam-
pus, providing further support for the excitotoxicity 
hypothesis and the critical role of the hippocampus in 
learning and memory.
The Factors Leading to Development of 
Epilepsy Are Poorly Understood
A single seizure does not warrant a diagnosis of 
epilepsy. Normal people can have a seizure under 
extenuating circumstances such as after drug inges-
tion or extreme sleep deprivation. Clinicians look 
for possible causes of seizures in such patients but 
usually do not begin treatment with anticonvulsants 
following a single seizure. Unfortunately, our under-
standing of what factors contribute to susceptibility 
to epilepsy is still rudimentary. However, progress 
on this front is increasing rapidly with the advent 
of experimental mutagenesis in animal models and 
clinical neurogenetics in patients including whole-
exome sequencing.
Some forms of epilepsy have long been consid-
ered to result in part from a genetic predisposition. 
For example, infants with febrile seizures often have a 
family history of similar seizures. The role of genetics 
in epilepsy is supported by the existence of familial 
epileptic syndromes in humans as well as seizure-
prone animal models with such exotic names as Papio 
papio (a baboon with photosensitive seizures), audio-
genic mice (in which loud sounds induce seizures), 
and spontaneous single-locus mutations such as reeler 
and totterer mice (names alluding to the clinical mani-
festations of cerebellar mutations in these animals). 
Even with a genetic predisposition or a structural 
lesion, the evolution of the epileptic phenotype often 
involves maladaptive changes in brain structure and 
function.
Mutations in Ion Channels Are Among the  
Genetic Causes of Epilepsy
Recent studies have provided a wealth of new infor-
mation concerning the molecular genetics of epilepsy. 
At present, more than 120 genes have been linked to 
an epileptic phenotype; approximately half of these 
were discovered in humans and the others in animals, 
mostly mice. The affected proteins include ion channel 
subunits, proteins involved in synaptic transmission 
such as transporters, vesicle proteins, synaptic recep-
tors, and molecules involved in Ca2+ signaling. For 
example, seizures in the totterer mutant mouse are due 
to a spontaneous mutation in the gene that encodes the 
CaV2.1 or α1A-subunit of the P/Q-type voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channel. That a mutation in these classes of pro-
teins can cause epilepsy is perhaps not unexpected 
given the dependence of seizures on synaptic trans-
mission and neuronal excitability.
Some of the other genes linked to epilepsy in 
mice have been more surprising, such as the genes 
for centromere BP-B, a DNA binding protein, and the 
sodium/hydrogen exchanger, which is affected in the 
slow-wave epilepsy mouse. A wide variety of human 
genes cause neurological disorders, of which epilepsy 
is only one manifestation. For example, Rett syn-
drome, a disease associated with intellectual disability, 
autism, and seizures, is caused by mutations in MECP2 
(methyl-CpG-binding protein-2), a regulator of gene 
transcription. Although the exact links are not known, 
it is clear that mutations in many different genes may 
result in epilepsy.
In most cases, genetic epilepsy syndromes in 
humans have complex rather than simple (Mende-
lian) inheritance patterns, suggesting the involvement 
of many, rather than single, genes. Nevertheless, a 
number of monogenic epilepsies have been identified 
in studies of families with epilepsy. Ortrud Steinlein 
and colleagues reported in 1995 that a mutation in 
the α4-subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-
channel is responsible for autosomal dominant noctur-
nal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), the first example 
of an autosomal gene defect in human epilepsy. Subse-
quently, other voltage- and ligand-gated channel pro-
teins have been identified as critical genes for epilepsy. 
Mutations in ion channel genes (channelopathies) con-
stitute a major cause of known monogenic epilepsies 
(Figure 58–15). Many more genes are being discovered 
by clinical exome analysis for de novo mutations. The 
large number of genes for K+ channels and the criti-
cal role of these channels in balancing excitation and 
inhibition are important reasons for the expanding epi-
lepsy genome.
In voltage-gated channels, mutations largely 
involve the main pore-forming subunit(s), but there are 
also examples of epilepsy-causing mutations in regu-
latory subunits. When examined in vitro, the mutant 
channel proteins are most commonly associated with 
either reductions in the expression of the channel on 
the surface of the plasma membrane (due to reduced 
targeting to the membrane or premature degradation) 
or altered kinetics of the channels. It is straightforward 
to consider how changes in ion channel gating might 
affect the excitability of neurons and their synchroni-
zation during seizure generation. However, ion chan-
nel mutations may also affect neuronal development 
and thus exert their epileptogenic effects through a 


===== Page 9 =====
1468    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–15  Channelopathies are a major, but not the 
only, cause of monogenic human epilepsies.  The human 
epilepsy genes discovered so far can affect multiple phases of 
synaptic transmission including the migration of interneurons 
(1), upstream activation of interneurons (2), γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) levels within interneurons (3), the excitability of excita-
tory and inhibitory neurons (4), the release of neurotransmitters 
(5), and the postsynaptic response to neurotransmitters (6). 
The inset shows that the impact of mutations in these genes on 
neuronal excitability can affect the shape of the action potential 
as well as the afterpotentials and synaptic events that follow. 
Mutations indicated near the spike (a) affect the repolarization of 
the action potential. Other mutations shown in (b) affect the afte-
rhyperpolarization, synaptic conductances, or interspike interval.
1  Interneuron
    migration
2  Upstream
    activation
3  GABA
    levels
5  Neurotransmitter
    release
6  Response to
    neurotransmitter
    (channelopathies)
4  Excitability (channelopathies)
CaV 2.1
KCNQ2/3
CLCN2
KV 1.1
CaV 1.1
NaV 1.1, 
NaV 1.2, 
β1
α1, β3, γ2
Voltage-gated K+
Voltage-gated Ca2+
M-type K+
Cl–
Voltage-gated Na+
Ca2+-activated K+
Channel
Subunits affected
Epilepsy
Generalized epilepsy with febrile
 seizures plus (GEFS+)
Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy
Benign infantile epilepsy
GEFS+
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
Childhood absence epilepsy
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Absence epilepsy
Absence epilepsy
GABAA receptor
a
a
b
b
Benign neonatal epilepsy
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
secondary action on cell migration, network forma-
tion, or patterns of gene expression.
In the early days of research on epilepsy genes, 
it was widely expected that the genes would mostly 
underlie generalized epilepsies, based on the idea 
that a gene mutation (eg, in an ion channel) would be 
expected to affect most neurons. However, the very 
first autosomal dominant epilepsy gene discovered by 
Steinlein and colleagues caused a focal onset (frontal 
lobe) epilepsy, and another gives rise to seizures origi-
nating in the temporal lobe with an auditory aura. In 
retrospect, this should not be so surprising because 
channel subunits are rarely expressed uniformly in the 
brain, and some brain regions are more likely to gener-
ate seizures than other regions.
Timing of gene expression is also important. For 
example, totterer mice with mutations in the pore-
forming CaV2.1 subunit of P/Q-type Ca2+ channels 
show spike-wave–type seizures that begin in the third 
postnatal week, presumably because N-type Ca2+ 
channels are the predominant functional isoform ear-
lier in development, whereas P/Q-type Ca2+ channels 
predominate later. The neurological phenotype begins 
once the mutant channel is functionally required dur-
ing development.
Moreover, one mutation can give rise to differ-
ent epilepsy phenotypes, or different mutant genes 
can cause the same epilepsy phenotype. As an exam-
ple of the latter, the ADNFLE syndrome, first discov-
ered as a mutation in the α4-subunit of the nicotinic 


