===== Page 1 =====
316    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
40 ms
5 pA
ACh
ACh
Gi protein
Extracellular
side
P
P
B  Opening of GIRK channels by ACh hyperpolarizes cardiac muscle cells
βγ
Cytoplasmic
side
P
P
P
Membrane
K+
αi
A  Direct opening of the GIRK channel by a G protein
Muscarinic ACh
receptor
GIRK channel
GIRK subunit
C  Opening of GIRK channels by ACh does not require second messengers
Vagus nerve stimulation
1 s
50 mV
ACh
No ACh
ACh in bath — no response
ACh in pipette — increased opening
N
C
Figure 14–9  Some G proteins can open ion 
channels directly without employing second 
messengers.
A. An inward-rectifying K+ channel (GIRK) is 
opened directly by a G protein. Binding of ACh to 
a muscarinic receptor causes the Gi protein and 
αiβγ complex to dissociate; the free βγ-subunits 
bind to a cytoplasmic domain of the channel, 
causing the channel to open.
B. Stimulation of the parasympathetic vagus 
nerve releases ACh, which acts at muscarinic 
receptors to open GIRK channels in cardiac mus-
cle cell membranes. The current through the GIRK 
channel hyperpolarizes the cells, thus slowing the 
heart rate. (Adapted from Toda and West 1967.)
C. Three single-channel records show that open-
ing of GIRK channels does not involve a freely 
diffusible second messenger. In this experiment, 
the pipette contained a high concentration of K+, 
which makes EK less negative. As a result, when 
GIRK channels open, they generate brief pulses 
of inward (downward) current. In the absence of 
ACh, channels open briefly and infrequently  
(top record). Application of ACh in the bath 
(outside the pipette) does not increase channel 
opening in the patch of membrane under the 
pipette (middle record). This is because the free 
βγ-subunits, released by the binding of ACh to its 
receptor, remain tethered to the membrane near 
the receptor and can only activate nearby chan-
nels. The subunits are not free to diffuse to the 
channels under the patch pipette. The ACh must 
be in the pipette to activate the channel (bottom 
record). (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Soejima and Noma 1984. Copyright © 1984 
Springer Nature.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    317
Figure 14–10  G protein βγ-subunits can directly bind and 
activate GIRK channels. A high-resolution structure of a GIRK 
channel (green) interacting with the G protein β-subunit (Gβ, cyan) 
and γ-subunit (Gγ, purple). A geranylgeranyl lipid molecule (gg) is 
attached to the C-terminus of Gγ. The structure illustrates that Na+ 
ions and the phospholipid PIP2 also bind to the channel, thereby 
enhancing channel opening. The pink spheres inside the channel 
represent K+ ions. (Adapted with permission from Whorton and 
MacKinnon 2013. Copyright © 2013 Springer Nature.)
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
K+
Na+
gg
Gγ
N-terminus
Gβ
N-terminus
PIP2
of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in presynaptic terminals 
can suppress the release of neurotransmitter.
Cyclic AMP–Dependent Protein Phosphorylation 
Can Close Potassium Channels
In the marine mollusk Aplysia, a group of mechanore-
ceptor sensory neurons initiates defensive withdrawal 
reflexes in response to tactile stimuli through fast excit-
atory synapses with motor neurons. Certain interneu-
rons form serotonergic synapses with these sensory 
neurons, and the serotonin released by the interneu-
rons sensitizes the withdrawal reflex, enhancing the 
animal’s response to a stimulus and thus producing a 
simple form of learning (Chapter 53).
The modulatory action of serotonin depends on 
its binding to a G protein–coupled receptor that acti-
vates a Gs protein, which elevates cAMP and thus 
activates PKA. This leads to the direct phosphoryla-
tion and subsequent closure of the serotonin-sensitive 
(or S-type) K+ channel that acts as a resting channel  
(Figure 14–11). Like the closing of the M-type K+ 
channel by ACh, closure of the S-type K+ channel 
decreases K+ efflux from the cell, thereby depolarizing 
the cell and decreasing its resting membrane conduct-
ance. Conversely, the opening of the same S-type K+ 
channels can be enhanced by the neuropeptide FMR-
Famide, acting through 12-lipoxygenase metabolites 
of arachidonic acid. This enhanced channel opening 
leads to a slow hyperpolarizing inhibitory postsynap-
tic potential (IPSP) associated with an increase in rest-
ing membrane conductance.
Thus, a single channel can be regulated by distinct 
second-messenger pathways that produce opposite 
effects on neuronal excitability. Likewise, a resting 
K+ channel with two pore-forming domains in each 
subunit (the TREK-1 channel) in mammalian neurons 
is dually regulated by PKA and arachidonic acid in 
a manner very similar to the dual regulation of the 
S-type channel in Aplysia.
Second Messengers Can Endow Synaptic 
Transmission with Long-Lasting Consequences
So far, we have described how synaptic second mes-
sengers alter the biochemistry of neurons for periods 
lasting seconds to minutes. Second messengers can 
also produce long-term changes lasting days to weeks 
as a result of alterations in a cell’s expression of specific 
genes (Figure 14–12). Such changes in gene expression 
result from the ability of second-messenger cascades to 
control the activity of transcription factors, regulatory 
proteins that control mRNA synthesis.
Some transcription factors can be directly regu-
lated by phosphorylation. For example, the cAMP 
response element-binding protein (CREB) is activated 
when phosphorylated by PKA, calcium/calmodulin-
dependent protein kinases, PKC, or MAP kinases. Once 
activated, CREB enhances transcription by binding to 
specific DNA sequences, the cAMP response elements 
or CRE, and recruiting a component of the transcrip-
tion machinery, the CREB-binding protein (CBP). CBP 
activates transcription by recruiting RNA polymerase 
II and by functioning as a histone acetylase, adding 
acetyl groups to certain histone lysine residues. The 
acetylation weakens the binding between histones and 
DNA, thus opening up the chromatin structure and 
enabling specific genes to be transcribed. The changes 
in transcription and chromatin structure are important 
for regulating neuronal development, as well as for 
long-term learning and memory (Chapters 53 and 54).
Modulators Can Influence Circuit Function by 
Altering Intrinsic Excitability or Synaptic Strength
Most of this chapter has been devoted to understand-
ing the cellular mechanisms and signal transduc-
tion pathways that allow neuromodulator-activated 


===== Page 3 =====
318    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 14–11  Serotonergic interneurons close a K+ channel 
through the diffusible second-messenger cAMP. Serotonin 
(5-HT) produces a slow EPSP in Aplysia sensory neurons by 
closing the serotonin-sensitive or S-type K+ channels. The 
5-HT receptor is coupled to Gs, which stimulates adenylyl 
cyclase. The increase in cAMP activates cAMP-dependent  
protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the S-type 
channel, leading to its closure. Single-channel recordings illus-
trate the actions of 5-HT, cAMP, and PKA on the  
S-type channels.
A. Addition of 5-HT to the bath closes three of five S-type 
K+ channels active in this cell-attached patch of membrane. 
The experiment implicates a diffusible messenger, as 
the 5-HT applied in the bath has no direct access to the 
S-type channels in the membrane under the pipette. Each 
channel opening contributes an outward (positive) current 
pulse. (Adapted, with permission, from Siegelbaum, Camardo, 
and Kandel 1982.)
B. Injection of cAMP into a sensory neuron through a micro-
electrode closes all three active S-type channels in this patch. 
The bottom trace shows the closure of the final active chan-
nel in the presence of cAMP. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Siegelbaum, Camardo, and Kandel 1982.)
C. Application of the purified catalytic subunit of PKA to the 
cytoplasmic surface of the membrane closes two out of four 
active S-type K+ channels in this cell-free patch. ATP was 
added to the solution bathing the inside surface of the mem-
brane to provide the source of phosphate for protein phos-
phorylation. (Adapted, with permission, from Shuster  
et al. 1985.)
5-HT
5-HT
receptor
cAMP
PKA
A  Action of 5-HT
cAMP
cAMP
PKA
B  Action of cAMP
Control
5
4
3
2
1
0
2
1
0
5-HT
3
2
1
0
1
0
Control
cAMP
PKA
4
3
2
1
0
2
1
0
Number of
channels open
Number of
channels open
Number of
channels open
Control
PKA
C  Action of PKA
4 pA
100 ms
4 pA
100 ms
4 pA
250 ms
i
i
i


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    319
Figure 14–12  A single neurotrans-
mitter can have either short-term or 
long-term effects on an ion chan-
nel. In this example, a short exposure 
to transmitter activates the cAMP 
second-messenger system (1), which in 
turn activates PKA (2). The kinase phos-
phorylates a K+ channel; this leads to a 
synaptic potential that lasts for several 
minutes and modifies the excitability of 
the neuron (3). With sustained activation 
of the receptor, the kinase translocates 
to the nucleus, where it phosphoryl-
ates one or more transcription factors 
that turn on gene expression (4). As a 
result of the new protein synthesis, the 
synaptic actions are prolonged—closure 
of the channel and changes in neuronal 
excitability last days or longer (5). (Pol, 
polymerase.)
Receptor
Adenylyl
cyclase
ATP
+ ATP
Extracellular side
Membrane
Cytoplasmic side
Transmitter
+ ATP
K+
Protein
mRNA
Transcription
PKA
cAMP
Regulatory
protein
Pol
Enhancer
Promoter
Nucleus
Coding region
1
2
3
4
5
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
P
P
P
pathways to alter the activity of ion channels, recep-
tors, and synapses in individual neurons. However, 
in the intact brain, modulatory transmitters released 
either from diffuse projections over large areas of the 
brain (Chapter 16) or from more locally targeted con-
nections can alter the dynamics of brain circuits in a 
number of important ways. In this section, we exam-
ine one well-studied example of modulatory control 
of circuit function—the control of crustacean feeding 
behavior by the neurons of the stomatogastric gan-
glion to illustrate the following general properties.
1.	 Modulatory projection neurons or neurohormones 
can coordinately influence the properties of large 
numbers of neurons to change the state of a neu-
ral circuit or of the entire animal. For example, 
modulators released from a relatively small number 
of neurons are important in the control of the transi-
tions between sleep and wakefulness (Chapter 44).
2.	 Neuromodulators act over intermediate time scales, 
ranging from many milliseconds to hours. Fast syn-
aptic transmission and rapid action potential prop-
agation are well suited for rapid computation of all 
kinds of processes important for behavior. Never-
theless, modulators that act over longer time scales 
can bias a circuit’s dynamics to expand its dynamic 
range or to adapt it to the behavioral needs of the 
animal. For example, many sensory processes will 
evoke very different responses depending on the 
behavioral state of the animal, and modulators that 
alter synaptic strength and intrinsic excitability are 
often involved in such actions.


===== Page 5 =====
320    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Multiple Neuromodulators Can Converge  
Onto the Same Neuron and Ion Channels
We have seen in our discussion of the Aplysia S-channel 
how the same ion channel can be regulated by differ-
ent modulatory agents. This is a common theme, as the 
M-type K+ channel is modulated by acetylcholine, sub-
stance P, and a variety of other peptides.
One particularly striking example of convergence 
is seen in the modulatory control of the neurons of 
the crustacean stomatogastric ganglion. There, a large 
number of structurally diverse neuropeptides con-
verge to modulate a voltage-dependent inward current 
(IMI). Although IMI is a small current, it plays an impor-
tant role in regulating excitability and the generation 
of plateau and burst potentials. Many neurons express 
a large number of different receptor types, giving these 
cells the ability to respond flexibly to different modula-
tory inputs during different brain states.
The crustacean stomatogastric ganglion (STG) 
contains 26 to 30 neurons and generates two rhyth-
mic motor patterns important for feeding—the gastric 
rhythm and the pyloric rhythm. One set of STG neu-
rons generates the pyloric rhythm, which is important 
for filtering food and is continuously active throughout 
the animal’s life. Another set of neurons generates the 
gastric mill rhythm, which moves three teeth inside of 
the stomach that are used to chew and grind food. The 
gastric mill rhythm is activated in response to food and 
is therefore only intermittently active in vivo. Whether 
a particular rhythm is active at any time is under the 
control of a variety of neuromodulators, some of which 
activate the pyloric and gastric mill rhythms, while 
others inhibit them. These modulators can be released 
at specific synaptic contacts or can act diffusely as 
neurohormones. Interestingly, modulators can also 
cause individual neurons to switch between these two 
circuits, thereby increasing the computational power 
that this small number of neurons can achieve.
The fundamental circuit (the kernel) that serves as 
the pacemaker of the STG pyloric rhythm consists of a 
single anterior burster (AB) neuron and two pyloric dila-
tor (PD) neurons. Both types of neurons make inhibitory 
synaptic connections with a third type of neuron, the 
pyloric (PY) neuron. During bursting, a slowly depolar-
izing pacemaker potential (slow wave) triggers a burst 
of action potentials in both AB and PD neurons. As these 
neurons are strongly coupled by electrical (gap-junction) 
synapses, they depolarize and synchronously fire bursts 
of action potentials, resulting in transient inhibition of the 
downstream PY neuron (Figure 14–13A).
Dopamine, which functions both as a fast neuro-
transmitter and as a neurohormone in crustaceans, 
influences feeding behavior by acting on many 
neurons and synapses to influence synaptic strength 
and neuronal and muscle excitability. For example, 
application of dopamine decreases the slow-wave 
amplitude in the PD neurons but increases the 
amplitude of the slow wave in the AB neurons. Ron 
Harris-Warrick found that dopamine modulates dif-
ferent sets of membrane currents in the two neurons, 
providing a clear example of how a single modula-
tory transmitter can exert distinct actions in differ-
ent postsynaptic cells (Figure 14–13B).
Dopamine also alters the relative timing of the 
activity of these neurons. Although the PY neuron 
receives inhibitory input from both the AB and PD 
neurons, the inhibitory synaptic action from the AB 
neuron is faster than that from the PD neuron. Thus, 
dopamine, by inhibiting the PD neuron and suppress-
ing the slow component of the IPSP, acts to speed the 
time course of the combined IPSP in the PY neurons 
(Figure 14–13A), contributing to a change in the tim-
ing of the activity of the PY neurons relative to that of 
the pacemaker group. Dopamine also enhances firing 
in the PY neuron by modulating its intrinsic excitabil-
ity, by decreasing the transient A-type K+ current (IK,A) 
while increasing the excitatory slow inward current car-
ried by the HCN channels (Ih) (Figure 14–13B). Thus, 
the effects of a modulator on the circuit result from its 
selective actions on a number of voltage-gated chan-
nels and synapses in distributed circuit elements.
Why So Many Modulators?
We now know that the STG is the direct target of 50 or 
more different neuromodulatory substances, includ-
ing biogenic amines, amino acids, NO, and a host of 
neuropeptides that are released from descending mod-
ulatory projection neurons and sensory neurons and 
that circulate as hormones in the hemolymph. Many of 
these modulators are released as cotransmitters from 
the terminals of certain descending fibers that are acti-
vated by sensory neurons. Many neuromodulators are 
both released synaptically in the STG neuropil and also 
function as neurohormones.
Why should a small ganglion composed of only 26 
to 30 neurons be modulated by so many substances? 
At first, it was thought that the richness of the modula-
tory innervation was important for producing differ-
ent behaviorally relevant motor outputs. This remains 
true, but it is now also evident that some modulators 
may be used exclusively in special circumstances, such 
as molting, and that different modulators with similar 
effects ensure that important functions are preserved 
even if one modulatory system is lost. Thus, diverse 
modulators may be used in the service of both plastic-
ity and stability.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    321
Figure 14–13  The modulatory action of dopamine on the 
pyloric rhythm of the lobster stomatogastric ganglion 
results from numerous actions.
A. A circuit diagram shows the interactions between three 
of the pyloric circuit neurons. The anterior burster (AB) and 
pyloric dilator (PD) neurons are strongly electrically coupled 
by gap-junction channels. Both the AB and PD neurons form 
inhibitory synapses with the pyloric (PY) neuron that gener-
ate inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) in this cell. 
Intracellular voltage recordings illustrate phases of pyloric 
rhythm from PD, AB, and PY neurons without dopaminergic 
input (control) and with dopamine. On the right, the voltage 
traces from control cells (C) and cells with dopaminergic 
input (DA) are overlaid. Dopamine enhances the amplitude 
of the slow-wave burst in the AB neuron (in this neuron, 
axonal action potentials are highly attenuated by the cable 
properties of the neuron and appear in the soma as faint  
ripples) but hyperpolarizes and decreases the amplitude of 
the slow wave in the PD neurons. These combined actions 
result in a shorter IPSP in the PY neuron, enabling it to fire 
earlier relative to the PD neurons. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Eisen and Marder 1984.)
B. Dopamine modulates a number of different voltage-depend-
ent channels in the AB, PD, and PY neurons. These include 
Ca2+ currents (ICa), a calcium-activated K+ current (IK,Ca), an 
inactivating K+ current (IK,A), a delayed rectifier K+ current (IKv), 
the hyperpolarization-activated cation current (Ih), and a persis-
tent Na+ current (INa). Lines with arrowheads indicate current 
increase, lines ending in short line segment indicate current 
decrease. (Adapted, with permission, from Marder and Bucher 
2007. For effects of dopamine on the complete pyloric circuit, 
see Harris-Warrick, 2011.)
0.25 sec
10 mV
PY
AB
PD
C
C
C
DA
DA
DA
PY
–
Control
Dopamine
Control
Dopamine
–
–
AB
PD
PY
–
AB
PD
A
B
AB
PD
Excites
Inhibits
ICa
ICa
ICa
INa
IK,A
IK,A
Ih
IK,A
IK,Ca
Ih
IKv
IKv
Dopamine 
receptor
Dopamine
AB
PD
PY
Highlights
  1.  Neuromodulators are substances that bind to 
receptors, most of which are metabotropic, to 
alter the excitability of neurons, the likelihood 
of transmitter release, or the functional state of 
receptors on postsynaptic neurons.
  2.  When 
neuromodulators 
activate 
second- 
messenger pathways, the modulator can influence 
the properties of ion channels and other targets 
at some distance from the site of release.
  3.  Some neuromodulatory systems have wide-
spread and pronounced actions over many neu-
rons and many brain areas.
  4.  There are two major families of metabotropic 
receptors: G protein–coupled receptors and recep-
tor tyrosine kinases. Many important brain 
signaling molecules, such as norepinephrine, 


===== Page 7 =====
322    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
ACh, GABA, glutamate, serotonin, dopamine, 
and many diverse neuropeptides, activate 
metabotropic receptors; many of these same sub-
stances also activate ionotropic receptors.
  5.  The cyclic AMP pathway is among the best-
understood second-messenger signaling cascades. 
Metabotropic receptor activation triggers a 
sequence of biochemical reactions that result in 
activation of adenylyl cyclase, which synthesizes 
cAMP, which in turn activates protein kinase A. 
The kinase then phosphorylates target proteins, 
altering their functional state. Important targets 
for PKA include voltage- and ligand-gated ion 
channels as well as proteins important in vesicle 
release.
  6.  Hydrolysis of phospholipids by phospholipase C 
produces DAG and IP3, which plays an impor-
tant role in intracellular Ca2+ handling. Endocan-
nabinoids are synthesized from lipid precursors 
and can act across synapses as retrograde mes-
sengers. Another generalized signaling molecule 
is the gas nitric oxide, which diffuses across 
membranes and stimulates cyclic GMP synthesis.
  7.  The receptor tyrosine kinases also gate ion chan-
nels indirectly in response to binding a variety of 
peptide hormones.
  8.  Neuromodulators can close ion channels, thus 
producing decreases in membrane conductance. 
The M-type current is a slowly activating voltage-
gated K+ current that underlies action potential 
adaptation. ACh and several neuropeptides 
decrease M-type current amplitude, thereby pro-
ducing a slow depolarization and decreasing 
adaptation. The S-type K+ channel contributes 
to the resting K+ conductance of certain neurons, 
including a class of sensory neurons mediating 
the Aplysia gill withdrawal reflex. Closure of the 
channel by serotonin, acting through a cAMP 
signaling cascade, depolarizes the resting mem-
brane, increases excitability, and enhances trans-
mitter release from sensory neuron terminals. 
Prolonged exposure to serotonin can alter gene 
transcription to produce long-term changes in 
synaptic strength.
  9.  Modulators can alter the output of neuronal cir-
cuits by acting on numerous circuit targets.
10.  Given that all brain neurons and synapses are 
likely to be modulated by one or more substances, 
it is remarkable that brain circuits are only rarely 
“overmodulated” so that they lose their function. 
Much additional research is needed to under-
stand the rules that allow robust and stable net-
work performance in the face of the modulators 
that allow network plasticity.
11.  Except in a few notable cases such as small gan-
glia or the retina, it is likely that we still have 
only a partial catalog of the total number of neu-
romodulatory substances that are present and 
active.
12.  Much of what we know about neuromodulatory 
actions comes from in vitro studies. Much less is 
known about how neuromodulatory concentra-
tions are controlled in behaving animals.
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 
  David E. Clapham 
  Eve Marder 
Selected Reading
Berridge MJ. 2016. The inositol trisphosphate/calcium 
signaling pathway in health and disease. Physiol Rev 
96:1261–1296.
Greengard P. 2001. The neurobiology of slow synaptic trans-
mission. Science 294:1024–1030.
Hille B, Dickson EJ, Kruse M, Vivas O, Suh BC. 2015. Phosph-
oinositides regulate ion channels. Biochim Biophys Acta 
1851:844–856.
Kobilka B. 2013. The structural basis of G-protein-coupled 
receptor signaling (Nobel Lecture). Angew Chem Int Ed 
Engl 52:6380–6388.
Levitan IB. 1999. Modulation of ion channels by protein 
phosphorylation. How the brain works. Adv Second Mes-
senger Phosphoprotein Res 33:3–22.
Lu HC, Mackie K. 2016. An introduction to the endogenous 
cannabinoid system. Biol Psychiatry 79:516–525.
Marder E. 2012. Neuromodulation of neuronal circuits: back 
to the future. Neuron 76:1–11. 
Schwartz JH. 2001. The many dimensions of cAMP signaling. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:13482–13484.
Syrovatkina V, Alegre KO, Dey R, Huang XY. 2016. Regula-
tion, signaling, and physiological functions of G-proteins. 
J Mol Biol 428:3850–3868.
Takemoto-Kimura S, Suzuki K, Horigane SI, et al. 2017. 
Calmodulin kinases: essential regulators in health and 
disease. J Neurochem 141:808–818.
References
Adams PR, Jones SW, Pennefather P, Brown DA, Koch C, 
Lancaster B. 1986. Slow synaptic transmission in frog 
sympathetic ganglia. J Exp Biol 124:259–285.
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD. 
1994. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed. New York: 
Garland.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    323
Eisen JS, Marder E. 1984. A mechanism for the production 
of phase shifts in a pattern generator. J Neurophysiol 
51:1375–1393. 
Fantl WJ, Johnson DE, Williams LT. 1993. Signalling by recep-
tor tyrosine kinases. Annu Rev Biochem 62:453–481.
Frielle T, Kobilka B, Dohlman H, Caron MG, Lefkowitz RJ. 
1989. The β-adrenergic receptor and other receptors 
coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. In:  
S Chien (ed). Molecular Biology in Physiology, pp. 79–91. 
New York: Raven.
Halpain S, Girault JA, Greengard P. 1990. Activation of 
NMDA receptors induces dephosphorylation of DARPP-32 
in rat striatal slices. Nature 343:369–372.
Harris-Warrick, RM. 2011.  Neuromodulation and flexibility 
in central pattern generating networks. Curr Opin Neuro-
biol 21:685-692.
Logothetis DE, Kurachi Y, Galper J, Neer EJ, Clapham DE. 
1987. The βγ subunits of GTP-binding proteins activate 
the muscarinic K+ channel in heart. Nature 325:321–326.
Marder E, Bucher D. 2007. Understanding circuit dynamics 
using the stomatogastric nervous system of lobsters and 
crabs. Annu Rev Physiol 69:291–316.
Nusbaum MP, Blitz DM, Marder E. 2017. Functional conse-
quences of neuropeptide/small molecule cotransmission. 
Nature Rev Neurosci 18:389–403.
Osten P, Valsamis L, Harris A, Sacktor TC. 1996. Protein  
synthesis-dependent formation of protein kinase Mzeta in 
long-term potentiation. J Neurosci 16:2444–2451.
Pfaffinger PJ, Martin JM, Hunter DD, Nathanson NM, Hille B. 
1985. GTP-binding proteins couple cardiac muscarinic 
receptors to a K channel. Nature 317:536–538.
Phillis JW, Horrocks LA, Farooqui AA. 2006. Cyclooxyge-
nases, lipoxygenases, and epoxygenases in CNS: their 
role and involvement in neurological disorders. Brain Res 
Rev 52:201–243.
Shuster MJ, Camardo JS, Siegelbaum SA, Kandel ER. 1985. 
Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase closes the serotonin-
sensitive K+ channels of Aplysia sensory neurones in cell-
free membrane patches. Nature 313:392–395.
Siegelbaum SA, Camardo JS, Kandel ER. 1982. Serotonin and 
cyclic AMP close single K+ channels in Aplysia sensory 
neurones. Nature 299:413–417.
Soejima M, Noma A. 1984. Mode of regulation of the ACh-
sensitive K-channel by the muscarinic receptor in rabbit 
atrial cells. Pflugers Arch 400:424–431.
Tedford HW, Zamponi GW. 2006. Direct G protein modu-
lation of Cav2 calcium channels. Pharmacol Rev 58: 
837–862.
Toda N, West TC. 1967. Interactions of K, Na, and vagal 
stimulation in the S-A node of the rabbit. Am J Physiol 
212:416–423.
Whorton MR, MacKinnon R. 2013. X-ray structure of the 
mammalian GIRK2-betagamma G-protein complex. Nature 
498:190–197.
Zeng L, Webster SV, Newton PM. 2012. The biology of pro-
tein kinase C. Adv Exp Med Biol 740:639–661.


===== Page 9 =====
15
Transmitter Release
S
ome of the brain’s most remarkable abilities, such 
as learning and memory, are thought to emerge 
from the elementary properties of chemical syn-
apses, where the presynaptic cell releases chemical trans-
mitters that activate receptors in the membrane of the 
postsynaptic cell. At most central synapses, transmitter 
is released from the presynaptic cell at presynaptic bou-
tons, varicosities along the axon (like beads on a string) 
filled with synaptic vesicles and other organelles that 
contact postsynaptic targets. At other synapses, includ-
ing the neuromuscular junction, transmitter is released 
from presynaptic terminals at the end of the axon. For 
convenience, we will refer to both types of release sites as 
presynaptic terminals. In the last three chapters, we saw 
how postsynaptic receptors control ion channels that 
generate the postsynaptic potential. Here we consider 
how electrical and biochemical events in the presynaptic 
terminal lead to the rapid release of small-molecule neu-
rotransmitters, such as acetylcholine (ACh), glutamate, 
and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), that underlie fast syn-
aptic transmission. In the next chapter, we examine the 
chemistry of the neurotransmitters themselves as well 
as the biogenic amines (serotonin, norepinephrine, and 
dopamine) and neuropeptides, which underlie slower 
forms of intercellular signaling.
Transmitter Release Is Regulated by 
Depolarization of the Presynaptic Terminal
What event at the presynaptic terminal leads to the 
release of transmitter? Bernard Katz and Ricardo Miledi 
first demonstrated the importance of depolarization of 
the presynaptic membrane. For this purpose, they used 
Transmitter Release Is Regulated by Depolarization of the 
Presynaptic Terminal
Release Is Triggered by Calcium Influx
The Relation Between Presynaptic Calcium 
Concentration and Release
Several Classes of Calcium Channels Mediate 
Transmitter Release
Transmitter Is Released in Quantal Units
Transmitter Is Stored and Released by Synaptic Vesicles
Synaptic Vesicles Discharge Transmitter by Exocytosis 
and Are Recycled by Endocytosis
Capacitance Measurements Provide Insight Into the 
Kinetics of Exocytosis and Endocytosis
Exocytosis Involves the Formation of a Temporary 
Fusion Pore
The Synaptic Vesicle Cycle Involves Several Steps
Exocytosis of Synaptic Vesicles Relies on a Highly Conserved 
Protein Machinery
The Synapsins Are Important for Vesicle Restraint and 
Mobilization
SNARE Proteins Catalyze Fusion of Vesicles With the 
Plasma Membrane
Calcium Binding to Synaptotagmin Triggers Transmitter 
Release
The Fusion Machinery Is Embedded in a Conserved 
Protein Scaffold at the Active Zone
Modulation of Transmitter Release Underlies Synaptic Plasticity
Activity-Dependent Changes in Intracellular Free 
Calcium Can Produce Long-Lasting Changes in Release
Axo-axonic Synapses on Presynaptic Terminals Regulate 
Transmitter Release
Highlights


