===== Page 1 =====
580    Part IV / Perception
  5.  Individual cells in inferior temporal cortex 
can be highly shape-selective and respond 
selectively, eg, to a hand or a face. They can 
maintain selectivity across position, size, and 
even rotation—properties that might explain 
perceptual constancy.
  6.  Inferotemporal cortex comprises a yet-unknown 
number of areas with very different functional 
specializations. While the functional logic of the 
overall organization remains unknown, we do 
know that cells with similar selectivity group into 
cortical columns and that face cells are organized 
into larger units called face areas.
  7.  Face recognition is supported by multiple face 
areas, each with a unique functional specializa-
tion. Face areas are selectively coupled to form a 
face-processing network, which has emerged as a 
model system for high-level vision.
  8.  Inferotemporal cortex is interconnected with 
perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices for 
memory formation, with the amygdala for the 
assignment of emotional valence to objects, and 
with prefrontal cortex for object categorization 
and visual working memory. If associative memo-
ries are stored as patterns of connections between 
neurons, what then are the specific contributions 
of hippocampus and neocortical structures of 
the medial temporal lobe, and by what cellular 
mechanisms do they exert their influences? The 
confluence of molecular-genetic, cellular, neuro-
physiological, and behavioral approaches prom-
ises to solve these and other problems.
  9.  Objects are perceived as members of a category. 
This simplifies the selection of appropriate 
behaviors, which often do not depend on stim-
ulus details. Neurons with categorical selectiv-
ity are found in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a 
main projection site of inferior temporal cortex.
10.  Object recognition relies on past experience. Per-
ceptual learning can improve the ability to dis-
criminate between complex objects and refine 
neural selectivity in inferior temporal cortex.
11.  Visual information can be held in short-term 
working memory to be available beyond the dura-
tion of a sensory stimulus. Neurons in temporal 
and prefrontal cortex can exhibit delay-period 
activity after the disappearance of a stimulus. 
How these networks establish the ability to keep 
information online is an open question.
12.  High-level 
visual 
information 
processing 
changes with top-down modulation. The sensory 
experience of an image in view and the recall of 
the same stimulus from memory are subjectively 
similar. Neurons in inferior temporal cortex 
exhibit similar activity during bottom-up activa-
tion and cued recall.
 Thomas D. Albright  
 Winrich A. Freiwald 
Selected Reading
Freedman DJ, Miller EK. 2008. Neural mechanisms of visual 
categorization: insights from neurophysiology. Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 32:311–329.
Gross CG. 1999. Brain, Vision, Memory: Tales in the History of 
Neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. 1997. The fusiform 
face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex special-
ized for face perception. J Neurosci 17:4302–4311.
Logothetis NK, Sheinberg DL. 1996. Visual object recogni-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 19:577–621.
McCarthy G, Puce A, Gore J, Allison T. 1997. Face-specific 
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. J Cog Neurosci 
9:605–610.
Messinger A, Squire LR, Zola SM, Albright TD. 2005. Neural 
correlates of knowledge: stable representation of stimulus 
associations across variations in behavioral performance. 
Neuron 48:359–371.
Miller EK, Li L, Desimone R. 1991. A neural mechanism for 
working and recognition memory in inferior temporal 
cortex. Science 254:1377–1379.
Miyashita Y. 1993. Inferior temporal cortex: where visual per-
ception meets memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 16:245–263.
Schlack A, Albright TD. 2007. Remembering visual motion: 
neural correlates of associative plasticity and motion 
recall in cortical area MT. Neuron 53:881–890.
Squire LR, Zola-Morgan S. 1991. The medial temporal lobe 
memory system. Science 253:1380–1386.
Ungerleider LG, Courtney SM, Haxby JV. 1998. A neural sys-
tem for human visual working memory. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 95:883–890.
References
Baker CI, Behrmann M, Olson CR. 2002. Impact of learn-
ing on representation of parts and wholes in monkey 
inferotemporal cortex. Nat Neurosci 5:1210–1216.
Brown S, Schafer ES. 1888. An investigation into the func-
tions of the occipital and temporal lobes of the monkey’s 
brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 179:303–327.
Damasio AR, Damasio H, Van Hoesen GW. 1982. Prosop-
agnosia: anatomic basis and behavioral mechanisms. 
Neurology 32:331–341.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     581
Desimone R, Albright TD, Gross CG, Bruce CJ. 1984. Stimu-
lus selective properties of inferior temporal neurons in the 
macaque. J Neurosci 8:2051–2062.
Desimone R, Fleming J, Gross CG. 1980. Prestriate affer-
ents to inferior temporal cortex: an HRP study. Brain Res 
184:41–55.
Farah MJ. 1990. Visual Agnosia: Disorders of Object Recognition 
and What They Tell Us About Normal Vision. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical 
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 
1:1–47.
Freedman DJ, Riesenhuber M, Poggio T, Miller EK. 2002. Vis-
ual categorization and the primate prefrontal cortex: neu-
rophysiology and behavior. J Neurophysiol 88:929–941.
Freiwald WA, Tsao DY. 2010. Functional compartmentaliza-
tion and viewpoint generalization within the macaque 
face-processing system. Science 330:845–851.
Fujita I, Tanaka K, Ito M, Cheng K. 1992. Columns for vis-
ual features of objects in monkey inferotemporal cortex. 
Nature 360:343–346.
Fuster JM, Jervey JP. 1982. Neuronal firing in the inferotem-
poral cortex of the monkey in a visual memory task.  
J Neurosci 2:361–375.
Gross CG, Bender DB, Rocha-Miranda CE. 1969. Visual 
receptive fields of neurons in inferotemporal cortex of the 
monkey. Science 166:1303–1306.
Kosslyn SM. 1994. Image and Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Leibo JZ, Liao Q, Anselmi F, Freiwald WA, Poggio T. 2017. 
View-tolerant face recognition and Hebbian learning 
imply mirror-symmetric neural tuning to head orienta-
tion. Curr Biol 27:62–67.
Logothetis NK, Pauls J. 1995. Psychophysical and physiolog-
ical evidence for viewer-centered object representations in 
the primate. Cereb Cortex 5:270–288.
Messinger A, Squire LR, Zola SM, Albright TD. 2001. Neu-
ronal representations of stimulus associations develop in 
the temporal lobe during learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
98:12239–12244.
Miyashita Y, Chang HS. 1988. Neuronal correlate of picto-
rial short-term memory in the primate temporal cortex. 
Nature 331:68–70.
Rainer G, Rao SC, Miller EK. 1999. Prospective coding 
for objects in primate prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci 
19:5493–5505.
Rollenhagen JE, Olson CR. 2000. Mirror-image confusion in 
single neurons of the macaque inferotemporal cortex. 
Science 287:1506–1508.
Sakai K, Miyashita Y. 1991. Neural organization for the long-
term memory of paired associates. Nature 354:152–155.
Schwartz EL, Desimone R, Albright TD, Gross CG. 1983. 
Shape recognition and inferior temporal neurons. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 80:5776–5778.
Suzuki WA, Amaral DG. 2004. Functional neuroanatomy 
of the medial temporal lobe memory system. Cortex 
40:220–222.
Tanaka K. 2003. Columns for complex visual object features 
in the inferotemporal cortex: clustering of cells with simi-
lar but slightly different stimulus selectivities. Cereb 
Cortex 13:90–99.
Teuber HL. 1968. Disorders of memory following penetrat-
ing missile wounds of the brain. Neurology 18:287–288.
Tomita H, Ohbayashi M, Nakahara K, Hasegawa I, Miyashita 
Y. 1999. Top-down signal from prefrontal cortex in execu-
tive control of memory retrieval. Nature 401:699–703.
Tsao DY, Freiwald WA, Tootell RB, Livingstone MS. 2006. A 
cortical region consisting entirely of face-selective cells. 
Science 311:670–674.
Wheeler ME, Petersen SE, Buckner RL. 2000. Memory’s echo: 
vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11125–11129.


===== Page 3 =====
25
Visual Processing for Attention and Action
from information conveyed in several discrete neural 
pathways from the eyes. When we look at a painting, 
for example, we explore it with a series of quick eye 
movements (saccades) that redirect the fovea to differ-
ent objects of interest in the visual field. The brain must 
take into account these eye movements in the course of 
producing an interpretable visual image from the light 
stimuli in the retina.
As each saccade brings a new object onto the fovea, 
the image of the entire visual world shifts on the fovea. 
These shifts occur several times per second, such that 
after several minutes the record of movement is a jum-
ble (Figure 25–1). With such constant movement, visual 
images should resemble an amateur video in which the 
image jerks around because the camera operator is not 
skilled at holding the camera steady. In fact, however, 
our vision is so stable that we are ordinarily unaware 
of the visual effects of saccades. This is so because the 
brain makes continual adjustments to the images fall-
ing on the retina after each saccade.
A simple laboratory experiment, shown in Figure 
25–2, illustrates the biological challenge to the brain.
Motor Commands for Saccades Are Copied  
to the Visual System
The first insight into the brain mechanisms underlying 
visual stability came from an observation by Hermann 
von Helmholtz in the 19th century. He saw a patient 
who could not move his eye horizontally toward his 
ear because of a paralysis of the lateral rectus muscle. 
Whenever the patient attempted to look toward his 
ear, the entire visual world jumped in the opposite 
direction and then returned to the center of gaze.
The Brain Compensates for Eye Movements to Create a Stable 
Representation of the Visual World
Motor Commands for Saccades Are Copied to the  
Visual System
Oculomotor Proprioception Can Contribute to Spatially 
Accurate Perception and Behavior
Visual Scrutiny Is Driven by Attention and Arousal Circuits
The Parietal Cortex Provides Visual Information to the  
Motor System
Highlights
T
he human brain has an amazing  ability to 
direct action to objects in the visual world—a 
baby reaching for an object, a tennis player hit-
ting a ball, an artist looking at a model. This ability 
requires that the visual system solve three problems: 
making a spatially accurate analysis of the visual 
world, choosing the object of interest from the welter 
of stimuli in the visual world, and transferring infor-
mation on the location and details of the object to the 
motor system.
The Brain Compensates for Eye Movements  
to Create a Stable Representation of the  
Visual World
Although the visual system produces vivid represen-
tations of our visual world, as described in preceding 
chapters, a visual image is not like an instantaneous 
photographic record but is dynamically constructed 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    583
Figure 25–1  Eye movements during vision. A subject 
viewed this painting (An Unexpected Visitor by llya Repin) 
for several minutes, making saccades to selected fixation 
points, primarily to faces. Lines indicate saccades, and spots 
indicate points of fixation. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Yarbus 1967).
Helmholtz postulated that a copy of the motor 
command for each saccade was fed to the visual sys-
tem so that the representation of the visual world 
could be adjusted to compensate for eye movement. 
This adjustment would lead to a stable image of the 
visual world. In the 19th century, Helmholtz called 
such a copy a “sense of effort,” and in the 20th century, 
it was named an efference copy or corollary discharge.
The corollary discharge solves the problem of the 
double-step saccade. In order for a corollary discharge 
to affect visual perception across eye movements, motor 
information has to affect the activity of visual neurons. 
This is precisely what happens to neurons in the pari-
etal cortex, frontal eye field, prestriate visual cortex, 
and superior colliculus when a monkey makes a sac-
cade. Each saccade can be considered a vector with two 
dimensions—direction and amplitude. Although the 
retinal image is different after each saccade, the brain 
can use the vector of each saccade to reconstruct the 
whole visual scene from the sequence of retinal images.
The corollary discharge can be seen at the level 
of a single cell. Physiological studies in the Rhesus 
monkey, an animal whose oculomotor and visual sys-
tems resemble those of humans, have illuminated the 


===== Page 5 =====
584    Part IV / Perception
Figure 25–2  The double-step task illustrates how the brain 
stabilizes images during saccades.
A. A subject starts by looking at a fixation point (FP) that disap-
pears, after which two saccade targets A and B appear and disap-
pear sequentially before the subject can make the saccade. The 
first saccade (to target A) is simple. The retinal vector (FP→A) and 
the saccade vectors are the same. After the first saccade, the 
subject is looking at A. The retinal vector is A→B′, but the mon-
key must make a saccade whose vector is A→B. The brain must 
adjust the retinal vector to compensate for the first saccade.
B. Timing. The upper records show when the targets appear 
(colored bars). (Abbreviations: H, horizontal; V, vertical.)
A  Task geometry
B  Task timing
200 ms
Saccade
to A
Saccade
to B
A
A
B
B
B′
FP
FP
H
V
Eye 
movement
Target 
appearance
problem. Every time a monkey makes a saccade, a 
stimulus currently not in the receptive field of a neu-
ron in the lateral intraparietal area, and therefore inca-
pable of exciting the neuron, will excite the neuron if 
the impending saccade will bring the stimulus into the 
receptive field, even before the saccade occurs (Figure 
25–3). Thus, a corollary discharge of the impending 
saccade affects the visual responsiveness of the pari-
etal neuron.
This transient remapping of the receptive field 
explains how subjects can perform the double-step task. 
Consider the diagram in Figure 25–2A. The task begins 
with the monkey directing gaze to the fixation point 
(FP). After the monkey makes the first saccade, the reti-
nal vector A→B′ is no longer useful for making the A→B 
saccade. However, the FP→A saccade remaps the activ-
ity of the cell describing the vector A→B, so it responds 
to the target at the retinal location of B, which was not 
in its receptive field when the monkey was looking at 
FP. Remapping is found in a number of cortical and 
subcortical areas, including lateral intraparietal area, 
frontal eye field, medial intraparietal area, intermediate 
layers of the superior colliculus, and prestriate areas V4, 
V3a, and V2. As we shall see, remapping facilitates both 
visual perception around the time of a saccade and the 
accuracy of visually guided movement.
The first question this raises is: How does the brain 
obtain the vector of the saccade that it feeds back to 
the visual system? We know from decades of research 
that the motor command for the vector is represented 
in the superior colliculus on the roof of the midbrain 
(Chapter 35). Each neuron in the superior colliculus 
is tuned to saccades of a given vector, such that the 
neurons collectively provide a map of the vectors of 
all possible saccades. Inactivation of the superior col-
liculus affects the monkey’s ability to make saccades. 
Electrical stimulation of the superior colliculus evokes 
saccades of the vector described by the neurons at 
the stimulation site. But this provides the vectors that 
actually drive the eye, not the vectors that inform per-
ception about the vector of the saccade. How does the 
vector information used to move the eye become avail-
able to brain processes that do not move the eye but do 
require information about how it moved?
Since the vectors for moving the eye have been 
identified in the superior colliculus, it is reasonable to 
expect that this also might be the source of a corollary 
discharge. Indeed, it is. The superior colliculus has both 
descending pathways for generating the saccades and 
ascending pathways to the cerebral cortex that could 
carry the corollary discharge of the impending move-
ment (Figure 25–4). The pathways to the cortex pass 
through the thalamus, as does all internal and almost 
all external information reaching the cerebral cortex.
The motor signal in the thalamus is not necessar-
ily a corollary discharge; it could also be a movement 
command that simply passes through the cerebral 
cortex. That is not the case, however, because inactiva-
tion of this pathway in the thalamus does not alter the 
amplitude and direction of saccades. It is not driving 
saccades. It is more likely to be a corollary discharge. 
After inactivation of the thalamic pathway, monkeys 
cannot accurately perform the second saccade of the 
double-step task. In addition, inactivation disrupts the 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    585
Figure 25–3  Remapping of the receptive field of a visual 
neuron in the parietal cortex of a monkey in conjunction 
with saccadic eye movements. (A [left] and B adapted, with 
permission, from Duhamel, Colby, and Goldberg 1992. A [right] 
reproduced with permission, from M.E. Goldberg.)
A. Left: The monkey looks at fixation point 1 (FP1), and the cell 
responds to the abrupt onset of a task-irrelevant stimulus in the 
current receptive field (CRF). Successive trials are synchronized 
on the appearance of the stimulus. (Abbreviations: H, horizontal 
eye position; V, vertical eye position.) Right: The monkey looks 
at FP1, and the cell does not respond to a stimulus flashed in 
the future receptive field (FRF).
B. The monkey makes a saccade from FP1 to FP2, which will 
bring the cell’s receptive field onto the stimulus in the FRF. 
Now the cell fires even before the saccade begins, which 
means that a corollary discharge of the saccade plan remapped 
the area of the retina to which the cell responds.
Saccade
A  Fixation
B  Saccade
50 ms
Stimulus
Stim
100
spikes/s
H
V
Stim
H
V
Stim
H
V
FP1
FP1
FP2
FP1
Stimulus in current
receptive ﬁeld
CRF
CRF
FRF
CRF
FRF
Stimulus in future
receptive ﬁeld
Stimulus in future
receptive ﬁeld
receptive field remapping described earlier (Figure 
25–3B). Because disrupting the corollary discharge dis-
rupts both receptive field remapping and the behav-
ioral compensation for eye movements, it is likely 
that the corollary discharge is essential for solving the 
problem of spatial accuracy for action.
To determine whether the corollary discharge also 
provides the information that allows the visual system 
to perceive the location of objects that appeared before 
a saccade, the monkey is trained to indicate where it 
thinks its eyes are directed at the end of the saccade. 
We can measure where the motor system moved the 
eye, but what we want to know is the monkey’s per-
ception of the change in its eye direction with each 
saccade. This can be determined using a task devel-
oped for humans by Heiner Deubel and his colleagues 
and adapted for monkeys. In this task, the monkey 
looks at a fixation point and then makes a saccade to 
a target (Figure 25–5A). During the saccade, the target 
temporarily disappears; when it reappears, it has been 
displaced to a location left or right of the original tar-
get. After the trial, the monkey moves a bar to the right 
or left to indicate the direction of the displacement 
(Figure 25–5A).
Over a series of trials, the monkey’s responses 
are plotted to generate a psychometric curve (Figure 
25–5B). This curve show the actual intrasaccadic target 
displacement (horizontal axis) in the same (forward) 
or opposite (backward) direction as the initial saccade, 
and how frequently the monkey reports that it was 
moved forward (vertical axis). The monkey responded 
that the target had moved forward 100% of the time 
when the target was 3° to the right. When the target 
moved 3° to the left, the monkey responded that it had 
never moved forward. The point on the psychometric 
curve where the monkey reported forward and back-
ward displacements with equal frequency (the 50% 
horizontal line) was taken as the perceptual null point. 


===== Page 7 =====
Figure 25–4  A corollary discharge from the motor program 
for saccades directs a shift in location of the receptive field 
of frontal eye field neurons prior to the saccade. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Sommer and Wurtz 2008. Copyright © 
2008 by Annual Reviews.)
A. One possible pathway for the corollary discharge originates 
in saccade-generating neurons in the superior colliculus, passes 
through the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, and termi-
nates in the frontal eye field (FEF) in the frontal cortex.
B. When the medial dorsal nucleus (MD) is inactivated, the 
response of a frontal eye field neuron to a stimulus probe in 
the cell’s current receptive field is unaffected (upper records), 
whereas the response to a stimulus in a future (post-saccade) 
receptive field is severely impaired (lower records). This 
result demonstrates that a corollary discharge from the sac-
cade motor program directs the shift in the neuron’s receptive 
field properties.
Figure 25–5  Perceived saccade direction changes with dis-
ruption of corollary discharge.
A. At the start of each trial, the monkey fixates a target on a 
screen (1). When the fixation point is turned off, the monkey 
makes a saccade to the target; during the saccade, the target 
is displaced randomly (up to 3°) either to the left or to the 
right (2). After the saccade to the original target, the monkey 
receives a reward for manually moving a bar in the direction of 
the target displacement (3).
B. Psychometric curves before (black) and after (purple) inac-
tivation of the medial dorsal nucleus of the thalamus, which 
contains the relay neurons for the corollary discharge in its 
pathway between the superior colliculus and the frontal cortex. 
The curve shows the proportion of forward (in the direction of 
the saccade) judgments (y-axis) for each target displacement 
(x-axis). The post-saccadic target location at which the monkey 
perceived no displacement is defined as the perceptual null 
location. (Adapted, with permission, from Cavanaugh et al. 2016.)
100 ms
B
A
Probe onset 
(during initial ﬁxation)
Probe onset 
(just before saccade)
Saccade 
initiation
200
spikes/s
Baseline
MD inactivated
Superior
colliculus
Medial dorsal 
nucleus of 
the thalamus
Inactivation
Recording
FEF
Bar
1. Fixation
A  Task for perceived eye direction
B  Change in perceptual location
2. Saccade to target; 
target displaced
rightward
3. Monkey turns bar 
indicating displacement 
direction
Saccade
Target displacement
(degrees forward)
Proportion of “forward” reports
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
Fixation
point
Displaced target
Target


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    587
We take this point to be the monkey’s perception of the 
original target location. If the target were not perceived 
to move, it must be in the same location as before the 
saccade; in a normal monkey, that point is close to zero 
(Figure 25–5B).
We now have a corollary discharge that can pro-
vide the vector for each saccade and a task for a mon-
key that allows us to determine where it perceives the 
target to be at the end of the saccade. If the corollary 
discharge contributes to the monkey’s perception, then 
inactivating the corollary discharge should change the 
animal’s perception of target location. It does. The 
purple curve in Figure 25–5B represents the perceived 
location after corollary discharge inactivation; the 
curve shifts to the left after inactivation of the medial 
dorsal nucleus of the thalamus. The conclusion is that 
the corollary discharge does provide the vector of the 
saccade, which is necessary for the monkey to perceive 
that the target had moved. With each saccade, corol-
lary discharge information provides perceptual infor-
mation for determining the amplitude and direction of 
the current saccade, and it does so with machine-like 
precision several times per second.
The corollary discharge provides the vector infor-
mation available before the saccade is made, but it is 
not the only source of information. Two other types of 
information must be evaluated after the saccade has 
taken place: visual cues and eye muscle propriocep-
tion. Visual cues are unlikely to be a factor in the per-
ceptual experiment described (Figure 25–5) because 
the experiment was done in total darkness except for 
light scattered from the very dim fixation point and 
saccade target. In the light, however, could  visual 
cues be a factor? In fact, repeating the experiment in 
the light did not improve the monkey’s judgment and 
frequently made it worse.
Oculomotor proprioception is unlikely to pro-
vide the vector information at the end of the saccade 
because, on average, the metrics of the saccades before 
and during inactivation do not change, so there is little 
reason to expect that the muscle proprioception will 
have changed. In addition, while the corollary discharge 
begins at least 100 ms before the saccade, neuronal activ-
ity from oculomotor proprioception reaches the lateral 
intraparietal area about 150 ms after the saccade. As 
we will see in the next section, the role of propriocep-
tion in perception might be to provide information 
long after the saccade ends.
Finally, there is a second potential disruption of 
vision produced by saccades: a blur as the saccade 
sweeps the visual scene across the retina. The blur is 
not seen, however, because neuronal activity in a num-
ber of visual areas is suppressed around the time of 
every saccade. This so-called saccadic suppression 
was first seen in the superior colliculus and has subse-
quently been seen in the thalamus and areas of visual 
cortex beyond primary visual cortex.
A corollary discharge contributes to this neuronal 
activity suppression because the suppression occurs 
even in total darkness (no vision) and even if eye 
movement is blocked (no proprioception). Suppres-
sion can also be produced by visual masking, which 
occurs when one stimulus reduces the perception of 
a following or preceding stimulus. If a saccade starts 
in total darkness, and an object is then flashed and 
extinguished before the saccade ends, a blur can be 
seen during the  saccade. If a mask is flashed after the 
saccade, the blur is suppressed. A correlate of such a 
masking effect is clearly seen in neurons in primary 
visual cortex. The suppression resulting from a corol-
lary discharge is relatively weak but is present with all 
saccades; that from visual masking is much stronger 
but is present only in the light.
Oculomotor Proprioception Can Contribute to 
Spatially Accurate Perception and Behavior
Charles Sherrington suggested that the way the brain 
compensates for a moving eye is to measure directly 
where the eyes are in the orbit and adjust the visual 
signal for changes in position. Richard Andersen and 
Vernon Mountcastle discovered that the responses of 
parietal visual neurons with retinotopic receptive fields 
are modulated by the position of the eye in the orbit in a 
linear fashion called the gain field (Figure 25–6). From this 
relationship, the position of an object in head-centered 
(craniotopic) coordinates can easily be calculated.
Where does the eye position signal that creates the 
gain fields come from? It could come from a corollary 
discharge of eye position, or it could come from a pro-
prioceptive mechanism. Human eye muscles have two 
structures that could contribute to oculomotor pro-
prioception: muscle spindles and myotendinous cyl-
inders, or palisade endings, an eye-specific structure. 
Area 3a, the region of somatosensory cortex to which 
skeletal muscle spindles project, has a representation 
of the position of the eye, which arises from proprio-
ceptors in the contralateral orbit (Figure 25–7).
However, the proprioceptive measurement of eye 
position lags changes in eye position by 60 ms, and for 
150 ms after a saccade, the gain fields modulate the vis-
ual response as if the monkey were still looking at the 
presaccadic target, long after the corollary discharge 
has remapped the visual response. Therefore, the eye 
position signal creating the gain fields probably arises 
from a proprioceptive mechanism. The possibility 


===== Page 9 =====
588    Part IV / Perception
B
A
C
Receptive
ﬁeld
Fix center
Fix left
Fix: (–20,20)
(0,20)
(20,20)
(–20,0)
(0,0)
(20,0)
(–20,–20)
(0,–20)
(20,–20)
40°
10
20
40
Figure 25–6  The position of the eye in the orbit affects the 
responses of parietal visual neurons with retinotopic recep-
tive fields.
A. Receptive field relative to the fovea. Contour plot indicates 
spike rates for different spatial locations. Numbers are spikes 
per second for each contour at the maximum position.
B. The receptive field moves in space with the eye. On the left 
the monkey is fixating the center of the screen. On the right 
the same monkey is fixating 20° to the left of center. For the 
recordings in C, the stimulus (blue square) is always presented 
in the center of the receptive field.
C. Responses to a stimulus at the optimum location in the 
receptive field change as a function of the position of the eye 
in the orbit, from a maximum when the monkey fixates a point 
at −20°,20° to a minimum when the monkey fixates a point at 
20°,−20°. Arrows indicate onset of stimulus flash. Trial duration, 
1.5 sec; ordinate, 25 spikes/division. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Andersen, Essick, and Siegel 1985. Copyright © 1985 AAAS.)
exists that the brain calculates the spatial location of 
an object that appeared before an eye movement using 
two mechanisms: a corollary discharge that is rapid 
and a proprioceptive signal that is slow but can be 
more accurate than the corollary discharge. The pro-
prioceptive signal can also be used to calibrate the cor-
ollary discharge.
Visual Scrutiny Is Driven by Attention and 
Arousal Circuits
In the 19th century, William James described atten-
tion as “the taking possession by the mind in clear and 
vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultane-
ously possible objects or trains of thought. It implies 
withdrawal from some things in order to deal effec-
tively with others.” James went on to describe two dif-
ferent kinds of attention: “It is either passive, reflex, 
non-voluntary, effortless or active and voluntary. In 
passive immediate sensorial attention the stimulus is a 
sense-impression, either very intense, voluminous, or 
sudden … big things, bright things, moving things … 
blood.”
Your attention to this page as you read it is an 
example of voluntary attention. If a bright light sud-
denly flashed, your attention would probably be pulled 
away involuntarily from the page. Large changes in 
the visual scene that occur outside the focus of atten-
tion are often missed until the subject directs attention 
to them, a phenomenon referred to as change blind-
ness (Figure 25–8).
Voluntary attention is closely linked to saccadic 
eye movements because the fovea has a much denser 
array of cones than the peripheral retina (Chapter 17) 
and moving the fovea to an attended object permits a 
finer-grain analysis than is possible with peripheral 
vision. Attention that selects a point in space, whether 
or not it is accompanied by a saccade, is called spatial 
attention. Searching for a specific kind of object, for 


