===== Page 1 =====
1404    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A  Lateral intraparietal area
C  Anterior intraparietal area
B  Medial intraparietal area
Receptive ﬁeld 
characteristics
Attention
sensitive,
preparation
to look
Eye movement
after delay
Eye movement
after delay
Retina-centered,
preparation
to reach
Object-speciﬁc
viewing, grasping
AIP
MIP
LIP
Other 
object
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Attend
Attend
Attend
Attend
See
Grasp
Grasp
Grasp
See
See
S
S
S
S
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
E
S
G
G
S
S
G
1 s
E
to the difference, f2 – f1. This is challenging to study 
because the decision variable does not evolve over a 
long time scale. There is no need to acquire many sam-
ples of evidence. All that is needed is an estimate of f2 
and the application of a threshold. The flutter-vibration 
task complements the motion decision task by dem-
onstrating the diverse functions of persistent activity. 
In the motion task, the persistence supports the com-
putation of the decision variable—the accumulated 
evidence bearing on the decision alternatives. In the 
flutter-vibration task, the persistent activity represents 
a sensory quality—the frequency of the reference 
stimulus—through a delay period.
Perceptual Decision-Making Is a Model for 
Reasoning From Samples of Evidence
Most of the decisions animals and humans make 
are not about weak or noisy sensory stimuli. They 
are about activities, purchases, propositions, and 
menu items. They are informed by knowledge and 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1405
Figure 56–7  (Opposite) Persistent neural activity maintains 
working memory, attention, and plans of action.  The mon-
key is asked to view a scene and respond to a visual stimulus 
(S) by either moving its eyes (E) or reaching (R) or grasping 
(G) with its hand. Each histogram represents the firing rate of 
a representative neuron as a function of time following pres-
entation of the visual stimulus. The dashed circles show the 
response fields. This term is preferable to receptive and move-
ment field because these neurons are neither purely sensory 
nor purely motor. The blue line shows where on the screen the 
monkey is asked to initially fixate its gaze.
A. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) fire when a 
monkey is preparing to make an eye movement to an object 
or when the monkey directs attention to the object’s location. 
Most LIP neurons are not selective for object features such as 
shape and color. This neuron fires when the object is presented 
in the neuron’s response field, which lies in the circled area to 
the right of where the monkey is looking (1). The neuron’s fir-
ing is enhanced if the object is presented while the monkey’s 
attention is directed to this location or if the monkey is asked 
to plan an eye movement to the location (2). The firing can per-
sist for several seconds after the stimulus has been removed 
(2), thereby providing a potential mechanism for maintaining a 
short-term or working memory of its location. The neuron does 
not fire if an object is presented outside the neuron’s response 
field (eg, to the left) (3) even if the monkey is asked to attend to 
the location of the neuron’s response field (4). An object must 
appear there even if only briefly (2).
B. In the medial intraparietal area (MIP), neurons fire when 
the monkey is preparing to reach for a visual target. This neu-
ron starts firing shortly after the appearance of a target in the 
response field of the neuron, in this case, a fixed angle to the 
right of where the monkey is looking, whether its gaze is on 
the left edge (2) or the center (3) of the screen, and it continues 
to fire as the monkey waits to reach. The neuron does not fire 
when the monkey reaches for a target at the center of its gaze 
(1) or when the monkey plans to shift its gaze to a target in the 
response field, without reaching (4). The physical direction of 
the reach is not a factor in the neuron’s firing: It is the same in  
1 and 2, and yet the neuron fires only in 2.
C. In the anterior intraparietal area (AIP), neurons fire when the 
monkey is looking at or preparing to grasp an object and are 
selective for objects of particular shapes. This neuron fires when 
the monkey is viewing a ring (1) or making a memory-guided 
reach to it in the dark (2). It fires especially strongly when the 
monkey is grasping the ring under visual guidance (3). It does not 
fire during viewing or grasping of other objects (4).
expectations derived from sources such as personal 
experience, books, friends, and spreadsheets. Some are 
based on internal (subjective) valuation or preference. 
Many involve reasoning from sources of evidence 
that may differ in reliability and that must be weighed 
against costs and benefits. To what extent do the neu-
ral mechanisms of perceptual decision-making apply 
to these other types of decisions?
Imagine the following scenario. As you leave your 
home in the morning, you realize that you will be out-
doors from 4 to 5 pm and must decide whether to carry 
an umbrella. To make this interesting, assume this 
occurred before the age of the internet and accurate 
satellite weather prediction. You must decide based on 
yesterday’s forecast of “possible chance of rain“, the 
clear appearance of the sky at 7:00 am, a small drop 
in the barometric pressure compared to 1 hour before, 
and the observation that among a dozen pedestrians 
visible from your window only one seems to be car-
rying an umbrella. Let us assume further that you 
have experience with such decisions and have some 
sense of how reliable these indicators are. Finally, the 
cumbersomeness of carrying the umbrella is such that 
your decision boils down to a reasoned assessment of 
whether rain is more likely than not.
The right way to make this decision is to consider 
each of the indicators and ask how likely they would 
be if rain does or does not occur in the afternoon. 
These likelihoods are learned estimates of conditional 
probabilities, the probability of observing the indicator 
when it rains in the afternoon, and the probability of 
the same observation when it does not rain. For exam-
ple, suppose through experience you have learned that 
the forecast, chance of rain, implies a 1 in 4 chance of 
rain. Then, the conditional probabilities are 1 in 4 and 
3 in 4 that it will or will not rain, respectively, given the 
weather report. The ratio of these two probabilities is 
termed the likelihood ratio (LR), which is 1 in 3 in this 
case. If the LR is greater than 1, it favors rain, and if the 
LR is less than 1, it favors no rain. There is an LR for each 
of the four indicators. If the product of the four LRs is 
greater than 1, then you should carry the umbrella.
For reasons that will be clear in a moment, it is 
useful take logarithms of LRs, termed the log-likeli-
hood ratio (logLR). This provides a more natural scale 
for belief, and it allows us to replace multiplication 
with addition [recall that log(xy)=log(x)+log(y)]. To 
appreciate the scale, assume that the one passerby 
with an umbrella would be equally likely to carry 
the umbrella whether or not rain is a prospect. Both 
probabilities are 1 in 2. The LR is therefore 1, and the 
log(1)=0, which corresponds to the intuition that this 
observation is uninformative. LRs greater than 1 have 
positive logarithms, and LRs less than 1 have nega-
tive logarithms, consistent with the way they bear on 
the prediction of rain.
Monkeys can be trained to perform a version of this 
weather prediction task. In the experiment depicted in 


===== Page 3 =====
1406    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–9, a monkey had to decide whether to look 
at a red or a green target, only one of which would 
lead to a reward. Before committing to red or green, 
the monkey was shown four shapes. Each served as an 
indicator about the location of the reward. The monkey 
had learned to associate predictive value with a total 
of 10 shapes, half of which favored reward at red, the 
other half at green. The shapes also differed in the reli-
ability with which they predicted the reward location. 
The monkey learned to rely on these shapes rationally, 
making its decisions by combining evidence from each 
shape and by giving the more informative shapes more 
leverage on the choices.
While the monkeys made their decisions, neu-
ral activity was recorded from the same parietal 
area studied in the motion task. As before, the neu-
rons responded in a way that revealed the forma-
tion of the decision for or against the choice target in 
their response field. When the red target was in the 
response field, the neuron assigned positive values 
20
30
40
50
60
70
200
400
600
800
0
–200
0
Time (ms)
Firing rate (spikes/s)
Saccade
Motion
onset
Chose target in
response ﬁeld
Chose target outside
response ﬁeld
Strong
motion
Weak
motion
Pure 
noise
RF
LIP
Figure 56–8  Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) 
represent the accumulation of noisy evidence.  These neural 
recordings were obtained while a monkey performed the reac-
tion time version of the motion task. The traces are average fir-
ing rates from 55 neurons. The neurons were of the same type 
shown in Figure 56–7A.
     The traces show average responses to three motion 
strengths: strong (red), weak (purple), and zero (pure noise, 
gray). The solid traces are from trials in which the monkey 
chose the target in the neuron’s response field (RF; right 
choice). The dashed traces are from trials in which the mon-
key chose the target outside the neuron’s response field (left 
choice). For the nonzero strengths, the direction of random 
dot motion was the direction the monkey chose (ie, only cor-
rect choices are shown). The responses in the plot on the left, 
which are aligned to the start of random dot motion, exhibit a 
gradual buildup of activity, leading to rightward choices, and 
a gradual decline in activity, leading to leftward choices. The 
rate of this buildup and decline reflects the strength and direc-
tion of motion. The responses on the right are to the same 
dot motion but are now aligned to the moment the monkey 
makes its eye movement (saccade) to indicate its choice 
and reveal its reaction time. The responses reach a common 
level just before the monkey makes its choice, consistent 
with the idea that a threshold applied to the firing rate estab-
lishes the termination of these trials. The responses do not 
reach a common level before leftward choices because these 
decisions were terminated when a separate population of 
neurons, with the left choice target in their response fields, 
reached a threshold firing rate. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Roitman and Shadlen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Society 
for Neuroscience.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1407
A
B
D
C
Shape 4
added
Subject 
chooses
green
Shape 3
added
Shape 2
added
Shape 1
appears
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
20
40
100
80
60
0
Evidence for green vs. red (logLR)
Percent green choices
Strong
Weak
Time
Evidence
supporting
green
Shapes predicting
reward at green 
target
Shapes predicting
reward at red 
target
Figure 56–9  Evidence accumulation underlies probabilistic 
reasoning from evidentiary symbols.
A. A monkey was trained to make decisions based on a 
sequence of four shapes, drawn randomly with replacement 
from a set of 10. The shapes were added to the display sequen-
tially every one-half second.
B. Each shape provides a different amount of evidence that a 
reward is associated with a red or green choice target. Some, 
like the diamond and semicircle, are highly reliable predictors 
that a reward will occur if the choice is for green or red, respec-
tively. Others are less reliable predictors. The degree of reliabil-
ity is quantified by the likelihood ratio or its logarithm. A good 
decision-maker should base the decision on the product of the 
likelihood ratios or the sum of their logarithms (logLR).
C. The monkey’s decisions were guided by the probabilistic evi-
dence from the four shapes. On trials in which the sum of the 
logLR from the four shapes strongly favored green, the monkey 
almost always chose green. When the sum was closer to 0,  
the monkey had to base its decision on weak evidence and 
chose less consistently. The pattern of choices demonstrates 
that the monkey assigned greater weight to the shapes that 
were more reliable (strong versus weak).
D. The same types of parietal neurons studied in the percep-
tual decision-making task represent the running sum of evi-
dence bearing on the choice target in its response field. The 
spikes are shown from a single decision when the green tar-
get was in the neuron’s response field. The horizontal black 
line below the spikes marks the neutral level of evidence for 
green versus red, such that the two choice targets are equally 
likely to be rewarded. The vertical position of the green or 
red lines associated with each successive presentation of an 
indicated shape show the cumulative evidence conferred by 
the shapes that the reward was at the green target. The first 
shape was weak evidence for green. The second and third 
shapes supplied mounting evidence against green (for red). 
Note the reduction in firing rate. The final shape provided 
strong evidence for green, such that the cumulative evidence 
from all the shapes favored green. Note the increase in firing 
rate. It is an example of a single neuron in the association cor-
tex using persistent activity to compute quantities useful for 
decision-making. Based on the firing rates from many trials, it 
was shown that neurons encode the cumulative sum of the 
logarithm of the probability ratios—the logLR that a reward 
is associated with the choice target in the neuron’s response 
field. (Adapted, with permission, from Yang and Shadlen 2007.)


===== Page 5 =====
1408    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
to the red-favoring shapes and negative values to the 
green-favoring shapes. When the green target was in 
the response field, the signs were reversed. As shown 
in the example, the response changed discretely when 
each of the four shapes was presented, and it did so 
by an amount commensurate with the degree of reli-
ability. In fact, the increment (or decrement) was pro-
portional to the logLR assigned by the experimenter 
to the shape! The brain simply adds these logLRs to 
form a decision. And if the monkey is allowed to view 
as many shapes as it wants, it will typically stop when 
the accumulated evidence (in units of logLR) reaches a 
criterion level. The LIP neurons do the same thing they 
did in the motion decision. They produce firing rates 
that represent the cumulative sum of noisy increments 
and decrements.
By adding in units of logLR, the brain achieves rea-
soning from probabilistic cues in the way a statistician 
or actuary combines evidence from multiple sources. 
The experiment demonstrates that the mechanism 
used for perceptual decision-making is also at play 
in more complicated decisions that involve reasoning 
from more abstract sources of evidence. It speaks to the 
broader theme of this chapter: The study of decision-
making offers insight into how the brain achieves a 
variety of cognitive functions.
Decisions About Preference Use Evidence 
About Value
Many, if not most, decisions made by humans and 
animals are expressions of preference, based on an 
assignment of value. In some instances, the value is 
innate. For example, most animals experience sweet 
as positive and bitter as negative (Chapter 29). In the 
vast majority of instances, however, value is learned 
through experience, or it is derived from reasoning 
based on other preferences. Unlike a decision about 
the direction of motion, a medical diagnosis, or the 
weather, a decision about which of a pair of items one 
prefers is not objectively right or wrong. It can only be 
said to be consistent or inconsistent with one’s expres-
sion of value. In fact, our knowledge of a subject’s 
valuation of an object may only be revealed to us by 
observing her choices.
Yet despite the qualitative difference between 
subjective and objective evidence, there are parallels 
between the neural mechanisms that support percep-
tual and value-based decisions. Decision-makers take 
more time to choose between items of similar value 
than items that differ substantially in value, and their 
choices are less consistent. In a typical experiment, the 
participant is asked to indicate the value of each item 
that they will later make choices about. For example, 
they might be asked how much they are willing to pay 
or they are asked to indicate a rating from highly unde-
sirable through neutral to highly desirable. This proce-
dure is typically repeated to provide a subjective value 
for each item to be used in the experiment.
The participant is then asked to decide between 
pairs of items. The difference in the subjective val-
ues communicated before the experiment provides 
an index of the difficulty of the decision between the 
items. It is analogous to motion coherence. A similar 
approach works with animals. For example, a monkey 
might demonstrate a preference for grape juice over 
apple juice, and then be asked to choose between a 
small volume of grape juice versus a large volume of 
apple juice. The decision is rendered more difficult by 
titrating the ratio of volumes to values that lead the 
monkey to choose either juice with equal tendency.
Two types of neurons associated with this type of 
value encoding have been identified. The first, typically 
located in the striatum, encodes the value associated 
with an action. The second, primarily in the orbitofron-
tal and cingulate cortex, appears to encode the value 
associated with specific items. Decisions about prefer-
ence seem to arise from the same strategy that governs 
perceptual decisions. Just as a decision between left and 
right motion is guided by the difference in firing rates 
of left- and right-preferring sensory neurons, a decision 
between two items is based on the difference in activ-
ity of neurons encoding the values of each item. These 
neural representations are noisy, and this feature might 
explain why a decision-maker may make choices that 
are inconsistent with their values. It might also explain 
why decisions between items of similar value tend to 
take more time—a speed–consistency trade-off similar 
to the speed–accuracy trade-off discussed above.
The analogy to perceptual decision-making is 
appealing, but it misses the more interesting aspects of 
value-based decisions. As mentioned above, the value 
of most items is not given by biology but instead is 
learned. Further, there is no reason to assume that such 
value is monovalent. One may value an item differ-
ently, based on different qualities and considerations, 
and one or more of those qualities may dominate under 
different circumstances. Accordingly, the value of an 
item could appear to change simply by the occasion 
of its comparison to another item, which might invite 
emphasis on a more or less desirable aspect. Novelty, 
familiarity, and the value of exploration itself might 
also play a role in modifying a subjective valuation.
These considerations might contribute to the 
“noisy” representation of value that is thought to 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1409
explain inconsistencies and long decision times in 
preference choices. This type of noise belies processes 
that are far more complex than variability in random 
dot displays and the noisy spike rates of neurons. Such 
evaluative processes are likely to involve prospection 
and memory retrieval, which are only beginning to 
be understood at the neural level (Chapter 52). In the 
end, these processes must furnish samples of evidence 
bearing on the relative value of the items, and this evi-
dence is either accumulated or evaluated individually 
against a criterion to halt the process with a decision.
Decision-Making Offers a Framework for 
Understanding Thought Processes, States of 
Knowing, and States of Awareness
States of knowledge have persistence. Even if they con-
cern information derived from the senses, the knowl-
edge of sensation generally outlasts the sensory activity 
itself. In this way, the state of knowledge resembles a 
perceptual decision—a commitment to a proposition 
about the object, based on sensory evidence. As we 
have seen, these states are often tied to possible behav-
iors rather than to the features of the sensory informa-
tion. This is a position argued by many philosophers 
and the psychologist James J. Gibson.
This simple point can be made on empirical grounds. 
Persistent neural activity is not present in sensory areas 
of the brain unless a stimulus is unchanging and then 
only if the neurons do not adapt. Naturally, sensory 
neurons must change their response when the environ-
ment changes or the observer moves in the environment, 
whereas knowledge states persist through sensory 
changes and without a continuous stream of input. 
Indeed, persistent activity is apparent in areas of the 
brain that associate sources of information—from the 
senses and from memory—with circuits that organize 
behavior.
In the prefrontal cortex, persistent states repre-
sent plans of action, abstract rules, and strategies. In 
the parietal and temporal lobes, neural representa-
tions have the dual character of knowledge and the 
behavior that knowledge bears upon, such as mak-
ing an eye movement or reaching, eating, or avoiding. 
The responses can resemble a spatial representation, 
as they do in area LIP, if the target of the projection 
is the eye movement system, but that is only because 
there is correspondence between space and action. A 
useful guide is to consider the source and target of 
the association. If the source is the visual cortex and 
the targets are premotor areas that control hand pos-
ture (eg, grip), as they do in the anterior intraparietal 
area (Figure 56–7C), the association area might convey 
knowledge about curvature, distance, convexity, and 
texture. One might be inclined to use terms borrowed 
from geometry to catalogue such knowledge, but it 
may be simpler to think about the repertory of hand 
shapes available to the organism. Importantly, the neu-
rons in association cortex do not command an immedi-
ate action. They represent the possibility of acting in 
a certain way—an intention or provisional affordance 
(Box 56–1).
Let us defer for the moment the aspect of the 
knowledge state that includes conscious awareness 
and consider the simpler sense of knowledge as a state 
of possible utilization. Such preconscious ideation is 
probably the dominant state in which an animal inter-
acts with the environment. It is arguably also the lion’s 
share of human experience, although because we are 
not conscious of it, we underestimate its dominance. 
Two important insights emerge from this perspective. 
The first is that the correspondence between knowl-
edge and neuronal activity lies at a level of brain organ-
ization between sensation and behavior. Although the 
flow of information from sensory epithelia (eg, the 
retina) through the primary cortical sensory areas is 
essential for perception, knowledge resulting from 
activity in higher brain regions has temporal flexibility 
and persistence not seen in lower brain regions—what 
the philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty termed the 
temporal thickness of the present.
The second insight is that the computation leading 
to a knowledge state has the structure of a decision—a 
provisional commitment to something approximating 
a possible selection from a submenu of the behavioral 
repertory. We might say that the parietal association 
neurons interrogate the sensory areas for evidence 
bearing on the possibility of a behavior: look there, 
reach there, posture the hand this way to grasp. Of 
course, neurons do not ask questions. Nevertheless, 
we can think of the circuits as if they scan the world 
looking for evidence bearing on a possible behavior. 
The type of information they can access is limited by 
functional and anatomical connectivity. The type of 
question is framed by the target of the projection, such 
as regions that control gaze, reaching, and grasping.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle endowed Sherlock Holmes 
with the insight that the key to discovery was know-
ing where to look and what to look for. We acquire 
knowledge by controlling the brain’s interrogation 
system. Some interrogations are automatic, whereas 
others are learned. An example of the former is a sud-
den change of brightness of an object in the visual 
field; it provides evidence bearing on the possibility 
of orienting the eyes or body toward it. An example 


===== Page 7 =====
1410    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Box 56–1  Affordances, Perception, and Knowledge
James J. Gibson, known for his ecological theory of per-
ception, referred to affordances as properties of objects 
and the environment. The term comes from the verb 
afford. An object affords possible behaviors, such as lift-
ing, grabbing, filling, hiding in, drawing/writing upon 
(eg, parchment) or with (eg, a brush), or walking upon. 
The affordance refers to the potential behaviors of the 
animal. The same object, say a stone, could afford grasp-
ing, dropping, breaking (ie, used as a tool), throwing (as 
a missile weapon), or pinning (as a paperweight).
Gibson was widely criticized for claiming that per-
ceptual processes picked up these affordances directly 
from the optical array, what he termed “direct percep-
tion.” The term is commonly misunderstood as antitheti-
cal to computational accounts of information processing. 
By “direct perception,” Gibson did not mean that there 
were no computations on the data received through the 
senses. He promoted the mathematical understanding 
of these operations. He meant that we do not perceive 
the intermediates.
We do perceive the parts of objects that are acciden-
tally occluded by something in our line of sight, and we 
perceive the back of an opaque object that is occluded 
by its front. We do not perceive the outlines, the line art, 
and many other details, but that is not to say that they do 
not register on the retina and the visual cortex. Gibson 
held that representation of visual information is not a 
sufficient condition for perception. From the perspective 
of the neuroscience of decision-making, one might place 
emphasis on the representation of potential behavior—
something like a provisional commitment to a plan.
Affordance still refers to a category of actions, but it 
is about the organization of the action (eg, throwing) or 
strategy, and also—but not necessarily—a quality of the 
object. The modifier, “provisional,” emphasizes that the 
action may not actually ensue now or ever. This modi-
fier would have been superfluous in Gibson’s use of the 
term affordance, because an affordance was a property of 
the object (in his ecological framework) and therefore 
had a permanence independent of the perceiver.
of the latter draws on learning and foraging; we learn, 
through play and social interaction (eg, school), how 
to look for hidden items and how to explore in a goal-
directed way.
The beautiful thing about this construction is that 
an answer to the question confers a kind of meaning. 
Even for such a mundane question like “Might I look 
there?,” an affirmative answer—a decision to (possibly) 
look at an as yet undefined object in the periphery of 
one’s visual field—confers a spatial knowledge about 
the item. Before we have looked directly at it to identify 
what it is, we know about its thereness. From the perspec-
tive of decision-making, the location of an object is not 
perceived because there is a neural activity in a map of 
the visual field. Rather, the location is perceived because 
some aspect of the visual field—a fleck of contrast, change 
in brightness, appearance or disappearance—answered 
the question above in the affirmative.
This way of thinking helps us understand the dis-
ease states known by the term agnosia, from the Greek 
word meaning “absence of knowledge.” The classic 
example is visual hemineglect, which is caused by dam-
age to the parietal lobe (Chapter 59). A patient with a 
right parietal lesion will ignore the left side of the vis-
ual field and also the left side of objects even when the 
entire object is in the right visual field (Figure 56–10; see 
also Figure 59–1). Unlike the left side blindness, called 
homonymous hemianopsia (or hemiblind), which 
accompanies damage to the right visual cortex (homon-
ymous because it is the same regardless of which eye is 
used), the patient with a parietal lesion does not com-
plain of an inability to see. She is unaware of the deficit, 
so much so that crossing a street is a major hazard.
A hemiblind patient with damage to the right vis-
ual cortex still expects to interrogate and receive infor-
mation from the left visual field. When that patient 
receives no visual information, he knows to turn to 
face parallel to the street, thereby placing its contents 
in the intact right hemifield. In contrast, the patient 
with hemineglect does not interrogate the left hemi-
field in the first place. She does not perceive a lack of 
visual information because the apparatus to conduct 
the interrogation is not working. Like most deficits, 
there is enough redundancy in the brain (or the dam-
age partial) that some visual capacities are present. In 
fact, when confronted with a single spot of light on a 
dark background, the same patient may report its pres-
ence accurately even in the affected hemifield.
There are other versions of hemineglect that 
involve an absence of knowledge of the body. For 
example, a patient with a right parietal injury may 
deny that her left arm is hers. She may recognize it as 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1411
Figure 56–10  Damage to the parietal or temporal cortices 
results in agnosia, or deficits in knowing. After damage to 
the right parietal lobe, many patients are unaware of the left 
side of space or the left part of objects. The drawings on the 
right were made by patients with unilateral visual neglect fol-
lowing lesion of the right posterior parietal cortex. Agnosias can 
also be induced in healthy individuals by diverting attention (see 
Figure 25–8). (Reproduced, with permission, from Bloom F,  
Lazerson A. 1988. Brain, Mind and Behavior, 2nd ed., p. 300. 
New York: Freeman.)
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Model
Patient’s copy
Right posterior 
parietal cortex
an arm but deny that it is hers. When asked whose arm 
it is, she may express ignorance bordering on disin-
terest (personal experience). The syndrome is usually 
associated with some visual neglect as well and some 
weakness on the same side of the body suggestive of a 
more rostral and superior localization. Consider that 
the body’s position is known to us partly through the 
somatosensory system, partly through the predicted 
consequences of our motor command, and partly 
through vision. The arm in particular is a common fea-
ture of our lower visual field. Indeed, we are accus-
tomed to ignoring it.
These examples are the most common of the agno-
sias (which are thankfully rare). Other well-known 
examples involve problems in face recognition (pros-
opagnosia) and the perception of color (achromatop-
sia), both associated with lesions of the temporal lobe. 
The different types of agnosia have loose correspond-
ence to the anatomical specializations we learned 
about in Chapter 24. In particular, the ventral exten-
sion of the central visual pathways into the temporal 
lobe is referred to as the “what” pathway, which con-
tains circuits that are specialized for processing faces, 
objects, color, and semantic memory. The dorsal exten-
sion, which has been termed the “where” or “how” 
pathway, seems concerned with representations sup-
porting localization.
An alternative formulation would characterize 
these streams in terms of associations with behavio-
rally relevant targets. For the dorsal stream, those are 
parietal areas with projections to motor systems that 
reach, look, or grasp. For the ventral stream, those are 
temporal lobe areas with projections to structures that 
guide foraging decisions to eat, avoid, hide, approach, 
mate, and communicate. The last few behaviors are 
social affordances conferred by color and facial identity/
expression. With a small stretch of imagination, the 
organization of social affordances links to other func-
tions of the temporal lobe (and temporal parietal 
junction) in humans. For example, these regions are 
associated with language comprehension and infer-
ence about what someone else is thinking. The for-
mer is associated with a devastating agnosia, known 
as Wernicke aphasia (Chapters 1 and 55); the latter is 
known as theory of mind and will be discussed below.
From the perspective of decision-making, perceiv-
ing, believing, and thinking have the character of a 
provisional commitment to a proposition. Brain states 
that correspond to a sense of knowing, be it perceiv-
ing or believing, share two important aspects with 
decision-making: an extended temporal profile that 
withstands changes in the sensory and motor streams 
(ie, a freedom from immediacy) and a propositional 
character captured by the term “affordance.” Know-
ing is not solely about the information but is like the 
outcome of a decision to embrace a proposition: Might 
I do something, enact something, approach someone, 
or retain the possibility of trying the option I am not 
choosing now?
Two caveats deserve mention. This frame-
work does not replace a computational account of 


===== Page 9 =====
1412    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
information processing, nor does it explain the neu-
ral mechanisms that support these computations. It 
mainly tells us about the level of brain organization that 
carries out these operations. For example, consider the 
search for the neurons that achieve knowledge about 
the color red, despite changes in the spectral content 
of the morning and evening light—a phenomenon 
known as color constancy. Instead of searching in sen-
sory areas for neurons that respond selectively to red 
in this invariant way, one might look for neurons that 
guide the choice of ripe fruit. This does not obviate the 
computations required to recover the surface reflec-
tance properties of the fruit’s skin, despite variation in 
the spectral content of the illuminating light. The raw 
data for such computations are supplied by sensory 
neurons that lack color constancy and maintain tem-
poral fidelity with changes in the environment. The 
knowledge state “red,” however, is invariant to the 
illuminant and likely persistent. In animals that lack 
language, the knowledge state may not be dissociable 
from “ripe vegetation.”
The second caveat is that we have not distin-
guished knowledge states that we are consciously 
aware of from those that we experience unconsciously. 
For example, as I make my way through the forest 
trying to find the creek that I hear burbling, my brain 
might consider locations of objects I pass that are 
graspable, attached to vegetation, and with color sug-
gesting ripeness. I may be unaware of this consciously. 
Yet that evening in my search for food, I may return 
to this part of the forest, guided by these unconscious 
encounters. I may do this without knowing why, or the 
memory might pierce consciousness. All that has been 
said up to now could apply to conscious and noncon-
scious experience. We are now prepared to elucidate 
the difference.
Consciousness Can be Understood Through the 
Lens of Decision Making
Clearly, we are unaware of most of the operations 
that transpire in our brains, and this is true even for 
the processes that ultimately pierce consciousness. 
This is why Freud famously quipped that conscious-
ness is overrated. Every thought that enters our 
awareness began as neural computation preceding 
the conscious awareness of that thought. Indeed, 
the sophistication of nonconscious mental processes, 
including those leading to “I’ve got it!” moments and 
the activities we perform while occupied by a phone 
call, involves decisions that transpire without con-
scious awareness.
It is difficult to study nonconscious processing 
because people deny experience of the process. Indeed, 
the term nonconscious experience seems like an oxy-
moron. The experimenter must find a way to prove 
that information processing has occurred despite the 
fact that the subject is unaware of it. In recent years, it 
has become possible to establish conditions whereby 
information is provided to a human subject that has a 
high likelihood of going unnoticed but is nonetheless 
able to influence behavior, thereby permitting scien-
tific characterization of nonconscious mental process-
ing (Chapter 59). This has encouraged neuroscientists 
to ask what it is about the neural activity that gives 
rise to the thoughts, perceptions, and movements that 
do reach conscious awareness. We will not review this 
vast topic here but instead share a pertinent insight: 
Viewed through the lens of decision-making, the prob-
lem of consciousness may be simpler than imagined.
Broadly speaking, two sets of phenomena fall under 
the heading consciousness. The first concerns levels of 
arousal. One is not conscious when one is asleep, under 
general anesthesia, comatose, or having a generalized 
seizure. One is fully conscious when awake, and there 
are levels of consciousness between these extremes. 
These states are associated with terms such as confu-
sion, dissociation, stupor, and obtundation. Some alter-
ations of consciousness are normal (eg, sleep), whereas 
others are induced by toxins (eg, alcohol), metabolic dis-
turbances (eg, hypoglycemia), low oxygen, trauma (eg, 
concussion), or fever (eg, delirium).
The neuroscience underlying these states—and the 
transitions between them—is immensely important to 
medicine. We might classify this group of phenomena 
as neurology-consciousness. However, these topics are 
not what most people mean when they speak of the 
mystery of consciousness. This is partly because they 
are less mysterious but also because their characteriza-
tion is more objective and the phenomena can be stud-
ied in animals. That said, there is much to be learned 
about the mechanisms responsible for sleep, awaken-
ing, anesthesia, and so forth. Much of the neuroscience 
is unfolding at a rapid pace (Chapter 44).
We will not say more about neurology-consciousness 
here, except to seed one useful insight. Imagine a 
mother and father sleeping comfortably in their bed-
room as a storm ensues outdoors. There are also traf-
fic sounds and even the occasional thunder. This scene 
goes on for some time, until the cry of a baby awakens 
the parents. This common occurrence tells us that the 
nonconscious brain is capable of processing sounds 
and deciding to become conscious. It decides, noncon-
sciously, that some sounds afford an opportunity for 
more sleep while others sound a call to nurture. This 


