===== Page 1 =====
172    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Some ion channels can be blocked by certain free 
ions or molecules in the cytoplasm or extracellular 
fluid that bind either to the mouth of the aqueous pore 
or somewhere within the pore. If the blocker is an ion 
that binds to a site within the pore, it will be influenced 
by the membrane electric field as it enters the chan-
nel. For example, if a positively charged blocker enters 
the channel from outside the membrane, then making 
the cytoplasmic side of the membrane more negative 
will drive the blocker into the channel by electrostatic 
attraction, increasing the block. Although some block-
ers are toxins or drugs that originate outside the body, 
others are common ions normally present in the cell 
or its environment. Physiological blockers of certain 
classes of channels include Mg2+, Ca2+, Na+, and poly-
amines such as spermine.
The Opening and Closing of a Channel Involve 
Conformational Changes
In ion channels that mediate electrical signaling, the 
channel protein has two or more conformational states 
that are relatively stable. Each conformation repre-
sents a different functional state. For example, each 
ion channel has at least one open state and one or two 
closed states. The transition of a channel between these 
different states is called gating.
The molecular mechanisms of gating are only 
partially understood. In some cases, such as the voltage-
gated Cl- channel described later in the chapter, a local 
conformational change along the channel lumen gates 
the channel (Figure 8–4A). In most cases, channel gat-
ing involves widespread changes in the channel’s 
conformation (Figure 8–4B). For example, concerted 
movements, such as twisting, bending, or tilting, of the 
subunits that line the channel pore mediate the open-
ing and closing of some ion channels (see Figure 8–14 
and Chapters 11 and 12). The molecular rearrange-
ments that occur during the transition from closed to 
open states appear to enhance ion conduction through 
the channel not only by creating a wider lumen, but 
also by positioning relatively more polar amino acid 
constituents at the surface that lines the aqueous pore. 
In other cases (eg, inactivation of K+ channels described 
in Chapter 10), part of the channel protein acts as a par-
ticle that can close the channel by blocking the pore 
(Figure 8–4C).
Three major transduction mechanisms have 
evolved to control channel opening in neurons. Cer-
tain channels are opened by the binding of chemi-
cal ligands, known as agonists (Figure 8–5A). Some 
ligands bind directly to the channel either at an 
extracellular or intracellular site; transmitters bind 
Figure 8–4  Three physical models for the opening and closing 
of ion channels.
A. A localized conformational change occurs in one region of 
the channel.
B. A generalized structural change occurs along the length of 
the channel.
C. A blocking particle swings into and out of the channel mouth.
A  Conformational change in one region
B  General structural change
C  Blocking particle
Open
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
Closed
at extracellular sites, whereas certain cytoplasmic 
constituents, such as Ca2+, cyclic nucleotides, and 
GTP-binding proteins, bind at intracellular sites, as 
do certain dynamically regulated mobile lipid com-
ponents of the membrane (Chapter 14). Other ligands 
activate intracellular second messenger signaling 
cascades that can covalently modify channel gat-
ing through protein phosphorylation (Figure 8–5B). 
Many ion channels are regulated by changes in mem-
brane potential (Figure 8–5C). Some voltage-gated 
channels act as temperature sensors; changes in tem-
perature shift their voltage gating to higher or lower 
membrane potentials, giving rise to heat- or cold-
sensitive channels. Finally, some channels are regu-
lated by mechanical force (Figure 8–5D).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    173
The rapid gating actions necessary for moment-to-
moment signaling may also be influenced by certain 
long-term changes in the metabolic state of the cell. For 
example, the gating of some K+ channels is sensitive 
to intracellular levels of ATP. Some channel proteins 
contain a subunit with an integral oxidoreductase cata-
lytic domain that is thought to alter channel gating in 
response to the redox state of the cell.
These regulators control the entry of a channel into 
one of three functional states: closed and activatable 
(resting), open (active), or closed and nonactivatable 
(inactivated or refractory). A change in the functional 
state of a channel requires energy. In voltage-gated 
channels, the energy is provided by the movement 
of a charged region of the channel protein through 
the membrane’s electric field. This region, the voltage 
sensor, contains a net electric charge, called a gating 
charge, resulting from the presence of basic (positively 
charged) or acidic (negatively charged) amino acids. 
The movement of the charged voltage sensor through 
the electric field in response to a change in membrane 
potential imparts a change in free energy to the chan-
nel that alters the equilibrium between the closed and 
open states of the channel. For most voltage-gated 
channels, channel opening is favored by making the 
inside of the membrane more positive (depolarization).
In transmitter-gated channels, gating is driven by 
the change in chemical free energy that results when 
the transmitter binds to a receptor site on the channel 
protein. Finally, mechanosensitive channels are gated 
by force transmitted by the distortion of the surround-
ing lipid bilayer or by protein tethers.
The stimuli that gate the channel also control the 
rates of transition between the open and closed states 
of a channel. For voltage-gated channels, the rates are 
steeply dependent on membrane potential. Although 
the time scale can vary from several microseconds to 
a minute, the transition tends to require a few mil-
liseconds on average. Thus, once a channel opens, it 
stays open for a few milliseconds, and after closing, it 
stays closed for a few milliseconds before reopening. 
Once the transition between open and closed states 
begins, it proceeds virtually instantaneously (in less 
than 10 μs, the present limit of experimental measure-
ments), thus giving rise to abrupt, all-or-none, step-
like changes in current through the channel (Figure 
8–2 in Box 8–1).
Ligand-gated and voltage-gated channels enter 
refractory states through different processes. Ligand-
gated channels can enter the refractory state when their 
exposure to the agonist is prolonged, a process called 
desensitization—an intrinsic property of the interaction 
between ligand and channel.
Figure 8–5  Several types of stimuli control the opening and 
closing of ion channels.
A. A ligand-gated channel opens when a ligand binds a receptor 
site on the external surface of the channel protein. The energy 
from ligand binding drives the channel toward an open state.
B. Some channels are regulated by protein phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation. The energy for channel opening comes 
from the transfer of the high-energy phosphate, Pi.
C. Voltage-gated channels open and close with changes in 
the electrical potential difference across the membrane. The 
change in membrane potential causes a local conformational 
change by acting on a region of the channel that has a net 
charge.
D. Some channels open and close in response to membrane 
stretch or pressure. The energy for gating may come from 
mechanical forces that are passed to the channel either directly 
by distortion of the membrane lipid bilayer or by protein fila-
ments attached to the cytoskeleton or surrounding tissues.
A  Ligand gating
B  Phosphorylation gating
C  Voltage gating
D  Stretch or pressure gating
Stretch
Cytoskeleton
Change in
Dephosphorylation
Phosphorylation
Ligand binding
membrane
potential
Closed
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
Open
Pi
P
+ +
– –
+ +
– –
+ +
+ +
– –
– –
+
+
+
+


===== Page 3 =====
174    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Many, but not all, voltage-gated channels enter a 
refractory state after opening, a process termed inacti-
vation. In the inactivated state, the channel is closed and 
can no longer be opened by positive voltages. Rather, 
the membrane potential must be returned to its initial 
negative resting level before the channel can recover 
from inactivation so that it can again open in response 
to depolarization. Inactivation of voltage-gated Na+ 
and K+ channels is thought to result from a conforma-
tional change, controlled by a subunit or region of the 
channel separate from that which controls activation. 
In contrast, the inactivation of certain voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels is thought to require Ca2+ influx. An 
increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration inactivates 
the Ca2+ channel by binding to the regulatory molecule 
calmodulin, which is permanently associated with the 
Ca2+ channel protein (Figure 8–6).
Some mechanically gated ion channels that medi-
ate touch sensation inactivate in response to a pro-
longed stimulus or to a train of brief stimuli. Although 
the molecular mechanism of this inactivation is not 
known, it is thought to be an intrinsic property of the 
channel.
Exogenous factors, such as drugs and toxins, can 
also affect the gating control sites of an ion channel. 
Most of these agents tend to inhibit channel opening, 
but a few facilitate opening. Competitive antagonists 
interfere with normal gating by binding to the same 
site at which the endogenous agonist normally binds. 
Antagonist binding, which does not open the channel, 
Figure 8–6  Voltage-gated channels 
are inactivated by two mechanisms.
A. Many voltage-gated channels enter a 
refractory (inactivated) state after briefly 
opening in response to depolarization of 
the membrane. They recover from the 
refractory state and return to the resting 
state only after the membrane potential 
is restored to its resting value.
B. Some voltage-dependent Ca2+ chan-
nels become inactivated when the 
internal Ca2+ level increases following 
channel opening. The internal Ca2+ 
binds to calmodulin (CaM), a specific 
regulatory protein associated with the 
channel.
blocks access of agonist to the binding site, thereby 
preventing channel opening. The antagonist binding 
can be weak and reversible, as in the blockade of the 
nicotinic ACh-gated channel in skeletal muscle by the 
plant alkaloid curare, a South American arrow poison 
(Chapters 11 and 12), or it can be strong and virtually 
irreversible, as in the blockade of the same channel by 
the snake venom α-bungarotoxin.
Some exogenous substances modulate gating in a 
noncompetitive manner, without directly interacting 
with the transmitter-binding site. For example, bind-
ing of the drug diazepam (Valium) to a regulatory site 
on Cl− channels that are gated by γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter, enhances the 
frequency with which the channels open in response 
to GABA binding (Figure 8–7B). This type of indirect, 
allosteric modulatory effect is found in some voltage- 
and mechanically gated channels as well.
The Structure of Ion Channels Is Inferred 
From Biophysical, Biochemical, and Molecular 
Biological Studies
What do ion channels look like? How does the chan-
nel protein span the membrane? What happens to the 
structure of the channel when it opens and closes? 
Where along the length of the channel protein do 
drugs and transmitters bind?
+ +
– –
+ +
Depolarization
Prolonged
depolarization
Resting
Open
CaM
Inactivated
– –
– –
+ +
+ +
– –
– –
+ +
+ +
– –
A  Change in membrane potential
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
+ +
– –
+ +
Depolarization
Ca2+ entry
– –
– –
+ +
– –
+ +
– –
+ +
– –
+ +
B  Calcium binding
Ca2+
Ca2+


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    175
Figure 8–7  Exogenous ligands, such as 
drugs, can bias an ion channel toward 
an open or closed state.
A. In channels that are normally opened 
by the binding of an endogenous ligand 
(1), a drug or toxin may block the binding 
of the agonist by means of a reversible  
(2) or irreversible (3) reaction.
B. Some exogenous agents can bias a 
channel toward the open state by binding 
to a regulatory site, distinct from the  
ligand-binding site that normally opens  
the channel.
Figure 8–8  Ion channels are integral membrane proteins 
composed of several subunits.
A. Ion channels can be constructed as hetero-oligomers from 
distinct subunits (left), as homo-oligomers from a single type of 
subunit (middle), or from a single polypeptide chain organized 
into repeating motifs, where each motif functions as the equiv-
alent of one subunit (right).
B. In addition to one or more α-subunits that form a central pore, 
some channels contain auxiliary subunits (b or γ) that modulate 
pore gating, channel expression, and membrane localization.
Extracellular 
side
Endogenous
agonist
Reversible
antagonist
Irreversible
antagonist
A
B
Reversible reaction
Irreversible reaction
Cytoplasmic 
side
Exogenous
regulator
Endogenous
ligand
1
2
3
Biophysical, biochemical, and molecular biological 
studies have provided a basic understanding of chan-
nel structure and function. More recent studies using 
X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy 
have provided information about the structure of an 
increasing number of channels at the atomic level. All 
ion channels are large integral-membrane proteins 
with a core transmembrane domain that contains a 
central aqueous pore spanning the entire width of the 
membrane. The channel protein often contains carbo-
hydrate groups attached to its external surface. The 
γ
A
B
β
α
pore-forming region of many channels is made up of 
two or more subunits, which may be identical or differ-
ent. In addition, some channels have auxiliary subunits 
that may have a variety of effects, including facilitat-
ing cell surface expression of the channel, targeting the 
channel to its appropriate location on the cell surface, 
and modifying gating properties of the channel. These 
subunits may be attached to the cytoplasmic end or 
embedded in the membrane (Figure 8–8).
The genes for all the major classes of ion chan-
nels have been cloned and sequenced. The amino acid 


===== Page 5 =====
176    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
sequence of a channel, inferred from its DNA sequence, 
can be used to create a structural model of the channel 
protein. Regions of secondary structure—the arrange-
ment of the amino acid residues into α-helixes and 
β-sheets—as well as regions that are likely to corre-
spond to membrane-spanning domains of the channel 
are then predicted based on the structures of related 
proteins that have been experimentally determined 
using electron and X-ray diffraction analysis. This type 
of analysis has identified, for example, the presence of 
four hydrophobic regions, each around 20 amino acids 
in length, in the amino acid sequence of a subunit of 
the ACh receptor channel. Each of these regions is 
thought to form an α-helix that spans the membrane 
(Figure 8–9).
Comparing the amino acid sequences of the same 
type of channel from different species provides addi-
tional insights into channel structure and function. 
Figure 8–9  The secondary structure of membrane-spanning 
proteins.
A. A proposed secondary structure for a subunit of the nicotinic 
acetylcholine (ACh) receptor channel present in skeletal muscle. 
Each cylinder (M1–M4) represents a putative membrane-spanning 
α-helix comprised of approximately 20 hydrophobic amino acid 
residues. The membrane segments are connected by cytoplas-
mic or extracellular segments (loops) of hydrophilic residues. 
The amino terminus (NH2) and carboxyl terminus (COOH) of the 
protein lie on the extracellular side of the membrane.
B. The membrane-spanning regions of an ion channel protein 
can be identified using a hydrophobicity plot. The amino acid 
sequence of the α-subunit of the nicotinic ACh receptor was 
inferred from the nucleotide sequence of the cloned recep-
tor subunit gene. Then a running average of hydrophobicity 
was plotted for the entire amino acid sequence of the subu-
nit. Each point in the plot represents an average hydrophobic 
index of a sequence of 19 amino acids and corresponds to the 
midpoint of the sequence. Four of the hydrophobic regions 
(M1–M4) correspond to the membrane-spanning segments. 
The hydrophobic region at the far left in the plot is the signal 
sequence, which positions the hydrophilic amino terminus of 
the protein on the extracellular surface of the cell during protein 
synthesis. The signal sequence is cleaved from the mature pro-
tein. (Reproduced, with permission, from Schofield et al. 1987.)
A
B
NH2
COOH
M1M2M3M4
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
40
20
0
–20
0
M1
M2
M3
M4
100
Amino acids
Hydrophobicity
200
400
300
Regions that show a high degree of sequence similar-
ity (that is, have been highly conserved throughout 
evolution) are likely to be important in determining 
the structure and function of the channel. Likewise, 
conserved regions in different but related channels are 
likely to serve a common biophysical function.
The functional consequences of changes in a chan-
nel’s primary amino acid sequence can be explored 
through a variety of techniques. One particularly ver-
satile approach is to use genetic engineering to con-
struct channels with parts that are derived from the 
genes of different species—so-called chimeric channels. 
This technique takes advantage of the fact that the same 
type of channel can have somewhat different proper-
ties in different species. For example, the bovine ACh 
receptor channel has a slightly greater single-channel 
conductance than the ACh receptor channel in electric 
fish. By comparing the properties of a chimeric channel 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    177
to those of the two original channels, one can assess 
the functions of specific regions of the channel. This 
technique has been used to identify the membrane-
spanning segment that forms the lining of the pore of 
the ACh receptor channel (Chapter 12).
The roles of different amino acid residues or 
stretches of residues can be tested using site-directed 
mutagenesis, a type of genetic engineering in which 
specific amino acid residues are substituted or deleted. 
Finally, one can exploit the naturally occurring muta-
tions in channel genes. A number of inherited and 
spontaneous mutations in the genes that encode ion 
channels in nerve or muscle produce changes in chan-
nel function that can underlie certain neurological dis-
eases. Many of these mutations are caused by localized 
changes in single amino acids within channel proteins, 
demonstrating the importance of that region for chan-
nel function. The detailed functional changes in such 
channels can then be examined in an artificial expres-
sion system.
Ion Channels Can Be Grouped Into Gene Families
The great diversity of ion channels in a multicellular 
organism is illustrated by the human genome. Our 
genome contains nine genes encoding variants of 
voltage-gated Na+ channels, 10 genes for different 
Ca2+ channels, 80 genes for K+ channels, 70 genes for 
ligand-gated channels, and more than a dozen genes for 
Cl− channels. Fortunately, the evolutionary relationships 
between the genes that encode ion channels provide a rel-
atively simple framework with which to categorize them.
Most of the ion channels that have been described 
in nerve and muscle cells fall into a few gene superfam-
ilies. Members of each gene superfamily have similar 
amino acid sequences and transmembrane topology 
and, importantly, related functions. Each superfam-
ily is thought to have evolved from a common ances-
tral gene by gene duplication and divergence. Several 
superfamilies can be further subdivided into families 
of genes encoding channels with more closely related 
structure and function.
One superfamily encodes ligand-gated ion chan-
nels that are receptors for the neurotransmitters ACh, 
GABA, glycine, or serotonin (Chapter 12). All of these 
receptors are composed of five subunits, each of which 
has four transmembrane α-helixes (Figure 8–10A). In 
addition, the N-terminal extracellular domain that 
forms the receptor for the ligand contains a conserved 
loop of 13 amino acids flanked by a pair of cysteine 
residues that form a disulfide bond. As a result, this 
receptor superfamily is referred to as the cys-loop 
receptors. Ligand-gated channels can be classified by 
their ion selectivity in addition to their agonist. The 
genes that encode glutamate receptor channels belong 
to a separate gene family.
Gap-junction channels, which bridge the cyto-
plasm of two cells at electrical synapses (Chapter 11), 
are encoded by a separate gene superfamily. A gap-
junction channel is composed of two hemi-channels, 
one from each connected cell. A hemi-channel has six 
identical subunits, each of which has four membrane-
spanning segments (Figure 8–10B).
The genes that encode the voltage-gated ion chan-
nels responsible for generating the action potential 
belong to another superfamily (Chapter 10). These 
channels are selective for Ca2+, Na+, or K+. Compara-
tive DNA sequence data suggest that most voltage- 
sensitive cation channels stem from a common ancestral 
channel—perhaps a K+ channel—that can be traced 
to a single-cell organism living more than 1.4 billion 
years ago, before the evolution of separate plant and 
animal kingdoms.
All voltage-gated cation channels have a similar 
four-fold symmetric architecture, with a core motif com-
posed of six transmembrane α-helical segments termed 
S1–S6. A seventh hydrophobic region, the P-region, 
connects the S5 and S6 segments by dipping into and 
out of the extracellular side of the membrane (Figures 
8–10C and 8–11A); it forms the channel’s selectivity 
filter. Voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ channels are com-
posed of a large subunit that contains four repeats of 
this basic motif (Figure 8–10C). Voltage-gated K+ chan-
nels are tetramers, with each separate subunit contain-
ing one copy of the basic motif (Figure 8–11A). Each 
subunit contributes one P-region to the pore of the fully 
assembled channel. This structural configuration is also 
shared by other, more distantly related channel families 
described later and in Chapter 10.
The S4 segment is thought to play a particularly 
important role in voltage gating. It contains an unu-
sual pattern of amino acids in which every third posi-
tion contains a positively charged arginine or lysine 
residue. This region was originally proposed to be the 
voltage sensor because, according to fundamental bio-
physical principles, voltage-gating must involve the 
movement of intramembrane gating charges within 
the membrane electric field. Additional evidence 
implicating S4 as the voltage sensor comes from the 
finding that this pattern of positive charges is highly  
conserved in all voltage-gated cation-selective chan-
nels but is absent in channels that are not voltage-gated. 
Further support comes from site-directed mutagenesis 
experiments showing that neutralization of these posi-
tive charges in S4 decreases the voltage sensitivity of 
channel activation.


===== Page 7 =====
178    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
A  Ligand-gated channel (ACh receptor)
NH2
NH2
P
COOH
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
Subunit
α
COOH
M
1
M
2
M
3
M
4
γ
α
δ
β
C  Voltage-gated channel (Na+ channel)
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
B  Gap-junction channel
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
Cytoplasmic side
Motif
I
S
3
S
4
S
5
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
S
6
S
1
S
2
α
γ
α
δ
β
Figure 8–10  Three superfamilies of 
ion channels.
A. Members of a large family of ligand-
gated channels, such as the acetylcho-
line receptor channel, are composed of 
five identical or closely related subunits, 
each of which contains four transmem-
brane α-helixes (M1–M4). Each cylinder 
in the figure represents a single trans-
membrane α-helix.
B. The gap-junction channel is formed 
from a pair of hemichannels, one each 
in the pre- and postsynaptic cell mem-
branes, that join in the space between 
two cells. Each hemichannel is made of 
six identical subunits, each containing 
four transmembrane α-helixes. Gap-
junction channels serve as conduits 
between the cytoplasm of the pre- and 
postsynaptic cells at electrical synapses 
(Chapter 11).
C. The voltage-gated Na+ channel is 
formed from a single polypeptide chain 
that contains four homologous domains 
or repeats (motifs I–IV), each with six 
membrane-spanning α-helixes (S1–S6). 
The S5 and S6 segments are connected 
by an extended strand of amino acids, 
the P-region, which dips into and out 
of the external surface of the mem-
brane to form the selectivity filter of 
the pore. Voltage-gated Ca2+ channels 
share the same general structural pat-
tern, although the amino sequences are 
different.
The major gene family encoding the voltage-gated 
K+ channels is related to three additional families of K+ 
channels, each with distinctive properties and struc-
ture. One family includes genes encoding three types 
of channels activated by either intracellular Na+ or 
Ca2+ or by intracellular Ca2+ plus depolarization. A sec-
ond family consists of the genes encoding inward- 
rectifying K+ channels. Because they are open at the 
resting potential and rapidly occluded by cytosolic 
cations during depolarization, they conduct ions more 
readily in the inward than in the outward direction. 
Each channel subunit has only two transmembrane 
segments connected by a pore-forming P-region. A 
third family of genes encodes K2P channels composed 
of subunits with two repeated pore-forming segments 
(Figure 8–11). Various members are regulated by tem-
perature, mechanical force, and intracellular ligands. 
These channels may also contribute to the K+ perme-
ability of the resting membrane.
The sequencing of the genomes of a variety of spe-
cies, from bacteria to humans, has led to the identifi-
cation of additional ion channel gene families. These 
include channels with related P-regions but that are 
only very distantly related to the family of voltage-
gated channels. An example is the excitatory postsyn-
aptic glutamate-gated channel, in which the P-region 
is inverted, entering and leaving the internal surface of 
the membrane (Figure 8–11D).
Finally, the transient receptor potential (TRP) 
family of nonselective cation channels (named after a 
mutant Drosophila strain in which light evokes a brief 
receptor potential in photoreceptors) comprises a very 
large and diverse group of tetrameric channels that 
contain P-regions. Like the voltage-gated K+ channels, 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    179
TRP channels also contain six transmembrane seg-
ments, but are in most cases gated by intracellular 
or intramembrane ligands. TRP channels are impor-
tant for Ca2+ metabolism in all cells, visual signaling 
in insects, and pain, heat, and cold sensation in the 
nervous system of higher animals (Chapter 18). TRP 
channels have been implicated in osmoreception and 
certain taste sensations in mammals.
A number of other families of channels have been 
identified, structurally unrelated to those considered 
earlier. These include CLC Cl− channels that help set 
the resting potential of skeletal muscle cells and certain 
neurons, nonspecific cation-permeable Piezo channels 
that are activated by mechanical stimuli (Chapter 18), 
Na+ channels that are activated by H+ ions released 
during inflammation, and ligand-gated cation chan-
nels that are activated by ATP, which functions as a 
neurotransmitter at certain excitatory synapses. With 
the completion of the human genome project, it is 
likely that nearly all of the major classes of ion channel 
genes have now been identified.
Figure 8–11  Four related families of 
ion channels with P-regions.
A. Voltage-gated K+ channels are com-
posed of four subunits, each of which 
corresponds to one repeated domain 
of voltage-gated Na+ or Ca2+ channels, 
with six transmembrane segments  
and a pore-forming P-region (see  
Figure 8–10C).
B. Inward-rectifying K+ channels are 
composed of four subunits, each of 
which has only two transmembrane 
segments connected by a P-region.
C. The K2P K+ channels are composed 
of subunits that contain two repeats 
similar to the inward-rectifying K+ chan-
nel subunit, with each repeat contain-
ing a P-region. Two of these subunits 
combine to form a channel with four 
P-regions.
D. Glutamate receptors constitute a 
distinct family of tetrameric channels 
with P-regions. Their pore regions are 
nonselectively permeable to cations. In 
these receptors, the amino terminus is 
extracellular and the P-region enters and 
exits the cytoplasmic side of the mem-
brane. The distantly related bacterial 
GluR0 K+-permeable glutamate recep-
tor has four subunits, which contain 
two transmembrane segments (left); in 
higher organisms, the subunits contain 
three (right).
N
N
P
C
A  Voltage-gated K+ channel 
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
S
3
S
4
S
5
S
6
S
1
S
2
N
C
N
C
N
C
P
C
B  Inward-rectifying K+ channel 
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
N
C
N
C
N
C
N
C
P
P
C  K+ channel subunit with two P-regions
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
D  Glutamate-gated channel subunits
N
C
C
N
P
P
The diversity of ion channels is even greater than 
the large number of ion channel genes. Because most 
channels in a subfamily are composed of multiple 
subunits, each type of which may be encoded by a 
family of closely related genes, combinatorial permu-
tations of these subunits can generate a diverse array 
of heteromultimeric channels with different functional 
properties. Additional diversity can be produced by 
posttranscriptional and posttranslational modifica-
tions. These subtle variations in structure and func-
tion presumably allow channels to perform highly 
specific functions. As with enzyme isoforms, variants 
of a channel with slightly different properties may be 
expressed at distinct stages of development, in differ-
ent cell types throughout the brain, and even in different 
regions within a cell. Changes in neuronal activity can 
also lead to changes in ion channel expression patterns 
(Chapter 10).
Biochemical, biophysical, and molecular biological 
approaches have been important in defining structure–
function relationships among the large variety of ion 


===== Page 9 =====
180    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
channels. The use of X-ray crystallography and cryo-
electron microscopy to define the structure of chan-
nels at atomic resolution provides a framework for 
achieving greater understanding of the mechanisms of 
ion channel function and malfunction due to disease-
causing mutations. Combining a wide array of data 
from these various approaches makes possible the con-
struction of detailed molecular models, which can be 
tested by further experiments, as well as by theoretical 
approaches such as molecular dynamics simulation.
X-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Potassium 
Channel Structure Provides Insight Into Mechanisms 
of Channel Permeability and Selectivity
The first high-resolution X-ray crystallographic analysis 
of the molecular architecture of the pore region of an 
ion-selective channel was provided by Rod MacKinnon 
and his colleagues. To overcome the difficulties inher-
ent in obtaining crystals of large integral membrane 
proteins, they initially focused on a non–voltage-gated 
K+ channel, termed KcsA, from a bacterium. This chan-
nel is advantageous for crystallography as it can be 
expressed at high levels for purification, is relatively 
small, and has a simple transmembrane topology simi-
lar to that of the inward-rectifying K+ channel in higher 
organisms, including mammals (Figure 8–11B).
The crystal structure of the KcsA protein provides 
several important insights into the mechanisms by 
which the channel facilitates the movement of K+ ions 
across the hydrophobic lipid bilayer. The channel is 
made up of four identical subunits arranged symmetri-
cally around a central pore (Figure 8–12A). Each subu-
nit has two membrane-spanning α-helixes, an inner and 
outer helix. They are connected by the P-loop, which 
forms the selectivity filter of the channel. The amino 
acid sequence of these subunits is homologous to that of 
the S5-P-S6 region of vertebrate voltage-gated K+ chan-
nels. The two α-helixes of each subunit tilt away from 
the central axis of the pore such that the structure resem-
bles an inverted tepee (Figure 8–12B,C).
The four inner α-helixes from each of the subunits 
line the cytoplasmic end of the pore. At the intracel-
lular mouth of the channel, these four helixes cross, 
forming a very narrow opening—the “smoke hole” 
of the tepee. Because this hole is too small to allow 
passage of K+ ions, the crystal structure is presumed 
to represent the channel in the closed state. The inner 
helixes are homologous to the S6 membrane-spanning 
segment of voltage-gated K+ channels (Figure 8–11A). 
At the extracellular end of the channel, the transmem-
brane helixes in each subunit are connected by a region 
consisting of three elements: (1) a chain of amino acids 
that surrounds the mouth of the channel (the turret 
region), (2) an abbreviated α-helix (the pore helix) 
approximately 10 amino acids in length that projects 
toward the central axis of the pore, and (3) a stretch of 
5 amino acids near the C-terminal end of the P-region 
that forms the selectivity filter.
The shape and structure of the pore determine its 
ion-conducting properties. Both the inner and outer 
mouths of the pore are lined with acidic amino acids 
whose negative charges help attract cations from the 
bulk solution. Going from inside to outside, the pore 
consists of a medium-wide tunnel, 18 Å in length, 
which leads into a wider (10 Å diameter) spherical 
inner chamber. This chamber is lined predominantly 
by the side chains of hydrophobic amino acids. These 
relatively wide regions are followed by the very nar-
row selectivity filter, only 12 Å in length, which is 
rate-limiting for the passage of K+ ions. A high K+ ion 
throughput rate is ensured by the fact that the inner 
28 Å of the pore, from the cytoplasmic entrance to the 
selectivity filter, lacks polar groups that could delay 
ion passage by binding and unbinding the ion (Figure 
8–12C,D).
An ion passing from the polar solution through the 
nonpolar lipid bilayer encounters the least energeti-
cally favorable region in the middle of the bilayer. The 
large energy difference between these two regions for 
a K+ ion is minimized by two details of channel struc-
ture. The inner chamber is filled with water, which pro-
vides a highly polar environment, and the pore helixes 
provide dipoles whose electronegative carboxyl ends 
point toward this inner chamber (Figure 8–12C).
The high energetic cost incurred as a K+ ion sheds 
its waters of hydration is partially compensated by the 
presence of 20 electronegative oxygen atoms that line 
the walls of the selectivity filter and form favorable 
electrostatic interactions with the permeant ions. Each 
of the four subunits contributes four main-chain car-
bonyl oxygen atoms from the protein backbone and 
one side-chain hydroxyl oxygen atom to form a total 
of four binding sites for K+ ions. Each bound K+ ion 
is thus stabilized by interactions with a total of eight 
oxygen atoms, which lie in two planes above and 
below the bound cation. In this way, the channel is 
able to compensate for the loss of the K+ ion’s waters of 
hydration. The selectivity filter is stabilized at a critical 
width, such that it provides optimal electrostatic inter-
actions with K+ ions as they pass but is too wide for the 
smaller Na+ ions to interact effectively with all eight 
oxygen atoms at any point along the length of the filter 
(Figure 8–12C).
In light of the extensive interactions between a 
K+ ion and the channel, how does the KcsA channel 


