===== Page 1 =====
1516    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
A  Serotonergic neurons
Tryptophan
Inhibition of synthesis
(p-chlorophenylalanine)
1
2
5
6
Interference with
vesicular storage
(reserpine)
Inhibition of MAO
(phenelzine, 
tranylcypromine)
MAO inhibitors
MAO inhibitors
Tricyclics and
selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors
Depressant
Antidepressant
No effect on mood
5-OH-Tryptophan
5-HT
5-HT
5-HIAA
MAO
5-HT
5-HT
5-HT receptor
Inhibition of reuptake
(imipramine,
amitryptyline, ﬂuoxetine,
sertraline)
Stimulation of 5-HT
receptors as partial 
agonist (lysergic acid
diethylamide)
3
4
Stimulation of
autoreceptor as agonist
(8-hydroxy-dipropylamino-
tetraline)
Stimulation of 
α2-adrenergic receptor
agonist (clonidine)
B  Noradrenergic neurons
Tyrosine
Inhibition of synthesis
(α-methyltyrosine)
1
2
6a
5
Interference with
vesicular storage
(reserpine)
Inhibition of NE reuptake
(desiprimine, reboxetine)
DOPA
Dopamine
NE
COMT
NM
Deaminated
products
Receptor
Inactivation inhibitor
Tricyclics and selective
NE reuptake inhibitors
6b
Inhibition of MAO
(phenelzine, 
tranylcypromine)
Inhibition of COMT
(tropolone)
Blockade of β-adrenergic
receptors (propranolol)
Blockade of α-adrenergic
receptors 
(phenoxybenzamine) 
Reversal of normal 
direction of transport to 
produce NE efﬂux 
(amphetamines,
methylphenidate)
NE
MAO
5-HT
transporter
NE
transporter
3
4


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1517
Figure 61–7  (Opposite) Actions of antidepressant drugs at 
serotonergic and noradrenergic synapses. The figure shows 
the pre- and postsynaptic sides of serotonergic and noradren-
ergic synapses. Serotonin and norepinephrine are synthesized 
from amino acid precursors by enzymatic cascades. The neu-
rotransmitters are packaged in synaptic vesicles; free neuro-
transmitter within the cytoplasm is metabolized by monoamine 
oxidase (MAO), an enzyme associated with the abundant mito-
chondria found in presynaptic terminals. Upon release, seroto-
nin and norepinephrine interact with several types of pre- and 
postsynaptic receptors. Each neurotransmitter is cleared from 
the synapse by a specific transporter. The serotonin and norepi-
nephrine transporters and MAO are targets of antidepressant 
drugs.
A. Important sites of drug action at serotonergic synapses. Not 
all actions described are shown in the figure.
  1. Enzymatic synthesis. Inhibition of synthesis of the rate-
limiting enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase by p-chloropheny-
lalanine initiates the cascade that converts tryptophan to 
5-OH-tryptophan, the precursor of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HT, 
serotonin).
  2. Storage. Reserpine and tetrabenazine interfere with the 
transport of serotonin and catecholamines into synaptic vesi-
cles by blocking the vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT2. 
As a result, cytoplasmic serotonin is degraded (see step 6 
below), and thus, the neuron is depleted of neurotransmitter. 
Reserpine was used as an antihypertensive drug but commonly 
caused depression as a side effect.
  3. Presynaptic receptors. Agonists at presynaptic receptors 
produce negative feedback on neurotransmitter synthesis or 
release. The agonist 8-hydroxy-diprolamino-tetraline (8-OH-
DPAT) acts on 5-HT1A receptors on the presynaptic neuron. 
The antimigraine triptan drugs (eg, sumatriptan) are agonists at 
5-HT1D receptors.
  4. Postsynaptic receptors. The hallucinogen lysergic acid 
diethylamide (LSD) is a partial agonist at 5-HT2A receptors on 
postsynaptic serotoninergic neurons. Second-generation  
antipsychotic drugs, such as risperidone and olanzapine, are 
antagonists at 5-HT2A receptors in addition to their ability to 
block D2 dopamine receptors. The antiemetic compound  
ondansetron is an antagonist at 5-HT3 receptors, the only 
ligand-gated channel among the monoamine receptors. Its key 
site of action is in the medulla.
  5. Uptake. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, such 
as fluoxetine and sertraline, are selective blockers of the sero-
tonin transporter. The tricyclic drugs have mixed actions; some, 
such as clomipramine, are relatively selective for the serotonin 
transporter. Uptake blockers increase synaptic concentrations 
of serotonin. Amphetamines enter monoaminergic neurons 
via the uptake transporter and bind to the vesicular transporter 
found on the membranes of synaptic vesicles, causing reverse 
transport of the monoamine neurotransmitter into the cyto-
plasm. The neurotransmitter is then reverse-transported out of 
the neuron into the synapse via the uptake transporter.
  6. Degradation. Phenelzine and tranylcypromine, both of 
which are effective for depression and panic disorder, block 
MAO-A and MAO-B. Moclobemide, effective against depres-
sion, is selective for MAO-A; selegiline, which has been used 
to treat Parkinson disease, is selective for MAO-B in low doses. 
(Abbreviation: 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid.)
B. Important sites of drug action at noradrenergic synapses.
  1. Enzymatic synthesis. The competitive inhibitor 
α-methyltyrosine blocks the reaction catalyzed by tyrosine 
hydroxylase that converts tyrosine to DOPA. A dithiocarbamate 
derivative, FLA-63 (not shown), blocks the reaction that con-
verts DOPA to dopamine.
  2. Storage. Reserpine and tetrabenazine interfere with the 
transport of norepinephrine (NE), dopamine, and serotonin into 
synaptic vesicles by blocking the vesicular monoamine trans-
porter VMAT2. As a result, the cytoplasmic neurotransmitter 
is degraded (see below), and thus the neuron is depleted of 
neurotransmitter.
  3. Presynaptic receptors. Agonists at presynaptic receptors 
produce negative feedback on neurotransmitter synthesis or 
release. Clonidine is an agonist at α2-adrenergic receptors, 
inhibiting NE release. It has anxiolytic and sedative effects 
and is also used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disor-
der. Yohimbine is an antagonist at α2-adrenergic receptors; it 
induces anxiety.
  4. Postsynaptic receptors. Propranolol is an antagonist at 
β-adrenergic receptors that blocks many effects of the sympa-
thetic nervous system. It is used to treat some forms of cardio-
vascular disease but is commonly used to block anxiety during 
performance situations. Phenoxybenzamine is an agonist at 
α-adrenergic receptors.
  5. Uptake. Certain tricyclic antidepressants, such as desip-
ramine, and newer NE selective reuptake inhibitors, such as 
reboxetine, selectively block the NE transporter, thus increas-
ing synaptic NE. Amphetamines enter monoaminergic neu-
rons via the uptake transporter and interact with the vesicular 
transporter (the transporter on synaptic vesicles) to release 
neurotransmitter into the cytoplasm. The neurotransmitter is 
then pumped out of the neuron into the synapse via the uptake 
transporter acting in reverse.
  6. Degradation. At the postsynaptic neuron, tropolone inhib-
its the enzyme catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), which 
inactivates NE (step 6a). Normetanephrine (NM) is formed by 
the action of COMT on NE. At the presynaptic neuron, degrada-
tion by MAO is blocked by the MAO inhibitors phenelzine and 
tranylcypromine.


===== Page 3 =====
1518    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
and also suggests new interpretations of such stimuli 
that help the patient cope with the experience. Where 
possible and when tolerable to patients, gradual transi-
tion to real-world exposures to phobic stimuli can be 
employed.
Exposure therapy produces extinction learning in 
analogy with studies of animal behavior. The memory 
of the phobic stimulus is not erased, but the fearful 
response is suppressed by new information that the 
stimulus and the context in which it is experienced 
are not dangerous. Animal physiology and lesioning 
studies and human imaging studies demonstrate that 
the prefrontal cortex is required for extinction learn-
ing and that the hippocampus is required for learning 
new contexts for familiar events or stimuli (eg, that a 
helicopter flying overhead does not portend an attack).
Electroconvulsive Therapy Is Highly Effective 
Against Depression
Although it still conjures up negative images in the 
popular imagination, electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 
administered with modern anesthesia is medically 
safe and a tolerable patient experience, and it remains 
a highly effective intervention for the acute treatment 
of serious major depressive disorder. It is most often 
used when depressive symptoms are severe and medi-
cations and psychotherapies have proven ineffective. 
It is also effective in both the depressed and manic 
phases of bipolar disorder. It is not effective for anxiety 
disorders in the absence of a mood disorder and is not 
used to treat them clinically.
Generally, six to eight treatments are given, most 
commonly on an outpatient basis. Patients are anes-
thetized, and electrical stimulation is administered 
just above the threshold to produce electroencephalo-
graphic evidence of a generalized seizure. The major 
side effect is a variable degree of anterograde and 
retrograde amnesia. Amnesia can be minimized, but 
not eliminated, by placing the electrodes unilaterally 
and using the lowest level of electrical stimulation 
needed. Rodents given ECT exhibit massive release 
of neurotransmitters, which causes significant activa-
tion of gene expression, presumably leading to large-
scale neural plasticity. However, the precise molecules, 
cells, and circuits involved in the therapeutic response 
remain unknown.
Newer Forms of Neuromodulation Are Being 
Developed to Treat Depression
Other forms of therapeutic electrical stimulation of 
the brain are being explored, motivated by the desire 
to improve upon the therapeutic effects of ECT while 
diminishing its side effects. These approaches are often 
described as “neuromodulation.”
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) employs a 
device on the scalp to deliver brief pulses of rapidly 
alternating magnetic stimulation. This induces cur-
rents to flow within axons in regions of cerebral cor-
tex beneath the device. Daily administration of TMS 
over the left prefrontal cortex is safe and was effective 
enough to have received regulatory approval by the 
US Food and Drug Administration. Nonetheless, in 
subsequent trials, its efficacy appears to be only mod-
est. Additional clinical experiments are under way 
aimed at improving efficacy.
Alternative therapies under development include 
magnetic seizure therapy, an alternative to ECT in 
which a magnetic field is the used to produce a seizure. 
The hope for this experimental therapy is to reproduce 
the efficacy of ECT with less anterograde and retro-
grade amnesia.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), mentioned above, is 
an invasive neuromodulatory treatment in wide use for 
treatment of the motor symptoms of Parkinson disease 
and of essential tremor. For treatment of Parkinson dis-
ease, an electrode is typically placed within the subtha-
lamic nucleus, a component of basal ganglia circuitry 
involved in motor control that is well understood com-
pared with circuits that regulate mood. A DBS electrode 
is connected by a wire that exits the skull and travels 
under the scalp and skin of the neck to a controller and 
battery pack that resides in the chest, much like a car-
diac pacemaker battery. The rate at which the electrode 
stimulates its target can be controlled externally and is 
typically adjusted by the treatment team to optimize 
the therapeutic response. During the past decade, clini-
cal trials of DBS have been extended from Parkinson 
disease and other movement disorders to psychiatric 
disorders. In addition to its use in treatment-refractory 
depression, DBS is being studied for the treatment of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Several locations in the brain have been targets 
for DBS to treat depression. As described in Figure 
61–4, the rostral anterior (subgenual) cingulate cortex 
is activated by sadness. Accordingly, it has been used 
as a DBS target for treatment-resistant depression (Figure 
61–8). In some clinical series, 60% of treatment-resist-
ant patients achieved stable improvement with stim-
ulation of the subgenual cingulate cortex. However, 
similar levels of efficacy using this target could not be 
replicated in a large multisite clinical trial. Differences 
in patient selection, interindividual differences in brain 
anatomy, or small differences in electrode placement 
may account for the disparate results seen to date. To 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1519
Anatomical target for electrode
Bilateral DBS electrode placement
PET baseline patients vs.
healthy control subjects
PET in improved patients
after 3 or 6 months
Anatomical target for electrode
Mid-SCC
CC
MCC
MCC
MF10
MF10
OF11
F9
F9
F9
F9
F47
F46
Ins
ACC
Cg25
HT
Cg25
Cg25
Cg25
BS
SN
HT
vCD
AC
Genu
A  Surgical procedure
B  Change in PET activity in DBS responders
Figure 61–8  Electrode placement for deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) in the rostral anterior cingulate 
cortex and measurement of response by [18F]
fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET). (Reproduced, with permission, from Helen 
Mayberg.)
A. Left: The rostral anterior (subgenual) cingulate cor-
tex, Brodmann area 25 (Cg25), is an anatomic target 
for DBS for patients with treatment-resistant depres-
sion. (Sagittal section; electrode site in red; corpus 
callosum is just superior and shown in white; dotted 
line, position of the electrode relative to the AC-genu 
line.) (Abbreviations: AC, anterior commissure; Mid-
SCC, mid-subcallosal cingulate.) Right: A PET scan 
shows placement of the electrodes in the brain of a 
patient undergoing stimulation of the rostral anterior 
cingulate cortex. (Sagittal section.)
B. PET scans show the changes in activity in patients 
with treatment-resistant depression who have 
improved with stimulation of the rostral anterior cin-
gulate cortex. The top panels are sagittal sections; the 
bottom panels are coronal sections. Left: Pretreat-
ment metabolic activity in patients with treatment-
resistant depression. Red pseudo-color denotes 
elevated metabolic activity compared with healthy 
control subjects (note elevated activity in Cg25 before 
DBS); blue denotes lower metabolic activity. Right: 
Averages of patients who have improved at 3 or  
6 months after initiation of DBS. Activity in Cg25 is 
decreased (blue) in patients who have had a positive 
response to stimulation. (Abbreviations: ACC, anterior 
cingulate cortex; BS, brain stem; F9, dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex; F46, prefrontal cortex; F47, ventrolat-
eral prefrontal cortex; HT, hypothalamus; Ins, insula; 
mF10, medial frontal cortex; MCC, middle cingulate 
cortex; OF11, orbital frontal cortex; SN, substantia 
nigra; vCD, ventral caudate.)
put it simply, depression is highly heterogeneous, and 
it should not be surprising that a single DBS target is 
not useful for all treatment-resistant patients.
Lacking good animal models of mood disorders, 
human DBS treatment trials may provide a particu-
larly important source of information about the brain 
circuitry responsible for the symptoms of mental dis-
orders. Although careful attention must be paid to 
obtaining informed consent and to safety, especially 
when the judgment of patients is influenced by severe 
depression, DBS may provide an opportunity to learn 
about mood regulation. In particular, newly developed 
electrodes not only stimulate a DBS target but can also 
record extracellular neuronal activity. Such “read–
write” electrodes, currently being used in research set-
tings only, may not only improve clinical results but 
also advance our knowledge of circuit dysfunction and 
therapeutic modulation in psychiatric disorders.
Bipolar Disorder Can Be Treated With Lithium and 
Several Anticonvulsant Drugs
In 1949, John Cade discovered the calming effects of 
lithium in guinea pigs and, soon thereafter, in a small 
clinical trial in bipolar patients. Cade’s observations 
initiated the modern era of psychopharmacology in 
which drugs, ultimately subjected to randomized, 
blinded clinical trials, were used to treat specific symp-
toms of mental disorders. Lithium eventually proved 
to be effective in treating acute episodes of mania 
and in stabilizing mood by reducing the frequency of 
cycling into mania and depression.
Several drugs initially developed to treat epilepsy, 
such as valproic acid and lamotrigine, have also been 
shown to be effective in treating acute mania and for 
mood stabilization and can serve as substitutes for 
lithium. In addition, antipsychotic drugs effectively 


===== Page 5 =====
1520    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
ameliorate symptoms of acute mania and, at low 
doses, can also help stabilize mood. None of these 
drugs exerts therapeutic effects rapidly; improvements 
in mental state and behavior may take several weeks.
The mechanisms by which lithium and anticon-
vulsant drugs exert beneficial effects on mania and on 
mood cycling are not known. Unlike the antidepressant 
and antipsychotic drugs, however, there remain open 
questions about the initial molecular target of lithium 
in the nervous system relevant to the initiation of its 
therapeutic effects. This lack of certainty reflects the 
many actions of lithium at therapeutic concentrations in 
the brain. The most likely molecular target is inhibition 
of glycogen synthase kinase type 3β (GSK3β), a com-
ponent of the Wnt signaling pathway that has many 
functions in the nervous system. As in the case of other 
drugs to treat psychiatric disorders, investigation of the 
therapeutic mechanism of lithium and of the mood-sta-
bilizing properties of anticonvulsants is impeded by the 
lack of an animal model of bipolar disorder.
Whatever the molecular mechanisms of lithium 
or the anticonvulsants, mood stabilizers appear to 
dampen the dynamics of mood regulatory systems. 
Mood is regulated by the external environment as 
well as several internal inputs, including the internal 
hormonal milieu, immune modulators, and circadian 
controls (eg, both the serotonergic and noradrenergic 
systems show diurnal variations closely coupled with 
the sleep–wake cycle). The integration of these systems 
is complex, involving dynamic interactions that are 
still poorly understood.
Second-Generation Antipsychotic Drugs Are Useful 
Treatments for Bipolar Disorder
All antipsychotic drugs act by blocking D2 dopamine 
receptors, but these drugs have long been recognized 
to have therapeutic effects not only in the treatment of 
the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia, severe mood 
disorders, and many other conditions, but also in the 
treatment of acute manic episodes. The side effects of 
first-generation antipsychotic drugs are severe, most 
prominently Parkinson-like motor side effects that 
result from D2 dopamine receptor antagonism.
Most second-generation drugs have somewhat 
lower affinity for D2 dopamine receptors than first-
generation drugs and, in addition, have other receptor 
effects, such as blocking serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, 
resulting in a lower liability for severe motor side 
effects. These drugs are by no means free of serious 
side effects; most cause weight gain and associated 
metabolic conditions. However, their relative tolerabil-
ity and their effects on serotonin receptors have made 
them an important treatment for the depressed phase of 
bipolar disorder as well as the treatment of acute mania. 
They have gained an important role in therapeutics 
because bipolar depression is less likely to respond to 
antidepressant drugs than unipolar depression.
Highlights
1.	 Mood disorders are divided into unipolar and 
bipolar disorder based on whether depression 
occurs alone (unipolar) or whether a person also 
suffers from episodes of mania. Unipolar and 
bipolar disorders have different familial patterns 
of transmission.
2.	 Clinically significant unipolar depression, often 
denoted as major depressive disorder (major 
depression), differs from normal sadness by its 
persistence, pervasiveness, and association with 
physiological, cognitive, and behavioral symptoms.
3.	 Major depression is common (15%–20% lifetime 
prevalence) and disabling, making it a leading 
cause of disability worldwide. Bipolar disorder is 
less common (1% lifetime prevalence worldwide) 
but tends to produce severe symptoms that often 
require hospitalization.
4.	 Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiat-
ric disorders. They range in severity from highly 
disabling cases of panic disorder and posttrau-
matic stress disorder (PTSD) to simple phobias. 
They often co-occur with major depression.
5.	 Mood and anxiety disorders have both genetic 
and nongenetic components of risk. Bipolar dis-
order is more heritable than major depression or 
anxiety disorders. Childhood adversity and later 
environmental stressors play a significant role in 
susceptibility to major depression and anxiety dis-
orders. Genetic analyses of bipolar disorder, major 
depression, and PTSD are beginning to yield 
molecular clues to pathogenesis.
6.	 The neural circuitry of fear and anxiety disorders 
involves the amygdala and its interconnections 
with the prefrontal cortex. The neural circuitry 
of major depression and bipolar disorder is less 
well understood. However, neuroimaging in 
humans with major depression implicated circuits 
involved in the processing of emotional salience 
and in cognitive control.
7.	 Bipolar disorder can be treated with lithium, 
certain anticonvulsant drugs such as valproic 
acid, and second-generation antipsychotic drugs, 
although many patients have residual symptoms, 
most commonly depression.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1521
8.	 Major depression and anxiety disorders can be 
treated with diverse antidepressant drugs and by 
cognitive and behavioral therapies. Electroconvul-
sive therapy is effective for major depression that 
is unresponsive to medications.
9.	 Experimental treatments such as deep brain stim-
ulation are being investigated for treatment of 
major depression and other psychiatric disorders. 
The development of electrodes that can record 
as well as stimulate promise greater insight in 
human neural circuit function in disease and its 
treatment.
 Steven E. Hyman  
 Carol Tamminga 
Selected Reading
Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Holtzman D, Malenka RJ. 2015. Molec-
ular Neuropharmacology: Foundation for Clinical Neurosci-
ence, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Otte C, Gold SM, Penninx BW, et al. AF. 2016. Major depres-
sive disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16065.
Sullivan PF, Daly MJ, O’Donovan M. 2012. Genetic architec-
ture of psychiatric disorders: the emerging picture and its 
implications. Nat Rev Genet 13:537–551.
Yehuda R, Hoge CW, McFarlane AC, et al. 2015. Post-traumatic 
stress disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers 1:15057.
References
Adhikari A, Lerner TN, Finkelstein J, et al. 2015. Basomedial 
amygdala mediates top-down control of anxiety and fear. 
Nature 527:179–185.
American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association.
Anacker C, Hen R. 2017. Adult hippocampal neurogenesis 
and cognitive flexibility: linking memory and mood. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 18:335–346.
Bagot RC, Cates HM, Purushothama I, et al. 2016. Circuit-
wide transcriptional profiling reveals brain region-spe-
cific gene networks regulating depression susceptibility. 
Neuron 90:969–983.
Besnard A, Sahay A. 2016. Adult hippocampal neurogen-
esis, fear generalization, and stress. Neuropsychopharm 
41:24–44.
Cade JFJ. 1949. Lithium salts in the treatment of psychotic 
excitement. Med Australia 2:349–352.
Clementz BA, Sweeney JA, Hamm, JP, et al. 2015. Identifica-
tion of distinct psychosis biotypes using brain-based bio-
markers. Am J Psychiatry 173:373–384.
Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consor-
tium, Lee SH, Ripke S, et al. 2013. Genetic relationship 
between five psychiatric disorders estimated from genome-
wide SNPs. Nat Genet 45:984–994.
Davidson RJ, Pizzagalli D, Nitschke JB, Putnam K. 2002. 
Depression: perspectives from affective neuroscience. 
Annu Rev Psychol 53:545–574.
Dayan P, Huys QJ. 2009. Serotonin in affective control. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 32:95–126.
Drysdale AT, Grosenick L, Downar J, et al. 2017. Resting-state 
connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological sub-
types of depression. Nat Med 23:28–38.
Etkin A, Klemenhagen KC, Dudman JT, et al. 2004. Individ-
ual differences in trait anxiety predict the response of the 
basolateral amygdala to unconsciously processed fearful 
faces. Neuron 44:1043–1055.
Fettes P, Schulze L, Downar J. 2017. Cortico-striato-thalamic 
loop circuits of the orbitofrontal cortex: promising thera-
peutic targets in psychiatric illness. Front Syst Neurocsci 
11:25.
Fornaro M, Stubbs B, De BD, et al. 2016. Atypical antipsychot-
ics in the treatment of acute bipolar depression with mixed 
features: a systematic review and exploratory meta-analy-
sis of placebo-controlled clinical trials. Int J Mol Sci 17:241.
Heimer L. 1995. The Human Brain and Spinal Cord, 2nd ed. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Holtzheimer PE, Mayberg HS. 2011. Deep brain stimulation 
for psychiatric disorders. Annu Rev Neurosci 34:289–307.
Hui PS, Sim K, Baldessarini RJ. 2015. Pharmacological 
approaches for treatment-resistant bipolar disorder. Curr 
Neuropharmacol 13:592–604.
Hyde CL, Nagle MW, Tian C, et al. 2016. Identification of 15 
genetic loci associated with risk of major depression in 
individuals of European descent. Nat Genet 48:1031–1036.
Ivleva EI, Morris DW, Moates AF, et al. 2010. Genetics and 
intermediate phenotypes of the schizophrenia: bipolar 
disorder boundary. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34:897–921.
Johansen JP, Cain CK, Ostroff LE, LeDoux JE. 2011. Molecular 
mechanisms of fear learning and memory. Cell 47:509–524.
Kendler KS, Prescott CA, Myers J, Neale MC. 2003. The struc-
ture of genetic and environmental risk factors for com-
mon psychiatric and substance use disorders in men and 
women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 60:929–937.
Kessler RC, Bromet EJ. 2013. The epidemiology of depression 
across cultures. Annu Rev Public Health 34:119–138.
Kreuger RF, Markon KE. 2006. Reinterpreting comorbidity: a 
model-based approach to understanding and classifying 
psychopathology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2:111–133.
Mayberg HS, Brannan SK, Mahurin RK, et al. 1997. Cingulate 
function in depression: a potential predictor of treatment 
response. NeuroReport  8:1057–1061.
Mayberg HS, Liotti M, Brannan SK, et al. 1999. Reciprocal 
limbic-cortical function and negative mood: converging 
PET findings in depression and normal sadness. Am J 
Psychiatry 156:675–682.


===== Page 7 =====
1522    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Mayberg HS, Lozano AM, Voon V, et al. 2005. Deep brain 
stimulation for treatment-resistant depression. Neuron 
45:651–660.
McClintock SM, Reti IM, Carpenter LL, et al.  2018. Consensus 
recommendations for the clinical application of repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in the treat-
ment of depression. J Clin Psychiatry 79:1. doi:10.4088/
JCP.16cs10905.
Miller BR, Hen R. 2015. The current state of the neurogenic 
theory of depression and anxiety. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
30:51–58.
Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, et al. 2007. Depression, 
chronic diseases, and decrements in health: results from 
the World Health Surveys. Lancet 370:851–858.
Muller VI, Cieslik EC, Serbanescu I, et al. 2017. Altered brain 
activity in unipolar depression revisited. Meta-analyses of 
neuroimaging studies. JAMA Psychiatry 74:47–55.
Neal, BM, Sklar P. 2015. Genetic analysis of schizophrenia 
and bipolar disorder reveals polygenicity but also sug-
gests new directions for molecular interrogation. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 30:131–138.
Nock MK, Borges G, Bromet EJ, et al. 2008. Cross-national 
prevalence and risk factors for suicidal ideation, plans 
and attempts. Br J Psychiatry 192:98–105.
Pizzagalli D, Pascual-Marqui RD, Nitschke JB, et al. 2001. 
Anterior cingulate activity as a predictor of degree of 
treatment response in major depression: evidence from 
brain electrical tomography analysis. Am J Psychiatry 
158:405–415.
Ripke S, Wray NR, Lewis CM, et al. 2013. A mega-analysis 
of genome-wide association studies for major depressive 
disorder. Mol Psychiatry 18:497–511.
Seeley WW, Menon V, Schaztzberg AF, et al. 2007. Dissocia-
ble intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing 
and executive control. J Neurosci 27:2349–2356.
Sheline YI, Sanghavi M, Mintun MA, Gado MH. 1999. 
Depression duration but not age predicts hippocampal 
volume loss in medically healthy women with recurrent 
major depression. J Neurosci 19:5034–5043.
Stoddard J, Gotts SJ, Brotman MA, et al. 2016. Aberrant 
intrinsic functional connectivity within and between cor-
ticostriatal and temporal-parietal networks in adults and 
youth with bipolar disorder. Psychol Med 46:1509–1522.
Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR, et al. 2006. Evaluation 
of outcomes with citalopram for depression using meas-
urement-based care in STAR*D: implications for clinical 
practice. Am J Psychiatry 163:28–40.
Tye KM, Prakash R, Kim SY, et al. 2011. Amygdala circuitry 
mediating reversible and bidirectional control of anxiety. 
Nature 471:358–362.
Whiteford HA, Degenhardt L, Rehm J, et al. 2013. Global 
burden of disease attributable to mental and substance 
use disorders: findings from the global burden of disease 
study 2010. Lancet 382:1575–1586.
Zarate CA Jr, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, et al. 2006. A rand-
omized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in 
treatment-resistant major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
63:856–864.


===== Page 8 =====
62
Disorders Affecting Social Cognition:  
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Advances in Basic and Translational Science Provide a Path to 
Elucidate the Pathophysiology of Autism Spectrum Disorder
Highlights
M
ental retardation, now referred to widely 
as intellectual disability, is currently defined 
as having an IQ below 70 accompanied by 
marked deficits in adaptive functioning. Both terms 
have been broadly used to label a variety of cognitive 
impairments linked to prenatal or early postnatal brain 
abnormalities. For decades, subsets of individuals with 
rare intellectual disability syndromes, such as Rett syn-
drome or fragile X syndrome, have been characterized 
by their genetic etiologies. We are now beginning to 
elucidate the complex genetics of more prevalent neu-
rodevelopmental disorders without distinct physical 
features that distinguish them, including so-called  
idiopathic or nonsyndromic forms of autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD). The combination of insights result-
ing from the intensive study of rare genetic syndromes 
coupled with successes in unraveling the genet-
ics underlying idiopathic ASD has transformed our 
understanding of normal and pathological develop-
ment of the human brain.
Common to all of these disorders are mental 
impairments that persist throughout life, hampering 
development and learning. Generally speaking, even 
if all mental functions seem to be affected, conditions 
with distinct etiologies and natural histories can be dif-
ferentiated because some cognitive domains tend to be 
Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Share Characteristic  
Behavioral Features
Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Also Share 
Distinctive Cognitive Abnormalities
Social Communication Is Impaired in Autism Spectrum 
Disorder: The Mind Blindness Hypothesis
Other Social Mechanisms Contribute to Autism  
Spectrum Disorder
People With Autism Show a Lack of Behavioral Flexibility
Some Individuals With Autism Have Special Talents
Genetic Factors Increase Risk for Autism  
Spectrum Disorder
Rare Genetic Syndromes Have Provided Initial Insights Into 
the Biology of Autism Spectrum Disorders
Fragile X Syndrome
Rett Syndrome
Williams Syndrome
Angelman Syndrome and Prader-Willi Syndrome
Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide Insight Into 
the Mechanisms of Social Cognition
The Complex Genetics of Common Forms of Autism 
Spectrum Disorder Are Being Clarified
Genetics and Neuropathology Are Illuminating the Neural 
Mechanisms of Autism Spectrum Disorder
Genetic Findings Can Be Interpreted Using Systems 
Biological Approaches
Autism Spectrum Disorder Genes Have Been Studied in 
a Variety of Model Systems
Postmortem and Brain Tissue Studies Provide Insight 
Into Autism Spectrum Disorder Pathology


===== Page 9 =====
1524    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
more impaired than others. And indeed, these differ-
ences are reified in diagnostic schemes that draw dis-
tinctions between developmental abnormalities that 
affect primarily general cognition, social cognition, or 
perception. These differential cognitive and behavioral 
vulnerabilities may provide useful clues about the ori-
gin and developmental time course of specific mental 
functions in normal development.
In this chapter, we focus principally on neurode-
velopmental disorders that include abnormalities in 
social functioning, including ASD, fragile X syndrome, 
Williams syndrome, Rett syndrome, and Angelman 
and Prader-Willi syndromes. These conditions all 
impair highly sophisticated brain functions includ-
ing social awareness and communication. ASD is a 
prime focus for several reasons: the high prevalence 
in the population; the overlap in genetic risks with 
other common neuropsychiatric conditions, including 
schizophrenia; and the absence of a defining neuropa-
thology. They are also exemplars of the etiological and 
phenotypic heterogeneity common to many psychiat-
ric syndromes. In this respect, ASD is a paradigmatic 
neuropsychiatric syndrome.
Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Share 
Characteristic Behavioral Features
Profound social disability has probably always been 
with us, but the characterization of autism as a medi-
cal syndrome was first described in the literature in 
1943 by Leo Kanner and in 1944 by Hans Asperger. 
Today, clinicians and researchers think of autism as a 
spectrum of disorders with two defining but highly 
variable diagnostic features: impaired social com-
munication and stereotyped behaviors with highly 
restricted interests.
Until recently, the term “Asperger syndrome” was 
used to describe individuals who met these two diag-
nostic criteria, but in whom language acquisition was 
not delayed and IQ was in the normal range. In the 
most recent edition of the standard psychiatric diagnos-
tic manual, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental  
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), Asperger syndrome 
along with a distinct disorder known as pervasive 
developmental disorder not otherwise specified—
designed to capture individuals with deficits in social 
communication who did not meet full criteria in other 
areas—were eliminated in favor of including variations 
within a single spectrum construct.
Autism spectrum disorder is present in at least 
1.5% of the population. Rigorous epidemiological 
studies estimate prevalence as high as 2.6% for the full 
spectrum of social disability, far higher than estimated 
only decades ago. The reasons for the increase in the 
prevalence over a relatively short time frame are of 
considerable interest and active debate, particularly 
among the lay public. Within the scientific community, 
a consensus has emerged that this increase reflects a 
combination of changing diagnostic criteria, increased 
awareness among families and health care profession-
als, “diagnostic substitution” (in which individuals 
who formerly would have been diagnosed with intel-
lectual disability are now more likely to be identified as 
socially disabled), and some true increase in incidence. 
These issues will be discussed below with regard to 
genetic risks.
Autism spectrum disorders occur predomi-
nantly in males, although the typically cited 4:1 
male-to-female ratio has recently been called into 
question based on concerns about male bias in the 
approaches used to ascertain the diagnosis, includ-
ing the diagnostic instruments. Even accounting for 
these challenges, however, the cumulative evidence 
suggests a ratio bias of at least 2:1 to 3:1 male excess. 
Individuals across the IQ spectrum are affected, and 
based on current diagnostic practices, about half of 
all individuals with ASD also have intellectual dis-
ability. By definition, ASD must be detectable before 
3 years of age, but recent studies have shown that it 
is possible to identify affected children in high-risk 
families well within the first year of life. ASD occurs 
in all countries and cultures and in every socioeco-
nomic group.
Although ASD clearly affects the brain, no defini-
tive biological markers have yet been identified; thus, 
diagnosis is based on behavioral criteria. This does not 
mean that there are not strong biological correlates, 
including specific gene mutations and neuroimaging 
findings, but none of these are sufficiently specific or 
predictive to be useful as an alternative to the gold 
standard of clinical assessment. Moreover, because 
behavior is variable during development and depends 
on a number of factors—age, environment, social con-
text, and availability and duration of remedial help—
no single behavior is likely ever to be conclusively 
diagnostic.
Like other neurodevelopmental syndromes, ASD 
typically endures throughout life. However, in recent 
longitudinal studies, approximately 10% of clearly 
affected children showed improvement, with little or 
no evidence of social disability later in life. Autism is 
not progressive. On the contrary, special educational 
programs and professional support often lead to 
improvements in behavior and adaptive functioning 
with age.


