===== Page 1 =====
1276    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–11  Possible circuit configurations that underlie 
sex differences in behavior. Neural circuit diagrams can be 
configured to generate sex differences in behaviors. Although 
it is possible to envision a neural circuit entirely exclusive to 
one or the other sex, most behaviors are shared between 
the sexes, and the current consensus is that sex differences 
in behavior or physiology reflect sexual dimorphisms in key 
neuronal populations embedded within an otherwise shared 
neural circuit. Such sexual dimorphisms have been found at 
the level of sensory neurons, motor neurons (as discussed for 
spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus neurons), or neurons 
interposed between sensory and motor pathways (such as the 
BNST and the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area).
to male-typical levels. Thus, the perinatal surge of testos-
terone acts largely via aromatization into estrogens to 
masculinize the brain, whereas in adult life, both tes-
tosterone and estrogen facilitate the display of male-
typical social interactions (Figure 51–12A).
These findings imply that male mice lacking andro-
gen receptor exclusively in the nervous system should 
not only have male genitalia but also exhibit male pat-
terns of social behavior, albeit at reduced intensity. This 
has in fact been borne out nicely by genetic engineering 
studies in mice; such mutant male mice indeed appear 
indistinguishable externally from control males, but 
they exhibit male-type sexual and aggressive behaviors 
with diminished intensity. However, there is growing 
evidence that the developmental control of masculini-
zation of the brain by estrogen has shifted during evo-
lution such that testosterone may be the predominant 
masculinizing agent in primates, including humans.
How do the actions of the limited number of sex 
hormones modulate the display of a large array of 
complex social interactions such as courtship vocali-
zations (similar to songbirds, many animals, including 
mice, vocalize as part of their mating ritual), sexual 
behavior, marking (the propensity of animals of many 
species to claim territory with pheromones secreted 
in bodily fluids), and aggression? As described earlier 
in this chapter, sex hormones bind to cognate recep-
tors to modulate gene expression in target cells. These 
steroids are available at different times, amounts, and 
places in the brain of the two sexes. Accordingly, sex 
hormone–regulated genes are expressed in sexually 
dimorphic patterns that are also different for different 
brain regions. These genes regulate differentiation and 
adult function of neural circuits along male- or female-
typical lines (Figure 51–12B).
Experimental inactivation of such sex hormone–
regulated genes reveals that individual genes influ-
ence only a subset of the sexually dimorphic social 
interactions without altering the entire behavioral pro-
gram of males and females. Thus, an additional emerg-
ing theme is that sex hormones control differentiation 
and function of neural circuits in a modular manner, 
with different sex hormone–regulated genes acting 
in distinct neuronal populations to regulate separate 
aspects of male- or female-typical behaviors. In short, 
there is no single neuronal population that governs 
Entire circuit
Sensory neurons
Motor neurons
Intermediary neurons
Male typical behaviors
A
B
Sensory
neurons
Motor
neurons
Intermediary
neurons
Sexual
dimorphism
Male circuitry
(activated)
Female circuitry
(not activated)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1277
Figure 51–12  Mechanisms whereby sex hormones influ-
ence development and function of the nervous system.
A. Masculinization of the nervous systems occurs in at least 
two distinct steps: a developmental organizational phase 
largely controlled by estrogen signaling and a postpubertal 
activational phase controlled by estrogen and testosterone 
signaling via their cognate hormone receptors to regulate 
gene expression. (Abbreviations: AR, androgen receptor; ER, 
estrogen receptor; PR, progesterone receptor.)
B. Histological images show sexually dimorphic expression 
patterns of Sytl4 mRNA in the bed nucleus of the stria ter-
minalis (BNST) and Cckar in the ventromedial hypothalamus 
(VMH) of adult mice. Expression of these genes is clearly dif-
ferent in unmanipulated males and females and dramatically 
altered upon experimental removal of sex hormones from the 
circulation following castration in adult life. Both the BNST 
and VMH regulate mating and aggression in the two sexes.
   Current thinking about how sex hormones regulate sex 
differences in behavior is illustrated in the diagram below. 
Molecular studies have identified many genes, such as 
Sytl4 and Cckar, whose expression is sexually dimorphic in 
the adult brain and controlled by sex hormones. Many such 
genes, when experimentally mutated in mice via genetic 
engineering, regulate distinct components of sexually 
dimorphic behaviors but not the entire repertory of social 
interactions. In other words, sex hormones control sexually 
dimorphic behaviors in a modular genetic manner.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Xu et al. 2012.)
gender-typical behaviors; rather, the neural control of 
distinct behaviors is distributed across multiple differ-
ent neuronal populations.
This modular control of sexually dimorphic 
behaviors fits well with our thinking that most circuits 
are shared between the males and females and that sex 
differences in behavior arise from key neural popula-
tions that alter circuit function in a male- or female-
typical fashion. It seems likely that neurons exhibiting 
sexually dimorphic molecular or anatomical features 
represent such key neuronal populations.
The Human Brain Is Sexually Dimorphic
Are sex differences between the brains of male and 
female mammals also present in humans, and if so, 
might they be functionally important? Early studies 
A
B
Male
BNST:
Sytl4
mRNA
VMH:
Cckar
mRNA
Female
Castrated male Castrated female
Testosterone
Estrogen
ERα, β
Masculinized
brain
Male typical behaviors
AR
Aromatase
Estrogen
During
development
In adulthood
Progesterone
ERα, β
Feminized
brain
Female typical behaviors
Sex hormones
Hormone receptors
Sexually dimorphic transcriptional program
Sytl4
Brs3
Brs3
Cckar
Irs4
Male
mating
Male
aggression
Maternal
aggression
Female
receptivity
PR


===== Page 3 =====
1278    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–13  Sexual dimorphism in the interstitial nucleus 
of the anterior hypothalamus (INAH) 3 in the human 
brain.  The human hypothalamus contains four small, discrete 
neuronal clusters, INAH1 to INAH4. The photomicrographs 
show these nuclei in adult male and female brains. While 
INAH1, INAH2, and INAH4 appear similar in men and women, 
INAH3 is significantly larger in men. The section in part A is 
0.8 mm anterior to the section in part B. (Abbreviations: IFR, 
infundibular recess; III, third ventricle; OC, optic chiasm; OT, 
optic tract; PVH, paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus; 
SO, supraoptic nucleus.) (Adapted, with permission, from 
Gorski 1988.)
revealed that a few structures are markedly larger in 
men. These include Onuf’s nucleus in the spinal cord, 
the homolog of the SNB in rodents (Figure 51–7); 
the BNST, implicated in rodent mating behavior  
(Figure 51–4); and the interstitial nucleus of the anterior 
hypothalamus 3 (INAH3), related to the rodent SDN-
POA discussed earlier (Figure 51–13).
Advances in high-resolution magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) and histology have uncovered more 
subtle structural and molecular dimorphisms in the 
B
A
SO
OC
PVH
SO
OT
IFR
A
B
Male
Female
III
III
1
3
3
2
4
4
SO
1
2
3
4
INAH
INAH
1
2


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1279
Figure 51–14  Sexual dimorphism is widespread in the adult 
human brain. A magnetic resonance imaging study measured 
the volume of many brain regions in adult men and women. 
The volume of each region was normalized to the size of the 
cerebrum for both sexes. Sex differences were significant in 
many regions, including several cortical areas that likely  
mediate cognitive functions. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Cahill 2006. Copyright © 2006 Springer Nature.)
central nervous system. For example, structures such 
as the fronto-orbital cortex and several gyri—including 
the precentral, superior frontal, and lingual gyri—
occupy a significantly larger volume in adult women 
compared to a cohort of adult men (Figure 51–14). 
Moreover, the frontomedial cortex, amygdala, and 
angular gyrus volumes are larger in men compared 
to women. Thus, there are likely to be many sexual 
dimorphisms in the human brain.
Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From 
Hormonal Action or Experience
What remains unclear is how these brain dimorphisms 
arise and how they relate to behavior. They might arise 
early from the organizational effects of hormones or 
later as a result of experience. Sex differences arising 
before or soon after birth could underlie behavioral 
differences, whereas those that arise later in life might 
be results of dimorphic experiences. Answers to these 
questions are fairly clear in a few cases. For example, 
studies of the development of neural circuits responsi-
ble for penile erection and lactation in rodents translate 
readily to humans.
Two recent observations suggest that enduring 
effects of experience on behavior first studied in ani-
mals (Figure 51–10) are also relevant to humans. First, 
as discussed in Chapter 49, children raised for lengthy 
periods in orphanages with little individual care have 
long-lasting defects in a variety of social behaviors. 
Even years after placement in foster homes, these chil-
dren have on average lower levels of oxytocin and 
vasopressin in their serum than children raised with 
biological parents. Second, people who have suffered 
abuse as children often grow up to be poor parents. 
Postmortem studies have shown that adults who had 
been abused as children exhibited greater promoter 
methylation of their glucocorticoid receptor genes than 
adults in control populations. Although these studies 
are new and require replication, they provide tantaliz-
ing hints at the biological mechanisms that underlie 
the lifelong effects of early parental care.
Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with 
Gender Identity and Sexual Orientation
In contrast to progress in mapping the biological bases 
of some relatively simple sexually dimorphic behaviors 
in people, differences in sexual partner preference and 
gender identity remain poorly understood. Little pro-
gress has been made in relating sex differences in cog-
nitive functions to structural differences in the brain, 
in part because the very existence of cognitive differ-
ences remains a matter of controversy; if they exist at 
all, they are small and represent differences in means 
between highly variable male and female populations. 
On the other hand, several lines of evidence have con-
nected clear differences in gender identity and sexual 
orientation to dimorphic structures in the brain.
Early insight into this issue came from observa-
tion of people with single-gene mutations that disso-
ciate anatomical sex from gonadal and chromosomal 
sex, such as CAIS, CAH, and 5α-reductase deficiency 
(Table 51–1). For example, girls with CAH experience 
an excess of testosterone during fetal life; the disorder 
is generally diagnosed at birth and corrected. Never-
theless, the early exposure to androgens is correlated 
with subsequent changes in gender-related behaviors. 
On average, girls with CAH tend to have toy prefer-
ences and engage in play typical of boys of equivalent 
age. There is also a small but significant increase in the 
incidence of homosexual and bisexual orientation in 
females treated for CAH as children, and a significant 
proportion of these females also express the desire to 
live as men, consistent with a change in gender iden-
tity. These findings suggest that early organizational 
effects of steroids affect gender-specific behaviors 
independent of chromosomal and anatomical sex.
In 5α-reductase II deficiency and CAIS, many 
of the affected males show completely feminized 
Posterior
Anterior
Proportionally larger in the female brain
Proportionally larger in the male brain


===== Page 5 =====
1280    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
external genitalia and are mistakenly raised as females 
until puberty. Thereafter, their histories diverge. In 
5α-reductase II deficiency, the symptoms arise from 
a defect in testosterone processing largely confined to 
the developing external genitalia. At puberty, the large 
increase in circulating testosterone virilizes the body hair, 
musculature, and most dramatically, the external geni-
talia. At this stage, many but not all patients choose 
to adopt a male gender. In CAIS, in contrast, defects 
arise from a body-wide defect in the androgen recep-
tor. These patients commonly seek medical advice 
after they fail to menstruate at puberty. Concordant 
with their feminized external phenotype, most CAIS 
Figure 51–15  Some sexually dimorphic patterns of olfac-
tory activation in the brain correlate with sexual orientation.
A. Positron emission tomography imaging was used to iden-
tify brain regions that were activated when subjects sniffed 
androstadienone (AND) or estratetraenol (EST) compared to 
nonodorous air. AND activated several hypothalamic centers in 
the brains of heterosexual women but not men, whereas EST 
activated several hypothalamic centers in heterosexual males 
but not females. Patterns of activation in the hypothalamus of 
homosexual men were similar to those of heterosexual women 
in response to AND, whereas similar patterns of activation 
were found in heterosexual men and homosexual women in 
response to EST. The color calibration on the right shows the 
level of putative neural activity. Because the same brain sec-
tions were selected to compare, the figure does not illustrate 
maximal activation for each condition. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Berglund, Lindstrom, and Savic 2006; Savic,  
Berglund, and Lindstrom 2005.)
B. Heterosexual and homosexual subjects were scanned 
while breathing unscented air, and a measure of covariance 
was used to estimate connectivity among regions. In het-
erosexual women and homosexual men, the left amygdala 
was strongly connected to the right amygdala, whereas con-
nectivity remained local in heterosexual men and homosexual 
women. (Adapted, with permission, from Savic and  
Lindstrom 2008.)
patients express a female gender identity and a sexual 
preference for men. They opt for surgical removal of 
the testes and hormonal supplementation appropriate 
for females.
What accounts for the different outcomes? Among 
many possibilities, one is that the dramatic change in 
behavior in 5α-reductase II patients at puberty results 
from the effects of testosterone acting on the brain. 
In CAIS patients, these effects do not occur because 
androgen receptors are absent from the brain. Clearly, 
however, this explanation does not rule out social and 
cultural upbringing as important factors in determin-
ing gender identity and sexual orientation.
A
Response
to EST
Response
to AND
Left
amygdala
connectivity
B
Heterosexual 
men
Heterosexual 
women
Homosexual 
men
Homosexual 
women
5
6
0
2
0


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1281
A second set of studies probing the biology of 
sexual orientation assessed responses to pheromones. 
Pheromone perception in humans is quite different 
from that of mice and is likely a less important sense. 
Humans do not have a functional VNO, and most of 
the genes implicated in pheromone reception in the 
mouse VNO, such as trpc2 and those encoding VNO 
receptors, are absent or nonfunctional in the human 
genome. To the extent that humans do sense phero-
mones, they appear to use the main olfactory epithe-
lium and bulb. Chemicals that appear to be human 
pheromones include androstadienone (AND), an odor-
ous androgenic metabolite, and estratetraenol (EST), 
an odorous estrogenic metabolite. AND is present at 
10-fold higher concentrations in male sweat compared 
to female sweat, whereas EST is present in the urine of 
pregnant women. Both compounds can produce sex-
ual arousal—AND in heterosexual women and EST in 
heterosexual men—even at concentrations so low that 
there is no conscious olfactory perception.
Brain areas activated by AND and EST have been 
identified by positron emission tomography (PET) 
imaging. When AND is presented, certain hypothalamic 
nuclei are activated in heterosexual women but not het-
erosexual men, whereas when EST is presented, adja-
cent regions containing clusters of nuclei are activated 
in men but not in women (Figure 51–15A). In homosex-
ual men and women, there is a reversal of hypothalamic 
activation: AND but not EST activates hypothalamic 
centers in homosexual men, and conversely, EST but 
not AND activates those areas in lesbian women. Het-
erosexual and homosexual brains therefore appear to 
process olfactory sensory information in different ways.
Do sexually dimorphic structures in homosexual 
brains correlate with anatomical sex or sexual orien-
tation? Imaging studies have provided support for 
the view that the brains of homosexual men resemble 
those of heterosexual woman and that the brains of 
homosexual women resemble those of heterosexual 
men (Figure 51–15B). Moreover, the volume of the 
sexually dimorphic BNST is small in male-to-female 
transsexuals compared to men, whereas female-to-
male transsexuals appear to have a larger BNST com-
pared to women (Figure 51–16). It is not clear, however, 
whether the structural dimorphism in these individu-
als is a consequence or a cause of gender identity or 
sexual orientation.
The male mouse counterpart of the human BNST 
plays a critical role in recognizing the sex of other mice 
and guides subsequent social interactions, such as 
aggression with males and mating with females. Thus, 
a region linked to gender identity in the human brain 
plays an important role in sex recognition in rodents. 
Figure 51–16  Sexual dimorphism in the bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis (BNST) in humans.  The nucleus has signifi-
cantly more neurons in men compared to women regardless 
of male sexual orientation. Similar to women, male-to-female 
transsexuals have fewer neurons than men. In the one female-
to-male transsexual brain available for postmortem analysis (not 
shown in the bar graph), the number of neurons is well within 
the normal range for men. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Kruijver et al. 2000.)
As is the case with the sexual dimorphism of the 
mouse BNST discussed earlier, hormonal influences 
are also thought to underlie the dimorphism of the 
human BNST.
If prenatal influences do lead to dissociation of sex 
from gender, are those influences genetic? Other than 
the rare syndromes described earlier, attempts to find 
genetic bases for sexual orientation or gender identity 
have not been productive. Claimed genetic contribu-
tions are small and claims of associations with specific 
genomic loci have not been replicated. Thus, while the 
current weight of evidence favors some contribution 
of early, even prenatal, factors in these processes, their 
cause and relative importance remain unknown.
Highlights
  1.  In humans and many other mammals, the sex 
determination pathway directs differentiation 
of the bipotential gonad into testes in males 
and ovaries in females. The SRY gene on the Y 
chromosome directs the gonad to form testes, 
whereas the absence of SRY enables the gonad to 
differentiate into ovaries.
  2.  Sex steroid hormones produced by the gonads— 
testosterone by testes and estrogens, and proges-
terone by ovaries—drive sexual differentiation of 
both the nervous system and the rest of the body.
Male
heterosexual
Female
heterosexual
Male-to-female
transsexual
Male
homosexual
0
10
20
30
40
Neurons in BNST (x 103)


===== Page 7 =====
1282    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
  3.  Sex hormones act early during a critical window 
in development to irreversibly organize neural 
substrates for behavior in a sexually dimorphic 
manner, whereas in adult life, these hormones 
act acutely and reversibly to activate sex-typical 
physiological and behavioral responses.
  4.  During the critical window, testes produce a 
transient surge of testosterone that masculin-
izes the developing bipotential nervous system. 
By contrast, the ovaries are quiescent during 
this period, and it is thought that the absence 
of sex hormones enables the nervous system in 
this period to differentiate along a female-typical 
pathway.
  5.  Many of the actions of testosterone that mas-
culinize the nervous system occur following its 
conversion to estrogen locally at the site of action. 
There is evidence to suggest that in humans and 
other primates testosterone also acts directly via 
its cognate hormone receptor to effect masculini-
zation of the neural substrates of behavior.
  6.  Sex hormones control sexual differentiation of 
neural pathways by utilizing cellular processes 
such as apoptosis, neurite extension, and syn-
apse formation that are employed widely during 
other developmental events.
  7.  Sex hormones bind to cognate hormone recep-
tors that modulate gene expression. Such genes 
in turn regulate the cellular processes that result 
in sex differences in neuronal number, connectiv-
ity, and physiology.
  8.  Many neuronal populations that are sexually 
dimorphic by morphological and other criteria 
have been identified in the vertebrate brain over 
the past few decades. Functional studies show 
that these regions influence some, but not all, 
sexually dimorphic behaviors.
  9.  Recent molecular studies have identified many 
sex hormone–regulated genes whose expression 
patterns are sexually dimorphic. These genes as 
well as the neurons they are expressed in regulate 
sexually dimorphic social behaviors in a modular 
manner. In other words, individual genes and the 
neuronal populations that express them modu-
late one or a few sexually dimorphic behaviors so 
that the control of these behaviors is distributed 
among many different neuronal groups.
10.  Such sexually dimorphic neuronal populations 
are likely embedded within neural circuits found 
in both sexes, and they are thought to guide 
behavior along male- or female-typical patterns.
11.  Both sensory stimuli and past experience 
profoundly regulate the display of sexually 
dimorphic behaviors. In some cases, the influ-
ence of past experience can extend across the life 
span of the animal.
12.  Pheromones guide choice of sexual partner in 
rodents. There is evidence from imaging stud-
ies that men and women may also show sexually 
dimorphic neural responses to male and female 
pheromones and that these responses can align 
with sexual orientation; in these cases, however, 
it is unclear if the neural responses are learned 
responses based on past experience.
13.  There are many sex differences between the 
brains of men and women, and in some instances, 
these sex differences align with gender in adult 
life rather than gender assigned at birth. In these 
cases, it is not clear whether the sex differences 
causally reflect gender identity or are a result 
of it. These issues are difficult to disentangle at 
present.
 Nirao M. Shah 
  Joshua R. Sanes 
Selected Reading
Arnold AP. 2004. Sex chromosomes and brain gender. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 5:701–708.
Bayless DW, Shah NM. 2016. Genetic dissection of neural 
circuits underlying sexually dimorphic social behaviours. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 371:20150109.
Byne W. 2006. Developmental endocrine influences on gen-
der identity: implications for management of disorders of 
sex development. Mt Sinai J Med 73:950–959.
Cahill L. 2006. Why sex matters for neuroscience. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 7:477–484.
Curley JP, Jensen CL, Mashoodh R, Champagne FA. 2010. 
Social influences on neurobiology and behavior: epige-
netic effects during development. Psychoneuroendocri-
nology 36:352–371.
Dulac C, Wagner S. 2006. Genetic analysis of brain circuits 
underlying pheromone signaling. Annu Rev Genet 
40:449–467.
Hines M. 2006. Prenatal testosterone and gender-related 
behavior. Eur J Endocrinol 155:S115–S121.
Kohl J, Dulac C. 2018. Neural control of parental behaviors. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 49:116–122.
Morris JA, Jordan CL, Breedlove SM. 2004. Sexual differen-
tiation of the vertebrate nervous system. Nat Neurosci 
7:1034–1039.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1283
Swaab DF. 2004. Sexual differentiation of the human brain: 
relevance for gender identity, transsexualism and sexual 
orientation. Gynecol Endocrinol 19:301–312.
Wilhelm D, Palmer S, Koopman P. 2007. Sex determination 
and gonadal development in mammals. Physiol Rev 87:1–28.
Yang CF, Shah NM. 2014. Representing sex in the brain, one 
module at a time. Neuron 82:261–278.
References
Bakker J, De Mees C, Douhard Q, et al. 2006. Alpha-fetoprotein 
protects the developing female mouse brain from mascu-
linization and defeminization by estrogens. Nat Neurosci 
9:220–226.
Bayless DW, Yang T, Mason MM, et al. 2019. Limbic neurons 
shape sex recognition and social behavior in sexually 
naïve males. Cell 176:1190–1205.
Berglund H, Lindstrom P, Savic I. 2006. Brain response to 
putative pheromones in lesbian women. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 103:8269–8274.
Brainard MS, Doupe AJ. 2002. What songbirds teach us about 
learning. Nature 417:351–358.
Byne W, Lasco MS, Kemether E, et al. 2000. The interstitial 
nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: an investiga-
tion of sexual variation in volume and cell size, number 
and density. Brain Res 856:254–258.
Cohen-Kettenis PT. 2005. Gender change in 46, XY persons 
with 5α-reductase-2 deficiency and 17β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase-3 deficiency. Arch Sex Behav 34:399–410.
Cooke BM, Woolley CS. 2005. Gonadal hormone modula-
tion of dendrites in the mammalian CNS. J Neurobiol 64: 
34–46.
Demir E, Dickson BJ. 2005. Fruitless splicing specifies male 
courtship behavior in Drosophila. Cell 121:785–794.
Edwards DA, Burge KG. 1971. Early androgen treatment and 
male and female sexual behavior in mice. Horm Behav 
2:49–58.
Forger NG, de Vries GJ. 2010. Cell death and sexual differ-
entiation of behavior: worms, flies, and mammals. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 20:776–783.
Goldstein LA, Kurz EM, Sengelaub DR. 1990. Androgen reg-
ulation of dendritic growth and retraction in the develop-
ment of a sexually dimorphic spinal nucleus. J Neurosci 
10:935–946.
Gorski RA. 1988. Hormone-induced sex differences in hypo-
thalamic structure. Bull Tokyo Metropol Inst Neurosci 16 
(Suppl 3):67–90.
Gorski RA. 1988. Sexual differentiation of the brain: 
mechanisms and implications for neuroscience. In: SS 
Easter Jr, KF Barald, BM Carlson (eds). From Message to 
Mind: Directions in Developmental Neurobiology, pp. 256–271. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Gorski RA, Harlan RE, Jacobsen CD, Shryne JE, Southam 
AM. 1980. Evidence for the existence of a sexually dimor-
phic nucleus in the preoptic area of the rat. J Comp Neurol 
193:529–539.
Greenspan RJ, Ferveur JF. 2000. Courtship in Drosophila. 
Annu Rev Genet 34:205–232.
Inoue S, Yang R, Tantry A, et al. 2019. Periodic remodeling in 
a neural circuit governs timing of female sexual behavior. 
Cell 179:1393–1408.
Juntti SA, Tollkuhn J, Wu MV, et al. 2010. The androgen 
receptor governs the execution, but not programming, of 
male sexual and territorial behaviors. Neuron 66:260–272.
Kimchi T, Xu J, Dulac C. 2007. A functional circuit underlying 
male sexual behavior in the female mouse brain. Nature 
448:1009–1014.
Kimura K, Ote M, Tazawa T, Yamamoto D. 2005. Fruitless 
specifies sexually dimorphic neural circuitry in the Dros-
ophila brain. Nature 438:229–233.
Kohl J, Babayan BM, Rubinstein ND, et al. 2018. Functional 
circuit architecture underlying parental behaviour. Nature 
556:326–331.
Konishi M, Akutagawa E. 1985. Neuronal growth, atrophy 
and death in a sexually dimorphic song nucleus in the 
zebra finch brain. Nature 315:145–147.
Koopman P, Gubbay J, Vivian N, Goodfellow P, Lovell-Badge 
R. 1991. Male development of chromosomally female 
mice transgenic for Sry. Nature 351:117–121.
Kruijver FP, Zhou JN, Pool CW, Hofman MA, Gooren LJ, 
Swaab DF. 2000. Male-to-female transsexuals have female 
neuron numbers in a limbic nucleus. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 85:2034–2041.
Långström N, Rahman Q, Carlström E, Lichtenstein P. 2010. 
Genetic and environmental effects on same-sex sexual 
behavior: a population study of twins in Sweden. Arch 
Sex Behav 39:75–80.
Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, et al. 2014. Scalable control of 
mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventrome-
dial hypothalamus. Nature 509:627–632.
LeVay S. 1991. A difference in hypothalamic structure 
between heterosexual and homosexual men. Science 
253:1034–1037.
Leypold BG, Yu CR, Leinders-Zufall T, Kim MM, Zufall F, 
Axel R. 2002. Altered sexual and social behaviors in trp2 
mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:6376–6381.
Liu YC, Salamone JD, Sachs BD. 1997. Lesions in medial pre-
optic area and bed nucleus of stria terminalis: differential 
effects on copulatory behavior and noncontact erection in 
male rats. J Neurosci 17:5245–5253.
Mandiyan VS, Coats JK, Shah NM. 2005. Deficits in sexual 
and aggressive behaviors in Cnga2 mutant mice. Nat 
Neurosci 8:1660–1662.
Manoli DS, Foss M, Villella A, Taylor BJ, Hall JC, Baker BS. 
2005. Male-specific fruitless specifies the neural substrates 
of Drosophila courtship behaviour. Nature 436:395–400.
McCarthy MM, Arnold AP. 2011. Reframing sexual differen-
tiation of the brain. Nat Neurosci 14:677–683.
McGowan PO, Sasaki A, D’Alessio AC, et al. 2009. Epigenetic 
regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human brain 
associates with childhood abuse. Nat Neurosci 12:342–348.
Nottebohm F, Arnold AP. 1976. Sexual dimorphism in vocal 
control areas of the songbird brain. Science 194:211–213.
Ohno S, Geller LN, Lai EV. 1974. TFM mutation and mascu-
linization versus feminization of the mouse central nerv-
ous system. Cell 3:235–242.


===== Page 9 =====
1284    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Sapolsky RM. 2004. Mothering style and methylation. Nat 
Neurosci 7:791–792.
Savic I, Berglund H, Gulyas B, Roland P. 2001. Smelling of odor-
ous sex hormone-like compounds causes sex-differentiated 
hypothalamic activations in humans. Neuron 31:661–668.
Savic I, Berglund H, Lindstrom P. 2005. Brain response to 
putative pheromones in homosexual men. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 102:7356–7361.
Savic I, Lindstrom P. 2008. PET and MRI show differences in 
cerebral asymmetry and functional connectivity between 
homo- and heterosexual subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
105:9403–9408.
Sekido R, Lovell-Badge R. 2009. Sex determination and SRY: 
down to a wink and a nudge? Trends Genet 25:19–29.
Shah NM, Pisapia DJ, Maniatis S, Mendelsohn MM, Nemes 
A, Axel R. 2004. Visualizing sexual dimorphism in the 
brain. Neuron 43:313–319.
Stockinger P, Kvitsiani D, Rotkopf S, Tirian L, Dickson BJ. 
2005. Neural circuitry that governs Drosophila male court-
ship behavior. Cell 121:795–807.
Stowers L, Holy TE, Meister M, Dulac C, Koentges G. 2002. 
Loss of sex discrimination and male-male aggression in 
mice deficient for TRP2. Science 295:1493–1500.
Unger EK, Burke KJ Jr, Yang CF, Bender KJ, Fuller PM, Shah 
NM. 2015. Medial amygdalar aromatase neurons regulate 
aggression in both sexes. Cell Rep 10:453–462.
Weaver IC, Cervoni N, Champagne FA, et al. 2004. Epige-
netic programming by maternal behavior. Nat Neurosci 
7:847–854.
Wei YC, Wang SR, Jiao ZL, et al. 2018. Medial preoptic area in 
mice is capable of mediating sexually dimorphic behav-
iors regardless of gender. Nat Commun 9:279.
Wierman ME. 2007. Sex steroid effects at target tissues: mech-
anisms of action. Adv Physiol Educ 31:26–33.
Wu MV, Manoli DS, Fraser EJ, et al. 2009. Estrogen mascu-
linizes neural pathways and sex-specific behaviors. Cell 
139:61–72.
Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 
2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern 
parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
Xu X, Coats JK, Yang CF, et al. 2012. Modular genetic control 
of sexually dimorphic behaviors. Cell 148:596–607.
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimor-
phic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus gov-
ern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell 
153:896–909.
Yang T, Yang CF, Chizari MD, et al. 2017. Social control 
of hypothalamus-mediated male aggression. Neuron 
95:955–970.
Zhang J, Webb DM. 2003. Evolutionary deterioration of the 
vomeronasal pheromone transduction pathway in catar-
rhine primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:8337–8341.
Zhang TY, Meaney MJ. 2010. Epigenetics and the environ-
mental regulation of the genome and its function. Annu 
Rev Psychol 61:439–466.


