===== Page 1 =====
15
Transmitter Release
S
ome of the brain’s most remarkable abilities, such 
as learning and memory, are thought to emerge 
from the elementary properties of chemical syn-
apses, where the presynaptic cell releases chemical trans-
mitters that activate receptors in the membrane of the 
postsynaptic cell. At most central synapses, transmitter 
is released from the presynaptic cell at presynaptic bou-
tons, varicosities along the axon (like beads on a string) 
filled with synaptic vesicles and other organelles that 
contact postsynaptic targets. At other synapses, includ-
ing the neuromuscular junction, transmitter is released 
from presynaptic terminals at the end of the axon. For 
convenience, we will refer to both types of release sites as 
presynaptic terminals. In the last three chapters, we saw 
how postsynaptic receptors control ion channels that 
generate the postsynaptic potential. Here we consider 
how electrical and biochemical events in the presynaptic 
terminal lead to the rapid release of small-molecule neu-
rotransmitters, such as acetylcholine (ACh), glutamate, 
and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), that underlie fast syn-
aptic transmission. In the next chapter, we examine the 
chemistry of the neurotransmitters themselves as well 
as the biogenic amines (serotonin, norepinephrine, and 
dopamine) and neuropeptides, which underlie slower 
forms of intercellular signaling.
Transmitter Release Is Regulated by 
Depolarization of the Presynaptic Terminal
What event at the presynaptic terminal leads to the 
release of transmitter? Bernard Katz and Ricardo Miledi 
first demonstrated the importance of depolarization of 
the presynaptic membrane. For this purpose, they used 
Transmitter Release Is Regulated by Depolarization of the 
Presynaptic Terminal
Release Is Triggered by Calcium Influx
The Relation Between Presynaptic Calcium 
Concentration and Release
Several Classes of Calcium Channels Mediate 
Transmitter Release
Transmitter Is Released in Quantal Units
Transmitter Is Stored and Released by Synaptic Vesicles
Synaptic Vesicles Discharge Transmitter by Exocytosis 
and Are Recycled by Endocytosis
Capacitance Measurements Provide Insight Into the 
Kinetics of Exocytosis and Endocytosis
Exocytosis Involves the Formation of a Temporary 
Fusion Pore
The Synaptic Vesicle Cycle Involves Several Steps
Exocytosis of Synaptic Vesicles Relies on a Highly Conserved 
Protein Machinery
The Synapsins Are Important for Vesicle Restraint and 
Mobilization
SNARE Proteins Catalyze Fusion of Vesicles With the 
Plasma Membrane
Calcium Binding to Synaptotagmin Triggers Transmitter 
Release
The Fusion Machinery Is Embedded in a Conserved 
Protein Scaffold at the Active Zone
Modulation of Transmitter Release Underlies Synaptic Plasticity
Activity-Dependent Changes in Intracellular Free 
Calcium Can Produce Long-Lasting Changes in Release
Axo-axonic Synapses on Presynaptic Terminals Regulate 
Transmitter Release
Highlights


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    325
Figure 15–1  Transmitter release is triggered by changes in 
presynaptic membrane potential. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Katz and Miledi 1967a.)
A. Voltage recording electrodes are inserted in both the pre- 
and postsynaptic fibers of the giant synapse in the stellate 
ganglion of a squid. A current-passing electrode is also inserted 
presynaptically to elicit a presynaptic action potential.
B. Tetrodotoxin (TTX) is added to the solution bathing the cell 
to block the voltage-gated Na+ channels that underlie the action 
potential. The amplitudes of both the presynaptic action poten-
tial and the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) gradually 
decrease as more and more Na+ channels are blocked. After 
7 minutes, the presynaptic action potential can still produce 
a suprathreshold EPSP that triggers an action potential in the 
postsynaptic cell. After about 14 to 15 minutes, the presynaptic 
spike gradually becomes smaller and produces smaller postsyn-
aptic depolarizations. When the presynaptic spike is reduced to 
40 mV or less, it fails to produce an EPSP.  Thus, the size of the 
presynaptic depolarization (here provided by the action  
potential) controls the magnitude of transmitter release.
C. The dependence of the amplitude of the EPSP on the ampli-
tude of the presynaptic action potential is the basis for the input–
output curve for transmitter release. This relation is obtained by 
stimulating the presynaptic nerve during the onset of the block-
ade by TTX of the presynaptic Na+ channels, when there is a 
progressive reduction in the amplitude of the presynaptic action 
potential and postsynaptic depolarization. The upper plot demon-
strates that a 40-mV presynaptic action potential is required to 
produce a postsynaptic potential. Beyond this threshold, there is 
a steep increase in amplitude of the EPSP in response to small 
increases in the amplitude of the presynaptic potential. The 
relationship between the presynaptic spike and the EPSP is loga-
rithmic, as shown in the lower plot. A 13.5-mV increase in the 
presynaptic spike produces a 10-fold increase in the EPSP.
the giant synapse of the squid, a synapse large enough 
to permit insertion of electrodes into both pre- and 
postsynaptic structures. Two electrodes are inserted 
into the presynaptic terminal—one for stimulating and 
one for recording—and one electrode is inserted into 
the postsynaptic cell for recording the excitatory post-
synaptic potential (EPSP), which provides an index of 
transmitter release (Figure 15–1A).
After the presynaptic neuron is stimulated and fires 
an action potential, an EPSP large enough to trigger 
an action potential is recorded in the postsynaptic cell. 
Katz and Miledi then asked how the presynaptic action 
potential triggers transmitter release. They found that as 
voltage-gated Na+ channels are blocked by application 
Presynaptic spike amplitude (mV)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
50
60
70
2
5
10
20
Log EPSP
EPSP (mV)
5
10
15
Voltage recording
A  Experimental setup
Current
passing
Voltage 
recording
Pre
Post
B  Potentials when Na+ channels are 
progressively blocked by TTX
C   Input–output curve of 
postsynaptic response
2 ms
50 mV
+ 7 min
+ 14 min
> 15 min
+ 15 min
Post
Pre
of tetrodotoxin, successive action potentials become 
progressively smaller. As the action potential is reduced 
in size, the EPSP decreases accordingly (Figure 15–1B). 
When the Na+ channel blockade becomes so profound 
as to reduce the amplitude of the presynaptic spike 
below 40 mV (positive to the resting potential), the EPSP 
disappears altogether. Thus, the amount of transmit-
ter release (as measured by the size of the postsynap-
tic depolarization) is a steep function of the amount of 
presynaptic depolarization (Figure 15–1C).
Katz and Miledi next investigated how presynaptic 
depolarization triggers transmitter release. The action 
potential is produced by an influx of Na+ and an efflux 
of K+ through voltage-gated channels. To determine 


===== Page 3 =====
326    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 15–2  Transmitter release is not directly triggered by the 
opening of presynaptic voltage-gated Na+ or K+ channels.  
(Adapted, with permission, from Katz and Miledi 1967a.)
A. Voltage recording electrodes are inserted in both the pre- 
and postsynaptic fibers of the giant synapse in the stellate 
ganglion of a squid. A current-passing electrode has also been 
inserted into the presynaptic cell.
B. Depolarizing the presynaptic terminal with direct current 
injection through a microelectrode can trigger transmitter 
release even after the voltage-gated Na+ channels are com-
pletely blocked by adding tetrodotoxin (TTX) to the cell-bathing 
solution. Three sets of traces represent (from bottom to top) 
the depolarizing current pulse (I) injected into the presynaptic 
terminal, the resulting potential in the presynaptic terminal 
(Pre), and the EPSP generated by the release of transmitter 
onto the postsynaptic cell (Post). Progressively stronger current 
pulses in the presynaptic cell produce correspondingly greater 
depolarizations of the presynaptic terminal. The greater the pre-
synaptic depolarization, the larger is the EPSP. The presynaptic 
depolarizations are not maintained throughout the duration of 
the depolarizing current pulse because delayed activation of the 
voltage-gated K+ channels causes repolarization.
C. Transmitter release occurs even after the voltage-gated Na+ 
channels have been blocked with TTX and the voltage-gated K+ 
channels have been blocked with tetraethylammonium (TEA). 
In this experiment, TEA was injected into the presynaptic ter-
minal. The three sets of traces represent the same measure-
ments as in part B. Because the presynaptic K+ channels are 
blocked, the presynaptic depolarization is maintained through-
out the current pulse. The large sustained presynaptic depolari-
zation produces large sustained EPSPs.
D. Blocking both the Na+ and K+ channels permits accurate con-
trol of presynaptic voltage and the determination of a complete 
input–output curve. Beyond a certain threshold (40 mV positive 
to the resting potential), there is a steep relationship between 
presynaptic depolarization and transmitter release, as meas-
ured from the size of the EPSP. Depolarizations greater than a 
certain level do not cause any additional release of transmitter. 
The initial presynaptic resting membrane potential was approxi-
mately −70 mV.
whether Na+ influx or K+ efflux is required to trig-
ger transmitter release, Katz and Miledi first blocked 
the Na+ channels with tetrodotoxin. They then asked 
whether direct depolarization of the presynaptic mem-
brane, by current injection, would still trigger transmit-
ter release. Indeed, depolarization of the presynaptic 
membrane beyond a threshold of about 40 mV positive 
to the resting potential elicits an EPSP in the postsyn-
aptic cell even with the Na+ channels blocked. Beyond 
that threshold, progressively greater depolarization 
leads to progressively greater amounts of transmitter 
release. This result shows that presynaptic Na+ influx 
is not necessary for release; it is important only insofar 
as it depolarizes the membrane enough for transmitter 
release to occur (Figure 15–2B).
To examine the contribution of K+ efflux to transmit-
ter release, Katz and Miledi blocked the voltage-gated 
K+ channels with tetraethylammonium at the same time 
that they blocked the voltage-sensitive Na+ channels with 
A  Experimental setup
B  Potentials when Na+ 
channels are blocked
C  Potentials when K+ 
channels are blocked
I
EPSP (mV)
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
TTX
TTX + TEA
Post
Pre
Presynaptic depolarization (mV)
25
50
75
70
Voltage recording
Current
passing
Voltage
recording
Pre
Post
D  Input–output curve of EPSP
2 ms
50 mV
20 mV
10 ms
200 mV
30 mV
tetrodotoxin. They then injected a depolarizing current 
into the presynaptic terminals and found that the EPSPs 
were of normal size, indicating that normal transmitter 
release occurred (Figure 15–2C). Thus, neither Na+ nor K+ 
flux is required for transmitter release.
In the presence of tetraethylammonium, the cur-
rent pulse elicits presynaptic depolarization through-
out the duration of the pulse because the K+ current 
that normally repolarizes the presynaptic membrane 
is blocked. As a result, transmitter release is sustained 
throughout the current pulse as reflected in the pro-
longed depolarization of the postsynaptic cell (Figure 
15–2C). Quantification of the sustained depolarization 
was used by Katz and Miledi to determine a complete 
input–output curve relating presynaptic depolariza-
tion to transmitter release (Figure 15–2D). They con-
firmed the steep dependence of transmitter release on 
presynaptic depolarization. In the range of depolariza-
tion over which transmitter release increases (40–70 mV  


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    327
Figure 15–3  Transmitter release is regulated by Ca2+ influx 
into the presynaptic terminals through voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels. The voltage-sensitive Na+ and K+ channels in a squid 
giant synapse were blocked by tetrodotoxin and tetraethyl-
ammonium. The membrane of the presynaptic terminal was 
voltage-clamped and membrane potential stepped to six differ-
ent command levels of depolarization (bottom). The amplitude 
of the postsynaptic depolarization (top) varies with the size 
of the presynaptic inward Ca2+ current (middle) because the 
amount of transmitter release is a function of the concentration 
of Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal. The notch in the postsynap-
tic potential trace is an artifact that results from turning off the 
presynaptic command potential. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Llinás and Heuser 1977.)
positive to the resting level), a 10-mV increase in pre-
synaptic depolarization produces as much as a 10-fold 
increase in transmitter release. Depolarization of the 
presynaptic membrane above an upper limit produces 
no further increase in the postsynaptic potential.
Release Is Triggered by Calcium Influx
Katz and Miledi next turned their attention to Ca2+ 
ions. Earlier, Katz and José del Castillo had found 
that increasing the extracellular Ca2+ concentration 
enhanced transmitter release, whereas lowering the 
concentration reduced and ultimately blocked syn-
aptic transmission. Because transmitter release is an 
intracellular process, these findings implied that Ca2+ 
must enter the cell to influence transmitter release.
Previous work on the squid giant axon membrane 
had identified a class of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, the 
opening of which results in a large Ca2+ influx because 
of the large inward electrochemical driving force on 
Ca2+. The extracellular Ca2+ concentration, approxi-
mately 2 mM in vertebrates, is normally four orders 
of magnitude greater than the intracellular concentra-
tion, approximately 10−7 M at rest. However, because 
these Ca2+ channels are sparsely distributed along the 
axon, they cannot, by themselves, provide enough cur-
rent to produce a regenerative action potential.
Katz and Miledi found that the Ca2+ channels were 
much more abundant at the presynaptic terminal. There, 
in the presence of tetraethylammonium and tetrodo-
toxin, a depolarizing current pulse was sometimes able 
to trigger a regenerative depolarization that required 
extracellular Ca2+, a calcium spike. Katz and Miledi there-
fore proposed that Ca2+ serves dual functions. It is a car-
rier of depolarizing charge during the action potential 
(like Na+), and it is a special chemical signal—a second 
messenger—conveying information about changes 
in membrane potential to the intracellular machinery 
responsible for transmitter release. Calcium ions are 
able to serve as an efficient chemical signal because of 
their low intracellular resting concentration, approxi-
mately 105-fold lower than the resting concentration of 
Na+. As a result, the small amount of Ca2+  ions that enter 
or leave a cell during an action potential can lead to large 
percentage changes in intracellular Ca2+ that can trigger 
various biochemical reactions. Proof of the importance 
of Ca2+ channels in release has come from more recent 
experiments showing that specific toxins that block Ca2+ 
channels also block release.
The properties of the voltage-gated Ca2+ channels 
at the squid presynaptic terminal were measured by 
Rodolfo Llinás and his colleagues. Using a voltage 
clamp, Llinás depolarized the terminal while blocking 
the voltage-gated Na+ channels with tetrodotoxin and 
the K+ channels with tetraethylammonium. He found 
that graded depolarizations activated a graded inward 
Ca2+ current, which in turn resulted in graded release 
of transmitter (Figure 15–3). The Ca2+ current is graded 
because the Ca2+ channels are voltage-dependent like 
the voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels. Calcium ion 
channels in squid terminals differ from Na+ channels, 
however, in that they do not inactivate quickly but stay 
open as long as the presynaptic depolarization lasts.
Calcium channels are largely localized in pre-
synaptic terminals at active zones, the sites where 
neurotransmitter is released, exactly opposite the post-
synaptic receptors (Figure 15–4). This localization is 
important as Ca2+ ions do not diffuse long distances 
from their site of entry because free Ca2+ ions are rap-
idly buffered by Ca2+-binding proteins. As a result, 
Ca2+ influx creates a sharp local rise in Ca2+ concentra-
tion at the active zones. This rise in Ca2+ in the presyn-
aptic terminals can be visualized using Ca2+-sensitive 
Postsynaptic
potential
Presynaptic
Ca2+ current
Presynaptic
command
potential
2 mV
500 nA
20 mV
2 ms


===== Page 5 =====
328    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 15–4  Calcium flowing into the presynaptic nerve ter-
minal during synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular 
junction is concentrated at the active zone. Calcium chan-
nels in presynaptic terminals at the end-plate are concentrated 
opposite clusters of nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptors on 
the postsynaptic muscle membrane. Two drawings show the 
frog neuromuscular junction.
A. The enlarged view shows the microanatomy of the neuro-
muscular junction with the presynaptic terminal peeled back. 
A fluorescent image shows the presynaptic Ca2+ channels 
(labeled with a Texas red-coupled marine snail toxin that binds 
to Ca2+ channels) and postsynaptic ACh receptors (labeled with 
fluorescently tagged α-bungarotoxin, which binds selectively 
to ACh receptors). The two images are normally superimposed 
but have been separated for clarity. The patterns of labeling 
with both probes are in almost precise register, indicating that 
the active zone of the presynaptic neuron is in almost perfect 
alignment with the postsynaptic membrane containing the high 
concentration of ACh receptors. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Robitaille, Adler, and Charlton 1990.)
B. Calcium influx in presynaptic terminals is localized at active 
zones. Calcium can be visualized using Ca2+-sensitive fluores-
cent dyes. 1. A presynaptic terminal at a neuromuscular junc-
tion filled with the dye fura-2 under resting conditions is shown 
in the black and white image. The fluorescence intensity of the 
dye changes as it binds Ca2+. In the color image, color-coded 
fluorescence intensity changes show local hotspots of intracel-
lular Ca2+ in response to a single presynaptic action potential. 
Red indicates regions with a large increase in Ca2+; blue indi-
cates regions with little increase in Ca2+. Regular peaks in Ca2+ 
concentration are seen along the terminal, corresponding to the 
localization of Ca2+ channels at the active zones.  
2. The color image shows a high-magnification view of the 
peak increase in terminal Ca2+ levels. The corresponding black 
and white image shows fluorescence labeling of nicotinic ACh 
receptors in the postsynaptic membrane, illustrating the close 
spatial correspondence between areas of presynaptic Ca2+ 
influx and areas of postsynaptic receptors. Scale bar =  
2 μm. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wachman et al. 
2004. Copyright © 2004 Society for Neuroscience.)
Nerve
terminals
Muscle ﬁbers
Myelinated
axon
A
12
0
Junctional 
fold
Active
zones
Postsynaptic
ACh receptors
Presynaptic
Ca2+ channels
1
2
Presynaptic
Ca2+ channels
Presynaptic
Ca2+ 
Presynaptic
terminal
Presynaptic
Ca2+ 
Postsynaptic
ACh receptors
[Ca2+] 
B


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    329
fluorescent dyes (Figure 15–4B). One striking feature 
of transmitter release at all synapses is its steep and 
nonlinear dependence on Ca2+ influx; a 2-fold increase 
in Ca2+ influx can increase the amount of transmitter 
released by more than 16-fold. This relationship indi-
cates that at some regulatory site, the calcium sensor, the 
cooperative binding of several Ca2+ ions is required to 
trigger release.
The Relation Between Presynaptic Calcium 
Concentration and Release
How much Ca2+ is necessary to induce release of neu-
rotransmitters? To address this question, Bert Sakmann 
and Erwin Neher and their colleagues measured syn-
aptic transmission in the calyx of Held, a large synapse 
in the mammalian auditory brain stem, composed of 
axons from the cochlear nucleus to the medial nucleus 
of the trapezoid body. This synapse is specialized for 
very rapid and reliable transmission to allow for pre-
cise localization of sound in the environment.
The calyx forms a cup-like presynaptic terminal 
that engulfs a postsynaptic cell body (Figure 15–5A). 
The calyx synapse includes almost a thousand active 
zones that function as independent release sites. This 
enables a presynaptic action potential to release a large 
amount of transmitter that results in a reliably large 
postsynaptic depolarization. In contrast, individual 
synaptic boutons of a typical neuron in the brain con-
tain only a single active zone. Because the calyx termi-
nal is large, it is possible to insert electrodes into both 
the pre- and postsynaptic structures, much as with the 
squid giant synapse, and directly measure the synaptic 
coupling between the two compartments. This paired 
recording allows a precise determination of the time 
course of activity in the presynaptic and postsynaptic 
cells (Figure 15–5B).
These recordings revealed a brief lag of 1 to 2 ms 
between the onset of the presynaptic action potential 
and the EPSP, which accounts for what Sherrington 
termed the synaptic delay. Because Ca2+ channels open 
more slowly than Na+ channels, and the inward Ca2+ 
driving force increases as the neuron repolarizes, Ca2+ 
does not begin to enter the presynaptic terminal in full 
force until the membrane has begun to repolarize. Sur-
prisingly, once Ca2+ enters the terminal, transmitter is 
rapidly released with a delay of only a few hundred 
microseconds. Thus, the synaptic delay is largely attrib-
utable to the time required to open Ca2+ channels. The 
astonishing speed of Ca2+ action indicates that, prior 
to Ca2+ influx, the biochemical machinery underlying 
the release process must already exist in a primed and 
ready state. Such rapid kinetics are vital for neuronal 
information processing and require elegant molecular 
mechanisms that we shall consider later.
A presynaptic action potential normally produces 
only a brief rise in presynaptic Ca2+ concentration 
because the Ca2+ channels open only for a short time. 
In addition, Ca2+ influx is localized at the active zone. 
These two properties contribute to a concentrated local 
pulse of Ca2+ that induces a burst of transmitter release 
(Figure 15–5B). As we shall see later in this chapter, the 
duration of the action potential regulates the amount of 
Ca2+ that flows into the terminal and thus the amount 
of transmitter release.
To determine how much Ca2+ is needed to trigger 
release, the Neher and Sakmann groups introduced 
into the presynaptic terminal an inactive form of Ca2+ 
complexed within a light-sensitive chemical cage. They 
also loaded the terminals with a Ca2+-sensitive fluores-
cent dye to assay the intracellular free Ca2+ concentra-
tion. By uncaging the Ca2+ ions with a flash of light, 
they could trigger transmitter release by a uniform 
and quantifiable increase in Ca2+ concentration. These 
experiments revealed that a rise in Ca2+ concentra-
tion of less than 1 μM is sufficient to induce release of 
some transmitter, but approximately 10 to 30 μM Ca2+ 
is required to release the amount normally observed 
during an action potential. Here again, the relationship 
between Ca2+ concentration and transmitter release is 
highly nonlinear, consistent with a model in which at 
least four or five Ca2+ ions must bind to the Ca2+ sensor 
to trigger release (Figure 15–5C,D).
Several Classes of Calcium Channels Mediate 
Transmitter Release
Calcium channels are found in all nerve cells and in many 
nonneuronal cells. In skeletal and cardiac muscle cells, 
they are important for excitation-contraction coupling; 
in endocrine cells, they mediate release of hormones. 
Neurons contain five broad classes of voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels: the L-type, P/Q-type, N-type, R-type, 
and T-type, which are encoded by distinct but closely 
related genes that can be divided into three gene fami-
lies based on amino acid sequence similarity. L-type 
channels are encoded by the CaV1 family. Members of 
the CaV2 family comprise P/Q- (CaV2.1), N- (CaV2.2), 
and R-type (CaV2.3) channels. Finally, T-type channels 
are encoded by the CaV3 gene family. Each channel type 
has specific biophysical and pharmacological properties 
and physiological functions (Table 15–1).
Calcium channels are multimeric proteins whose 
distinct properties are determined by their pore-
forming subunit, the α1-subunit. The α1-subunit is 
homologous to the α-subunit of the voltage-gated Na+ 


===== Page 7 =====
330    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 15–5  The precise relation between presynaptic 
Ca2+ and transmitter release at a central synapse has been 
measured. (Reproduced, with permission, from Meinrenken, 
Borst, and Sakmann 2003, and Sun et al. 2007. Parts A and B: 
Copyright © 2003 John Wiley and Sons.)
A. The large presynaptic terminal of the calyx of Held in the 
mammalian brain stem engulfs a postsynaptic cell body. The 
fluorescence image at left shows a calyx filled with a Ca2+-
sensitive dye.
B. Time courses for several synaptic events. The dashed lines 
indicate the timing of the peak responses for the Ca2+ current, 
transmitter release, and postsynaptic current.
C. Transmitter release is steeply dependent on the Ca2+ con-
centration in the presynaptic terminal. The calyx was loaded 
with a caged Ca2+ compound that releases its bound Ca2+ in 
response to a flash of ultraviolet light and with a Ca2+-sensitive 
dye that allows the intracellular Ca2+ concentration to be meas-
ured. By controlling the intensity of light, one can regulate 
the increase in Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal. The plot, on a 
logarithmic scale, shows the relation between the rate of vesi-
cle release and intracellular Ca2+ concentration. The blue line 
depicts a fit of the data by a model that assumes that release 
is triggered by a major Ca2+ sensor that binds five Ca2+ ions, 
resulting in a Ca2+ cooperativity of five. Due to the nonlinear 
relationship between Ca2+and release, small increments in Ca2+ 
at concentrations of more than 1 μm cause massive increases 
in release.
D. The release of transmitter from a vesicle requires the binding 
of five Ca2+ ions to a Ca2+-sensing synaptic vesicle protein. In the 
figure, Ca2+ ions bind to five sensors present on a single vesicle; 
in reality, each sensor molecule binds multiple Ca2+ ions.
C
5 µm
Ca2+
D
Time (ms)
0
0.5
1
25 mV
0.5 nA
25 mV
2 nA
0.5 ms–1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Presynaptic
action 
potential
Postsynaptic
action 
potential
Presynaptic
Ca2+ current
Postsynaptic 
current
Transmitter 
release rate
B
A
Presynaptic
terminal
Postsynaptic
cell
Ca2+
0.01
0.001
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Peak release rate (ves./ms)
0.01
0.1
1
10
[Ca2+]i (µM)


===== Page 8 =====
    331
Table 15–1  Voltage-Gated Ca2+ Channels of Neurons
Channel
Former  
name
Ca2+ channel  
type
Tissue
Blocker
Voltage  
dependence1
Function
CaV1.1−1.4
α1C,D,F,S
L
Muscle, neurons
Dihydropyridines
HVA
Contraction, slow 
and some limited 
fast release
CaV2.1
α1A
P/Q
Neurons
ω-Agatoxin  
(spider venom)
HVA
Fast release +++
CaV2.2
α1B
N
Neurons
ω-Conotoxin  
(cone snail venom)
HVA
Fast release ++
CaV2.3
α1E
R
Neurons
SNX-482  
(tarantula venom)
HVA
Fast release +
CaV3.1–3.3
α1G,H,I
T
Muscle, neurons
Mibefradil (limited 
selectivity)
LVA
Pacemaker firing
1HVA, high voltage activated; LVA, low voltage activated.


===== Page 9 =====
332    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
channel, comprised of four repeats of a domain with 
six membrane-spanning segments that includes the 
S4 voltage-sensor and pore-lining P-region (see Figure 
8–10). Calcium channels also have auxiliary subunits 
(termed α2, β, γ, and δ) that modify the properties of 
the channel formed by the α1-subunit. The subcellular 
localization in neurons of different types of calcium 
channels also varies. The N- and P/Q-type Ca2+ chan-
nels are found predominantly in the presynaptic ter-
minal, whereas L-, R-, and T-type channels are found 
largely in the soma and dendrites.
Four of the types of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels—
the L-type, P/Q-type, N-type, and R-type—generally 
require fairly strong depolarization to be activated 
(voltages positive to −40 to −20 mV are required) and 
thus are sometimes loosely referred to as high-voltage-
activated Ca2+ channels (Table 15–1). In contrast, T-type 
channels open in response to small depolarizations 
around the threshold for generating an action potential 
(−60 to −40 mV) and are therefore called low-voltage-
activated Ca2+ channels. Because they are activated by 
small changes in membrane potential, the T-type chan-
nels help control excitability at the resting potential 
and are an important source of the excitatory current 
that drives the rhythmic pacemaker activity of certain 
cells in both the brain and heart.
In neurons, the rapid release of conventional trans-
mitters during fast synaptic transmission is mediated 
mainly by P/Q-type and N-type Ca2+ channels, the 
channel types most concentrated at the active zone. 
The localization of N-type Ca2+ channels at the frog 
neuromuscular junction has been visualized using a 
fluorescence-labeled snail toxin that binds selectively 
to these channels (see Figure 15–4A). The L-type chan-
nels are not found in the active zone and thus do not 
normally contribute to the fast release of conventional 
transmitters such as ACh and glutamate. However, 
Ca2+ influx through L-type channels is important for 
slower forms of release that do not occur at specialized 
active zones, such as the release of neuropeptides from 
neurons and of hormones from endocrine cells. As we 
shall see later, regulation of Ca2+ influx into presynap-
tic terminals controls the amount of transmitter release 
and hence the strength of synaptic transmission.
Mutations in voltage-gated Ca2+ channels are 
responsible for certain acquired and genetic diseases. 
Timothy syndrome, a developmental disorder charac-
terized by a severe form of autism with impaired cog-
nitive function and a range of other pathophysiological 
changes, results from a mutation in the α1-subunit of 
L-type channels that alters their voltage-dependent 
gating, thereby affecting dendritic integration. Differ-
ent point mutations in the P/Q-type channel α1-subunit 
give rise to hemiplegic migraine or epilepsy. Patients 
with Lambert-Eaton syndrome, an autoimmune disease 
associated with muscle weakness, make antibodies to 
the P/Q-type channel α1-subunit that decrease total 
Ca2+ current (Chapter 57).
Transmitter Is Released in Quantal Units
How does the influx of Ca2+  trigger transmitter release? 
Katz and his colleagues provided a key insight into 
this question by showing that transmitter is released 
in discrete amounts they called quanta. Each quantum 
of transmitter produces a postsynaptic potential of 
fixed size, called the quantal synaptic potential. The total 
postsynaptic potential is made up of a large number 
of quantal potentials. EPSPs seem smoothly graded in 
amplitude only because each quantal (or unit) poten-
tial is small relative to the total potential.
Katz and Fatt obtained the first clue as to the 
quantal nature of synaptic transmission in 1951 when 
they observed spontaneous postsynaptic potentials of 
approximately 0.5 mV at the nerve-muscle synapse of 
the frog. Like end-plate potentials evoked by nerve 
stimulation, these small depolarizing responses are 
largest at the site of nerve-muscle contact and decay 
electrotonically with distance (see Figure 12–5). Small 
spontaneous potentials have since been observed in 
mammalian muscle and in central neurons. Because 
postsynaptic potentials at vertebrate nerve-muscle 
synapses are called end-plate potentials, Fatt and Katz 
called these spontaneous potentials miniature end-plate 
potentials.
Several results convinced Fatt and Katz that the 
miniature end-plate potentials represented responses 
to the release of small amounts of ACh, the neurotrans-
mitter used at the nerve-muscle synapse. The time 
course of the miniature end-plate potentials and the 
effects of various drugs on them are indistinguish-
able from the properties of the end-plate potential. 
Like the end-plate potentials, the miniature end-plate 
potentials are enhanced and prolonged by prostig-
mine, a drug that blocks hydrolysis of ACh by ace-
tylcholinesterase. Conversely, they are abolished by 
agents that block the ACh receptor, such as curare. The 
miniature end-plate potentials represent responses to 
small packets of transmitter that are spontaneously 
released from the presynaptic nerve terminal in the 
absence of an action potential. Their frequency can be 
increased by a small depolarization of the presynap-
tic terminal. They disappear if the presynaptic motor 
nerve degenerates and reappear when a new motor 
synapse is formed.


