===== Page 1 =====
1524    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
more impaired than others. And indeed, these differ-
ences are reified in diagnostic schemes that draw dis-
tinctions between developmental abnormalities that 
affect primarily general cognition, social cognition, or 
perception. These differential cognitive and behavioral 
vulnerabilities may provide useful clues about the ori-
gin and developmental time course of specific mental 
functions in normal development.
In this chapter, we focus principally on neurode-
velopmental disorders that include abnormalities in 
social functioning, including ASD, fragile X syndrome, 
Williams syndrome, Rett syndrome, and Angelman 
and Prader-Willi syndromes. These conditions all 
impair highly sophisticated brain functions includ-
ing social awareness and communication. ASD is a 
prime focus for several reasons: the high prevalence 
in the population; the overlap in genetic risks with 
other common neuropsychiatric conditions, including 
schizophrenia; and the absence of a defining neuropa-
thology. They are also exemplars of the etiological and 
phenotypic heterogeneity common to many psychiat-
ric syndromes. In this respect, ASD is a paradigmatic 
neuropsychiatric syndrome.
Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Share 
Characteristic Behavioral Features
Profound social disability has probably always been 
with us, but the characterization of autism as a medi-
cal syndrome was first described in the literature in 
1943 by Leo Kanner and in 1944 by Hans Asperger. 
Today, clinicians and researchers think of autism as a 
spectrum of disorders with two defining but highly 
variable diagnostic features: impaired social com-
munication and stereotyped behaviors with highly 
restricted interests.
Until recently, the term “Asperger syndrome” was 
used to describe individuals who met these two diag-
nostic criteria, but in whom language acquisition was 
not delayed and IQ was in the normal range. In the 
most recent edition of the standard psychiatric diagnos-
tic manual, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental  
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), Asperger syndrome 
along with a distinct disorder known as pervasive 
developmental disorder not otherwise specified—
designed to capture individuals with deficits in social 
communication who did not meet full criteria in other 
areas—were eliminated in favor of including variations 
within a single spectrum construct.
Autism spectrum disorder is present in at least 
1.5% of the population. Rigorous epidemiological 
studies estimate prevalence as high as 2.6% for the full 
spectrum of social disability, far higher than estimated 
only decades ago. The reasons for the increase in the 
prevalence over a relatively short time frame are of 
considerable interest and active debate, particularly 
among the lay public. Within the scientific community, 
a consensus has emerged that this increase reflects a 
combination of changing diagnostic criteria, increased 
awareness among families and health care profession-
als, “diagnostic substitution” (in which individuals 
who formerly would have been diagnosed with intel-
lectual disability are now more likely to be identified as 
socially disabled), and some true increase in incidence. 
These issues will be discussed below with regard to 
genetic risks.
Autism spectrum disorders occur predomi-
nantly in males, although the typically cited 4:1 
male-to-female ratio has recently been called into 
question based on concerns about male bias in the 
approaches used to ascertain the diagnosis, includ-
ing the diagnostic instruments. Even accounting for 
these challenges, however, the cumulative evidence 
suggests a ratio bias of at least 2:1 to 3:1 male excess. 
Individuals across the IQ spectrum are affected, and 
based on current diagnostic practices, about half of 
all individuals with ASD also have intellectual dis-
ability. By definition, ASD must be detectable before 
3 years of age, but recent studies have shown that it 
is possible to identify affected children in high-risk 
families well within the first year of life. ASD occurs 
in all countries and cultures and in every socioeco-
nomic group.
Although ASD clearly affects the brain, no defini-
tive biological markers have yet been identified; thus, 
diagnosis is based on behavioral criteria. This does not 
mean that there are not strong biological correlates, 
including specific gene mutations and neuroimaging 
findings, but none of these are sufficiently specific or 
predictive to be useful as an alternative to the gold 
standard of clinical assessment. Moreover, because 
behavior is variable during development and depends 
on a number of factors—age, environment, social con-
text, and availability and duration of remedial help—
no single behavior is likely ever to be conclusively 
diagnostic.
Like other neurodevelopmental syndromes, ASD 
typically endures throughout life. However, in recent 
longitudinal studies, approximately 10% of clearly 
affected children showed improvement, with little or 
no evidence of social disability later in life. Autism is 
not progressive. On the contrary, special educational 
programs and professional support often lead to 
improvements in behavior and adaptive functioning 
with age.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1525
Figure 62–1  Brain areas implicated in the three core defi-
cits characteristic of autism: impaired social interaction, 
impaired language and communication, and severely 
restricted interests with repetitive and stereotyped behav-
iors. Areas implicated in social deficits include the orbitofrontal 
cortex (OFC), the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and the 
amygdala (A). Cortex bordering the superior temporal sulcus 
(STS) has been implicated in mediating the perception that a 
living thing is moving and gaze perception. Face processing 
involves a region of the inferior temporal cortex within the fusi-
form gyrus (FG). Comprehension and expression of language 
involve a number of regions including the inferior frontal region, 
the striatum, and subcortical areas such as the pontine nuclei 
(PN). The striatum has also been implicated in the mediation of 
repetitive behaviors. (Abbreviations: IFG, inferior frontal gyrus; 
PPC, posterior parietal cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.)
Cerebellum
Striatum
A
PPC
IFG
STS
Cerebellum
OFC
FG
SMA
ACC
PN
Cerebellum
and you expect her to run away as soon as she realizes 
someone is watching. Thus, you explain and predict her 
behavior by inferring her mental states (desires, inten-
tions, beliefs, knowledge) from her overt behavior. This 
so-called mentalizing ability, termed a theory of mind, 
is thought to depend on specific brain mechanisms 
and circuits underlying social cognition (Figure 62–1). 
Further, it is postulated that mentalizing is impaired in 
ASD, with profound effects on social development.
It is now generally agreed that insight into the 
mental state of others depends on the capacity to men-
talize spontaneously. Spontaneous mentalizing allows 
us to appreciate that different people have different 
Autism Spectrum Disorder Phenotypes Also 
Share Distinctive Cognitive Abnormalities
Social Communication Is Impaired in Autism 
Spectrum Disorder: The Mind Blindness Hypothesis
One cognitive theory of social communication postu-
lates that humans have a particularly well-developed 
ability to understand the mental states of others in 
an intuitive and fully automatic fashion. Watching 
a young person surreptitiously trying to open a car 
door without a key, you instantly understand that 
she believes she can break in while being unobserved, 


===== Page 3 =====
1526    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 62–2  The Sally-Anne test. This first test 
of the “theory of mind” begins with a scripted 
performance using two dolls. Sally has a basket; 
Anne has a box. Sally puts a ball into her basket. 
She goes for a walk and leaves the room. While 
Sally is outside, naughty Anne takes the ball out 
of the basket and puts it into her box. Now Sally 
comes back from her walk and wants to play with 
her ball. Where will she look for the ball, the bas-
ket or the box? The answer, the basket, is obvious 
to most typically developing 4-year-olds but not 
to autistic children of the same or even higher 
mental age. (Adapted from original artwork by 
Axel Scheffler.)
thoughts and that thoughts are internal and different 
from external reality.
The inability to mentalize, or “mind blindness,” 
was first tested in children with autism using a simple 
puppet game, the Sally-Anne test. Young children with 
ASD, unlike those with Down syndrome or typically 
developing 4-year-olds, cannot predict where a puppet 
will first look for an object that was moved while the 
puppet was out of the room. They are not able to imag-
ine that the puppet will “think” that the object will 
be where the puppet had left it (Figure 62–2). Many 
children with ASD eventually do learn to pass this 
task, but on average with a 5-year delay. Mentalizing 
acquired so slowly remains effortful and error-prone 
even in adulthood.
At the same time, young children with ASD show 
excellent appreciation of physical causes and events. 
For instance, a child who is incapable of falsely telling 
another that a box is locked is quite capable of lock-
ing the same box to prevent its contents from being 
stolen.
Variations of the Sally-Anne test and other mental-
izing tasks have been used with children and adults 
with ASD since the mid-1980s (Figure 62–3).


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1527
Figure 62–3  Examples of cartoons 
used in imaging studies of “mentaliz-
ing.” Participants were asked to consider 
the meaning of each picture (silently) 
and then to explain them. In a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging study, nor-
mal adults passively viewed cartoons that 
require mentalizing versus those that 
do not. A characteristic network of brain 
regions is activated in each subject (see 
Figure 62–4). (Adapted from Gallagher  
et al. 2000.)
A  Mentalizing required
B  Mentalizing not required
Functional neuroimaging has been used to exam-
ine activity in the brain of healthy subjects while they 
are engaged in tasks that necessitate thinking about 
mental states. A wide range of tasks using visual and 
verbal stimuli has been used in these studies. In an 
early positron emission tomography study, adults in 
a control cohort viewed silent animations of geometric 
shapes. In some of the animations, the triangles move 
in scripted scenarios designed to evoke mentalizing 
(eg, triangles tricking each other). In other animations, 
the triangles move randomly in a manner that does 
not evoke mentalizing. Comparison of the scans made 
while subjects viewed each type of animation reveals a 
specific network of four brain centers involved in men-
talizing (Figure 62–4). Functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) studies using the same animations 
have shown that activity in this network is reduced in 
subjects with ASD.
This network has four components. The first, in 
the medial prefrontal cortex, is a region thought to be 
involved in monitoring one’s own thoughts. A sec-
ond component, in the temporoparietal region of the 
superior temporal lobe, is known to be activated by 
eye gaze and biological motion. Patients with lesions 
in this area in the left hemisphere are unable to pass 
the Sally-Anne test. The third region is the amygdala, 
which is involved in the evaluation of social and non-
social information for indications of danger in the 
environment. The fourth region is an inferior temporal 
region involved in the perception of faces.
Recent studies have used stimuli intended to cap-
ture more nuanced and naturalistic social content, for 
example, using movies of actual social encounters as 
opposed to static pictures of facial expressions. These 
studies have identified, among other things, the role of 
the orbital frontal cortex in social cognition.
Other Social Mechanisms Contribute to Autism 
Spectrum Disorder
From birth, normal infants prefer to attend to people 
rather than other stimuli. An absence of this prefer-
ence could lead to an inability to understand and 
interact with others. Indeed, the absence of prefer-
ential attention to social stimuli and mutual atten-
tion are widely acknowledged as early signs of ASD. 
These deficits may not involve problems with mental-
izing, given that mutual attention normally appears 
toward the end of the first year when signs of mental-
izing are still sparse.


===== Page 5 =====
1528    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 62–4  The mentalizing system of the brain. Healthy 
volunteers were presented with animated triangles that moved 
in such a way that viewers would attribute mental states to 
them. In the sample frame shown, the larger triangle was seen 
as encouraging the smaller triangle to leave the enclosure. They 
were also presented with animated triangles that moved in a 
more or less random fashion and thus would not elicit mental-
izing. The highlighted areas show differences in the positron 
emission tomography scans of brain activation when these 
two viewing conditions were compared. (Abbreviation: STS, 
superior temporal sulcus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Castelli et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002, Oxford University Press.)
STS-temporal-
parietal junction
Basal temporal
Amygdaloid 
Basal temporal
Medial prefrontal cortex
Extrastriate
Frame from animation that elicits mentalizing
Researchers have long considered the possibility 
that a specific neural mechanism underlies attention 
to social stimuli, such as faces, voices, and biological 
motion. In favor of this hypothesis, researchers found 
that the gaze of individuals with ASD is abnormal 
when watching social scenes. For example, multiple 
studies have found that individuals with ASD fixate 
on people’s mouths instead of showing the normal 
preference for eyes (Figure 62–5).
People With Autism Show a Lack of  
Behavioral Flexibility
Repetitive and inflexible behavior in ASD may reflect 
abnormalities in frontal lobe executive functions, a 
wide array of higher cognitive processes that include 
the ability to disengage from a given task, inhibit 
inappropriate responses, stay on task (plan and man-
age sequences of deliberate actions), keep multiple task 
demands in working memory, monitor performance, 
and shift attention from one task to another.
Even ASD individuals with IQs in the normal 
range have problems in planning, organizing, and 
flexibly switching between behaviors. Irrespective of 
IQ, affected individuals have difficulties suggesting 
various different uses of a single object such as a hand-
kerchief (used to block a sneeze, to wrap loose objects, 
etc.). Flexible thinking is also poor in patients with 
acquired damage to the frontal lobe.
Some Individuals With Autism Have Special Talents
A particularly fascinating feature of ASD in some indi-
viduals is “savant syndrome,” defined by the presence 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1529
Figure 62–5  Individuals with autistic disorder 
often do not look into the eyes of others. Pat-
terns of eye movements in individuals with autism 
were studied while the subjects watched clips from 
the film Who’s Afraid of Virginia Wolf? When look-
ing at human faces, the subjects tended to look at 
the mouth rather than the eyes, and in scenes of 
intense interaction between people, they tended to 
look at irrelevant places rather than at the faces of 
the actors. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Klin et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 American  
Psychiatric Association.)
Typically developing viewer
Viewer with autism 
of one or more exceptional skills that are in marked con-
trast to the individual’s overall disability but also rare in 
the population at large. The most widely cited estimate 
is that 10% of individuals with ASD demonstrate such 
exceptional abilities compared to about 1 in 1,000 indi-
viduals with other forms of intellectual disability.
In the largest ASD cohort surveyed by self-
reporting to date (about 5,000 families), 531 individu-
als were reported to have exceptional abilities in the 
following 10 areas (listed in descending frequency): 
music, memory, art, hyperlexia, mathematics, mechan-
ical, coordination, directions, calendar calculating, and 
extrasensory perception. Subsequent small-scale stud-
ies have placed the prevalence of savant skills in ASD 
at between 13% and 28%.
A recently established savant syndrome registry 
now includes more than 400 people from 33 countries. 
Among a group of 319 individuals who met some cri-
teria that earned them a savant diagnosis based on 
family or caregiver reports or self-reporting, 75% 
who showed savant skills in childhood were diag-
nosed with ASD. Approximately half reported a sin-
gle exceptional skill and half reported multiple skills. 
Music was the most commonly reported exceptional 
skill, followed by art, memory, and mathematics. 
Calendar calculating, while present in many savants 
along with another skill, was the sole skill in only 
about 5% of the sample. Among this self- or family-
selected group, the overall sex distribution mirrored 
that reported for ASD in general, with a male-to-
female ratio of approximately 4:1.
One explanation for savant syndrome is that 
information processing is preferentially geared to tiny 
details at the cost of seeing the bigger picture. (For 
example, the drawing by the gifted artist with high-
functioning autism in Figure 62–6 shows remarkably 
detailed cityscapes, as well as detailed numerical pat-
terns and dates.) A similar hypothesis is that brain 
regions involved in perception are overfunctioning; 
another possibility is that there is a preference for 
manipulating the bits of information that fit within 
a strict framework such as calendar knowledge or a 
bus timetable. Neuropsychological data support both 
explanations, but decisive experiments to distinguish 
between them remain to be done.
Genetic Factors Increase Risk for Autism 
Spectrum Disorder
The earliest evidence that genes contribute to ASD 
arose from studies of twin pairs as well as familial 
aggregation. The former show from 60% to 90% con-
cordance among monozygotic twin pairs; this wide 
range is due in part to previously used diagnostic cri-
teria and classifications. For example, the highest esti-
mates of monozygotic concordance are derived from 
observations of twins with any of three diagnoses that 
made up the social disability spectrum prior to the 
reformulations in the DSM-5. Only approximately 60% 
of monozygotic twins were found to be concordant for 
the “full diagnosis” of autism, which was defined at 


===== Page 7 =====
1530    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 62–6  Strikingly beautiful art work by George  
Widener. George is a highly accomplished and much-admired 
outsider artist. In the attention to detail, this drawing resembles 
the drawings of other autistic savant artists. The intricate topo-
graphical detail of a symmetrically arranged city, with rivers, 
bridges, and tall buildings, is combined with minutely executed 
and seemingly abstruse calendar sequences. Mastery of the 
calendar and the ability to name the day of the week for any 
given date has often been described for autistic savants. The 
viewer of this drawing can partake in an otherwise very private 
world of space and time, numbers, and patterns. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from the Henry Boxer Gallery, London.)
the time as comprising fundamental impairments in 
each of three categories: social communication, lan-
guage development, and restricted interests or repeti-
tive behaviors. In contrast, dizygotic twins show 10% 
to 30% concordance—again with the lower number 
estimating concordance for the diagnosis of isolated 
autism, while the larger number encompasses any of 
three diagnoses on the autism spectrum.
This difference between the rates at which 
monozygotic and dizygotic twins share an ASD phe-
notype is attributed to differences in the amount 
of shared genetic material between the two types 
of twin pairs. Monozygotic siblings share all their 
DNA, whereas dizygotic twins share as much DNA 
as any sibling pair. In addition to these types of data, 
it has long been observed that ASD runs in fami-
lies: Current estimates are that if parents have one 
child with ASD, the risk that a second child will be 
affected increases approximately 5- to 10-fold over 
the population base rate.
The most generous estimates of genetic contribu-
tion do not explain all risk for ASD in the population. 
Some contribution from the environment is a certainty. 
However, given the well-known public debate on the 
issue of whether immunization is a factor in ASD, it 
is important to note that there is no credible evidence 
that the increase in ASD prevalence is due to immu-
nizations. The initial study that raised the issue of the 
contribution of the trivalent measles-mumps-rubella 
(MMR) vaccine has been retracted and thoroughly 
repudiated by the editors of the journal in which the 
article appeared, as well as by 10 of 12 of the original 
authors. A wide range of subsequent investigations, 
both of the MMR vaccine and of vaccines with the 
mercury-containing preservative thimerosal, has found 
no evidence for association with ASD risk.
The counter argument that certain rare individu-
als may be predisposed to a vulnerability to vaccines 
leading to ASD is nonfalsifiable. However, three lines of 
evidence suggest that such a contribution, if present, is 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1531
likely to be quite small. First, it is important to recall 
that the basis for the MMR hypothesis has been thor-
oughly debunked, and consequently, the prior prob-
ability that vaccines are major etiological factors is 
extremely low. Second, even in very large research 
cohorts, it has so far not been possible to detect a risk 
signal. Third, although there is a subset of children 
with ASD who show developmental regression in the 
second year of life, there is often evidence on careful 
examination of preexisting delay. In the final analy-
sis, although the current level of understanding of 
pathophysiological mechanisms makes it impossible 
to definitively exclude any etiological contributor in a 
single individual, what is incontrovertible is that the 
risks to children of not receiving vaccinations are clear, 
measurable, and far greater overall than the role vac-
cines might play in ASD risk.
Although the evidence for a predominantly 
genetic contribution has been consistent, until recently, 
the search for risk genes contributing to nonsyndromic 
forms of ASD proved to be extremely challenging. Now, 
as will be discussed below, technological advances and 
changes in research culture have transformed the field. 
Moreover, critically important initial insights into both 
the genetics and neurobiology of ASD have emerged 
from the investigation of well-characterized genetic 
neurodevelopmental disorders, sometimes referred to 
as Mendelian syndromes (those with a single causa-
tive gene or genomic locus to the condition). These dis-
orders typically manifest with intellectual disability, 
often with evidence of social impairment. Several of 
these syndromes, including fragile X, Rett, Williams, 
and Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes, have been 
particularly important in beginning to elaborate the 
biology of ASD.
Rare Genetic Syndromes Have Provided  
Initial Insights Into the Biology of Autism 
Spectrum Disorders
Fragile X Syndrome
Fragile X syndrome is a common form of chromo-
some X–linked intellectual disability. Patients display 
a range of behavioral abnormalities including poor 
eye contact, social anxiety, and repetitive behaviors. 
In addition, approximately 30% of boys with fragile 
X meet the all diagnostic criteria for ASD. Moreover, 
in research with multiple cohorts, up to 1% of par-
ticipants with apparently idiopathic ASD also carried 
fragile X mutations. The overall prevalence is approxi-
mately 1 in 4,000 boys and 1 in 8,000 girls.
The fragile X mutation is quite remarkable. The 
FMR1 gene on the X chromosome includes the nucleo-
tide triplet CGG. In normal individuals, this triplet is 
repeated in approximately 30 copies. In fragile X syn-
drome patients, the number of repeats is more than 
200, with approximately 800 repeats being most 
common. This expansion of trinucleotide repeats has 
since been observed in other genes leading to neuro-
logical diseases, such as Huntington disease (Chapters 2  
and 63). When the number of CGG repeats exceeds 
200, the FMR1 gene regulatory region becomes heavily 
methylated, and gene expression is shut off. Conse-
quently, in these children, the fragile X mental retarda-
tion protein (FMRP) is lacking.
Lack of functional FMRP is considered responsi-
ble for fragile X syndrome. FMRP is a selective RNA-
binding protein that blocks translation of messenger 
RNA until protein synthesis is required. It is found 
with ribosomes at the base of dendritic spines, where 
it regulates local dendritic protein synthesis that is 
needed for synaptogenesis and certain forms of long-
lasting synaptic changes associated with learning and 
memory (Chapters 52 and 53). Interestingly, long-term 
depression of excitatory synaptic transmission, a form 
of long-lasting synaptic change that requires local pro-
tein synthesis, is enhanced in a mouse model of frag-
ile X syndrome in which the gene encoding FMRP has 
been deleted. Loss of FMRP may enhance long-term 
depression by allowing excess translation of the mes-
senger RNAs important for synaptic plasticity.
An exciting implication of these data is that antag-
onists of the type 5 metabotropic glutamate recep-
tor (mGluR5), the activation of which is required for 
the enhanced protein synthesis underlying long-term 
depression, may lessen the excess protein translation. 
In fact, compounds with this activity have been found 
to rescue the mutant phenotype in mouse and fruit fly 
models. Thus far, clinical trials of mGluR5 antagonists 
for individuals with fragile X with ASD have not shown 
efficacy against the defined clinical end points. How-
ever, it is still too early to tell whether these initial for-
ays into rational drug design for neurodevelopmental 
disorders may or may not be promising in the long run. 
A range of challenges have confronted these pioneering 
efforts, including measuring change in individuals with 
ASD, identifying ideal clinical end points, and deter-
mining the best age for evaluating interventions.
Rett Syndrome
Another single-gene disorder showing overlap with 
ASD is Rett syndrome, a devastating disorder that 
primarily affects girls. Affected females have normal 


===== Page 9 =====
1532    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
development from birth until 6 to 18 months of age, 
when they regress, losing speech and hand skills that 
they had acquired. Rett syndrome is progressive, and 
initial symptoms are followed by repetitive hand 
movements, loss of motor control, and intellectual 
disability. Often young girls will display symptoms 
indistinguishable from ASD early in the course of the 
syndrome, although social communication frequently 
improves later in childhood. Its prevalence is approxi-
mately 1 in 10,000 live female births.
Rett syndrome is an X-linked inherited disease 
caused by loss-of-function mutations in the MECP2 
gene, which encodes a transcriptional regulator that 
binds to methylated cytosine bases in DNA, regulating 
gene expression and chromatin remodeling. The gene 
product was initially thought to act predominantly as a 
transcriptional repressor, but studies of both the mouse 
model and human induced pluripotent stem cells have 
shown that overall gene expression is reduced when 
the gene is knocked out. Among the genes that have 
reduced expression in neurons is BDNF, encoding brain-
derived neurotrophic factor. Studies in mouse models of 
Rett have found that overexpression of BDNF improves 
the knock-out phenotype. Other growth factors that 
increase gene expression but have more favorable 
neuropharmacological profiles, including insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), have also improved aspects of 
the mouse phenotype, leading to optimism about clini-
cal trials of related compounds. Phase II human trials 
with both molecules are currently underway.
One might think that such a global abnormality in 
gene expression would lead to a very severe phenotype, 
but because females are mosaic, with approximately 
half of their brain cells expressing one normal copy of 
MECP2 (due to random X-inactivation), they are viable 
but manifest the devastating Rett phenotype. Boys, who 
have a single X chromosome and thus a single copy of 
MECP2, typically die soon after birth or in infancy if 
they carry a loss-of-function mutation in MECP2.
The role of X-inactivation in the survival of female 
mutation carriers and the observation that favorable 
skewing (a shift toward preferential silencing of the 
mutant X) leads to a less severe clinical course have gener-
ated considerable interest in therapeutic strategies aimed 
at reactivating the normal but silenced X chromosomes in 
females with Rett syndrome. Although one can imagine 
considerable challenges resulting from the reactivation 
of many genes on a normally silenced chromosome, a 
recent study has reported a mouse mutation that leads to 
both alleles expressing MeCP2 without wholesale activa-
tion of genes on the X chromosome.
Interestingly, in 2005, duplications spanning 
MECP2 were identified in males with severe intellectual 
disability. This condition, called MECP2 duplication 
syndrome (MDS), includes autistic features, hypoto-
nia, epilepsy, gait abnormalities, and recurrent infec-
tions. Like Rett syndrome, it has also been productively 
modeled in rodents. However, unlike Rett, the major-
ity of identified cases are familial and not sporadic in 
nature. In these cases, female carriers are often healthy 
enough (due to favorable X-inactivation) to reproduce 
and transmit the duplication to boys with only a single 
X chromosome.
Williams Syndrome
Williams syndrome is caused by a segmental deletion 
of about 27 genes on the long arm of chromosome 7 
and is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual 
disability, connective tissue abnormalities, cardiovas-
cular defects, distinctive facies, and a behavioral phe-
notype characterized by increased sociability, preserved 
language abilities, affinity for music, and impaired 
visuospatial capabilities. The disorder occurs in 1 in 
10,000 live births. The connective tissue and key car-
diovascular symptoms have been attributed to the loss 
of the gene ELN (elastin), although no specific genes 
within the deleted interval have yet been definitively 
shown to result in the behavioral phenotype. Nonethe-
less, the social cognitive features of Williams syndrome 
are particularly intriguing: The degree of interest in 
social interaction is striking, leading to a nearly univer-
sal loss of reticence with strangers in children with the 
syndrome. In contrast to the almost complete absence 
of social anxiety, individuals with Williams syndrome 
have a high degree of general anxiety and isolated 
phobias. Finally, the affinity for and interest in music 
among a very large percentage of 7q11.23 deletion car-
riers, although less well characterized, are striking.
Conversely, duplication of the identical region of 
chromosome 7, including the same 26 to 28 genes, is a 
significant risk factor for ASD and other neurodevel-
opmental syndromes apart from Williams syndrome. 
The observation of contrasting social phenotypes 
depending on whether there is loss or gain of a small 
region of the genome is fascinating. Whether social 
functioning in William syndrome is truly the opposite 
of that seen in ASD, as is sometimes argued, seems 
less interesting than the conclusion that this region 
of the genome must contain one or more genes that 
modulate social affiliation. Consequently, the molec-
ular characterization of these deletion and duplica-
tion syndromes and intensive investigation of their 
impact on the development of molecular, cellular, 
and circuit properties in the central nervous system 
are particularly important.


