===== Page 1 =====
1324    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Sensory
neuron
5-HT
Nucleus
Consolidation
initiated
CREB-2
CREB-1
piRNA-F
miRNA-124
?
Long-term
memory
5-HT
receptor
MAPK
Figure 53–8  Small non-coding RNA molecules contribute  
to  the memory consolidation switch. Long-term facilita-
tion of the sensory to motor neuron synapses is consolidated 
through the action of two distinct classes of small noncoding 
RNA molecules. miRNA-124 normally acts to suppress levels 
of the CREB-1 transcription factor by binding to its mRNA 
and inhibiting its translation. Serotonin (5-HT) downregulates 
miRNA-124 levels through a mechanism requiring mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK). This enhances the levels of 
CREB-1, promoting activation of CREB-1–dependent transcrip-
tion of gene products necessary for memory consolidation. 
In a complementary pathway, 5-HT enhances with a delay the 
synthesis of several piRNAs, including piRNA-F, which bind to 
the Piwi protein. The piRNA-F/Piwi complex leads to enhanced 
methylation of the CREB-2 gene, resulting in long-lasting 
transcriptional repression of CREB-2 and decreased levels of 
CREB-2 protein. Because CREB-2 normally inhibits the action 
of CREB-1, the increased levels of piRNA-F in response to 5-HT 
enhance and prolong CREB-1 activity, resulting in more effec-
tive memory consolidation.
induction of the hydrolase, approximately 25% of the 
regulatory subunits are degraded in the sensory neu-
rons. As a result, free catalytic subunits can continue 
to phosphorylate proteins important for the enhance-
ment of transmitter release and the strengthening of 
synaptic connections, including CREB-1, long after 
cAMP has returned to its resting level (Figure 53–6B). 
Formation of a constitutively active enzyme is there-
fore the simplest molecular mechanism for long-term 
memory. With repeated training, a second-messenger 
kinase critical for short-term facilitation can remain 
persistently active for up to 24 hours without requir-
ing a continuous activating signal.
The second and more enduring consequence of 
CREB-1 activation is the activation of the transcription 
factor C/EBP. This transcription factor forms both a 
homodimer with itself and a heterodimer with another 
transcription factor called activating factor. Together, 
these factors act on downstream genes that trigger the 
growth of new synaptic connections that support long-
term memory.
With long-term sensitization, the number of pre-
synaptic terminals in the sensory neurons in the gill-
withdrawal circuit doubles (Figure 53–9). The dendrites 
of the motor neurons also grow to accommodate the 
additional synaptic input. Thus, long-term structural 
changes in both post- and presynaptic cells increase 
the number of synapses. Long-term habituation, in 
contrast, leads to pruning of synaptic connections, as 
described above. Long-term disuse of functional con-
nections between sensory and motor neurons reduces 
the number of terminals of each sensory neuron by 
one-third (Figure 53–9A).
Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific
A typical pyramidal neuron in the mammalian brain 
makes 10,000 presynaptic connections with a wide 
range of target cells. It is therefore generally thought 
that long-term memory storage should be synapse 
specific—that is, only those synapses that actively 
participate in learning should be enhanced. However, 
the finding that long-term facilitation involves gene 
expression—which occurs in the nucleus, far removed 
from a neuron’s synapses—raises some fundamental 
questions regarding information storage.
Is long-term memory storage indeed synapse 
specific, or do the gene products recruited during 
long-term memory storage alter the strength of every 
presynaptic terminal in a neuron? And if long-term 
memory is synapse specific, what are the cellular 
mechanisms that enable the products of gene tran-
scription to selectively strengthen just some synapses 
and not others?
Kelsey Martin and her colleagues addressed these 
questions for long-term facilitation by using a cell culture 
system consisting of an isolated Aplysia sensory neu-
ron with a bifurcated axon that makes separate syn-
aptic contacts with two motor neurons. The sensory 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1325
Figure 53–9  Long-term habituation and 
sensitization involve structural changes 
in the presynaptic terminals of sensory 
neurons.
A. Long-term habituation leads to a loss 
of synapses, and long-term sensitization 
leads to an increase in the number of 
synapses. When measured either 1 day 
(shown here) or 1 week after training, the 
number of presynaptic terminals relative 
to control levels is greater in sensitized 
animals and less in habituated animals. 
The drawings below the graph illustrate 
changes in the number of synaptic con-
tacts. The swellings or varicosities on the 
sensory neuron processes are called syn-
aptic boutons; they contain all the special-
ized structures necessary for transmitter 
release. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Bailey and Chen 1983. Copyright © 1983 
AAAS.)
B. Fluorescence images of a sensory  
neuron axon contacting a motor neuron in 
culture before (left) and 1 day after (right) 
five brief exposures to serotonin. The 
resulting increase in varicosities simulates 
the synaptic changes associated with 
long-term sensitization. Prior to serotonin 
application, no presynaptic varicosities are 
visible in the outlined area (left). After  
serotonin, several new boutons are  
apparent (arrows), some of which contain 
a fully developed active zone (asterisk) or 
have small immature active zones.  
Scale bar = 50 μm. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Glanzman, Kandel,  
and Schacher 1990.)
*
3000
A  Long-term anatomical changes
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Number of synaptic boutons per sensory neuron
Control
Habituated
Sensitized
Control
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
Long-term habituation
Long-term sensitization
B
Long-term sensitization
Control
neuron terminals on one of the two motor neurons 
were activated by focal pulses of serotonin, thus mim-
icking the neural effects of a shock to the tail. When 
only one pulse of serotonin was applied, those syn-
apses showed short-term facilitation. The synapses on 
the second motor neuron, which did not receive sero-
tonin, showed no change in synaptic transmission.
When five pulses of serotonin were applied to 
the same synapses, those synapses displayed both 
short-term and long-term facilitation, and new synap-
tic connections were formed with the motor neuron. 
Although long-term facilitation and synaptic growth 
require gene transcription and protein synthesis, the 
synapses that did not receive serotonin showed no 
enhancement of synaptic transmission (Figure 53–10). 
Thus, both short-term and long-term synaptic facilita-
tion are synapse specific and manifested only by those 
synapses that receive the modulatory serotonin signal.
But how are the nuclear products able to enhance 
transmission at only certain synapses and not others of 
the same neuron? Are the newly synthesized proteins 
somehow targeted to only those synapses that receive 
serotonin? Or are they shipped out to all synapses but 
used productively for the growth of new synaptic con-
nections only at those synapses that have been marked 
by at least a single pulse of serotonin?


===== Page 3 =====
1326    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A
B
1 x 5-HT
5 x 5-HT 
Initiation
Capture
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
A
Motor
neuron
B
1  Short-term facilitation
2  Long-term facilitation
3  Capture of long-term facilitation
Cell A
Cell B
Cell A
Cell B
Cell A
Cell B
EPSP amplitude  (% change)
–50
50
0
100
150
10 min
10 min
24 h
24 h
24 h
24 h
24 h
24 h
1x
5-HT
1x
5-HT
SN
A
B
5x
5-HT
A
B
5x
5-HT
A
B
Figure 53–10  The long-term facilitation of synaptic  
transmission is synapse specific. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Martin et al. 1997.)
A. The experiment uses a single presynaptic sensory neuron 
that contacts two postsynaptic motor neurons A and B. The 
pipette on the left is used to apply five pulses of serotonin  
(5-HT) to a sensory neuron synapse with motor neuron A, ini-
tiating long-term facilitation at that synapse. The pipette on the 
right is used to apply one pulse of 5-HT to a sensory neuron 
synapse with motor neuron B, allowing this synapse to make 
use of (capture) new proteins produced in the cell body in 
response to the five pulses of 5-HT at the synapse with motor 
neuron A. The image at the right shows the actual appearance 
of the cells in culture.
B. 1. One pulse of 5-HT applied to the synapse with motor 
neuron A produces only short-term (10-minute) facilitation of 
the excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the neuron. 
By 24 hours, the EPSP has returned to its normal size. There 
is no significant change in EPSP size in cell B. 2. Application 
of five pulses of 5-HT to the synapses with cell A produces 
long-term (24-hour) facilitation of the EPSP in that cell but no 
change in the size of the EPSP in cell B. 3. When five pulses 
of 5-HT onto the synapse with cell A are paired with a single 
pulse of 5-HT onto the synapses with cell B, cell B now  
displays long-term facilitation and an increase in EPSP size 
after 24 hours.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1327
To test this question, Martin and her colleagues 
again selectively applied five pulses of serotonin to the 
synapses made by the sensory neuron onto one of the 
motor neurons. This time, however, the synapses with 
the second motor neuron were simultaneously acti-
vated by a single pulse of serotonin (which by itself 
produces only short-term synaptic facilitation lasting 
minutes). Under these conditions, the single pulse of 
serotonin was sufficient to induce long-term facilita-
tion and growth of new synaptic connections at the 
contacts between the sensory neuron and the second 
motor neuron. Thus, application of the single pulse 
of serotonin onto the synapses at the second branch 
enabled those synapses to use the nuclear products 
produced in response to the five pulses of serotonin 
onto the synapses of the first branch, a process called 
capture.
These results suggest that newly synthesized gene 
products, both mRNAs and proteins, are delivered by 
fast axonal transport to all the synapses of a neuron but 
are functional only at synapses that have been marked 
by previous synaptic activity, that is, by presynaptic 
release of serotonin. Although one pulse of serotonin 
at a synapse is insufficient to turn on new gene expres-
sion in the cell body, it is sufficient to mark that synapse, 
allowing it to make use of new proteins generated in 
the cell body in response to five pulses of serotonin at 
another synapse. This idea, developed by Martin and 
her colleagues for Aplysia and independently by Frey 
and Morris for the hippocampus in rodents, is called 
synaptic capture or synaptic tagging.
These findings raise the question, what is the 
nature of the synaptic mark that allows the capture of 
the gene products for long-term facilitation? When an 
inhibitor of PKA was applied locally to the synapses 
receiving the single pulse of serotonin, those synapses 
could no longer capture the gene products produced in 
response to the five pulses of serotonin (Figure 53–11). 
This indicates that local phosphorylation by PKA is 
required for synaptic capture.
In the early 1980s, Oswald Steward discovered 
that ribosomes, the machinery for protein synthesis, 
are present at synapses as well as in the cell body. Mar-
tin examined the importance of local protein synthesis 
in long-term synaptic facilitation by applying a single 
pulse of serotonin together with an inhibitor of local 
protein synthesis onto one set of synapses while simul-
taneously applying five pulses of serotonin to a second 
set of synapses. Normally, long-term facilitation and 
synaptic growth would persist for up to 72 hours in 
response to synaptic capture. In the presence of the 
local protein synthesis inhibitor, synaptic capture still 
occurred, producing long-term synaptic facilitation at 
the synapses exposed to only one pulse of serotonin. 
However, the facilitation only lasted 24 hours. After 
24 hours, synaptic growth and facilitation at these syn-
apses collapsed, indicating that the maintenance of 
learning-induced synaptic growth requires new local 
protein synthesis at the synapse (Figure 53–11B).
Martin and her colleagues thus found that regula-
tion of protein synthesis at the synapse plays a major 
role in controlling synaptic strength at the sensory-to-
motor neuron connection in Aplysia. As we shall see 
in Chapter 54, local protein synthesis is also important 
for the later phases of long-term potentiation of synap-
tic strength in the hippocampus.
These findings indicate there are two distinct 
components of synaptic marking in Aplysia. The first 
component, lasting about 24 hours, initiates long-term 
synaptic plasticity and synaptic growth, requires tran-
scription and translation in the nucleus, and recruits 
local PKA activity, but does not require local protein 
synthesis. The second component, which stabilizes 
the long-term synaptic change after 72 hours, requires 
local protein synthesis at the synapse. How might this 
local protein synthesis be regulated?
Maintaining Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation 
Requires a Prion-Like Protein Regulator of Local 
Protein Synthesis
The fact that mRNAs are translated at the synapse in 
response to marking of that synapse by one pulse of 
serotonin suggests that these mRNAs may initially 
be dormant and under the control of a regulator of 
translation recruited by serotonin. Translation of most 
mRNAs requires that transcripts contain a long tail of 
adenosine nucleotides at their 3′ end [poly(A) tail]. Joel 
Richter had earlier found that in Xenopus (frog) oocytes 
the maternal mRNAs only have a short tail of adenine 
nucleotides and thus are silent until activated by the 
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein 
(CPEB). CPEB binds to a site on mRNAs and recruits 
poly(A) polymerase, leading to the elongation of the 
poly(A) tail.
Kausik Si and his colleagues found that serotonin 
increases the local synthesis of a novel, neuron-specific 
isoform of CPEB in Aplysia sensory neuron terminals. 
The induction of CPEB is independent of transcription 
but requires new protein synthesis. Blocking CPEB 
locally at an activated synapse blocks the long-term 
maintenance of synaptic facilitation at the synapse but 
not its initiation and initial 24-hour maintenance.
How might CPEB stabilize the late phase of long-
term facilitation? Most biological molecules have a rel-
atively short half-life (hours to days), whereas memory 


===== Page 5 =====
1328    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A
1 x 5-HT
5 x 5-HT 
Initiation
Capture
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
A
Motor
neuron
B
B
EPSP amplitude (% change)
Control
+ Rp-cAMPS
+ Emetine
Capture requires PKA
Maintenance of facilitation requires local protein synthesis
Time (h)
01
1
4
12
24
48
72
0
50
100
0
4
12
24
48
72
0
50
PKA inhibitor
(Rp-cAMPS)
Local protein synthesis 
inhibitor (Emetine)
Figure 53–11  Long-term facilitation requires  
both cyclic adenosine monophosphate  
(cAMP)-dependent phosphorylation and local 
protein synthesis. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Casadio et al. 1999.)
A. Five pulses of serotonin (5-HT) are applied to the 
synapses on motor neuron A, and a single pulse is 
applied to those of cell B. Inhibitors of protein kinase 
A (PKA; Rp-cAMPS) or local protein synthesis  
(emetine) are applied to synapses on cell B.
B. Rp-cAMPS blocks the capture of long-term  
facilitation completely at the synapses on neuron  
B. Emetine has no effect on the capture of facilitation 
or the growth of new synaptic connections  
measured 24 hours after 5-HT application, but by  
72 hours, it fully blocks synaptic enhancement.  
The outgrowth of new synaptic connections is 
retracted, and long-term facilitation decays after  
1 day if capture is not maintained by local protein 
synthesis. (Abbreviations: EPSP, excitatory post-
synaptic potential; Rp-cAMPS, Rp-diaster-eomer of 
adenosine cyclic 3′,5′-phosphorothioate.)
lasts days, weeks, or even years. How can learning-
induced alterations in the molecular composition of 
a synapse be maintained for such a long time? Most 
hypotheses posit some type of self-sustained mecha-
nism that modulates synaptic strength and structure.
Si and his colleagues made the surprising discov-
ery that the neuronal isoform of Aplysia CPEB appears 
to have self-sustaining properties that resemble those 
of prion proteins. Prions were discovered by Stanley 
Prusiner, who demonstrated that these proteins were 
the causative agents of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a 
devastating neurodegenerative human disease, and 
mad cow disease. Prion proteins can exist in two forms: 
a soluble form and an aggregated form that is capable 
of self-perpetuation. Aplysia CPEB also has two con-
formational states, a soluble form that is inactive and 
an aggregated form that is active. This switch depends 
on an N-terminal domain of CPEB that is rich in glu-
tamine, similar to prion domains in other proteins.
In a naïve synapse, CPEB exists in the soluble, 
inactive state, and its resting level of expression is 
low. However, in response to serotonin, the local syn-
thesis of CPEB increases until a threshold concentra-
tion is reached that switches CPEB to the aggregated, 
active state, which is then capable of activating the 
translation of dormant mRNAs. Once the active state 
is established, it becomes self-perpetuating by recruit-
ing soluble CPEB to the aggregates, maintaining its 
ability to activate the translation of dormant mRNAs. 
Although dormant mRNAs are made in the cell body 
and distributed throughout the cell, they are translated 
only at synapses that have active CPEB aggregates.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1329
Figure 53–12  A self-perpetuating 
switch for protein synthesis at axon 
terminals in Aplysia maintains long-
term synaptic facilitation. Five pulses 
of serotonin (5-HT) set up a signal that 
goes back to the nucleus to activate 
synthesis of mRNA. Newly transcribed 
mRNAs and newly synthesized pro-
teins in the cell body are then sent to 
all terminals by fast axonal transport. 
However, only those terminals that 
have been marked by at least one 
pulse of serotonin can use the proteins 
to grow the new synapses needed for 
long-term facilitation. The marking of a 
terminal involves two substances: (1) 
protein kinase A (PKA), which is neces-
sary for the immediate synaptic growth 
initiated by the proteins transported to 
the terminals, and (2) phosphoinositide 
3 kinase (PI3 kinase), which initiates 
the local translation of mRNAs required 
to maintain synaptic growth and long-
term facilitation past 24 hours. Some 
of the mRNAs at the terminals encode 
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element 
binding protein (CPEB), a regulator of 
local protein synthesis. In the basal 
state, CPEB is thought to exist in a 
largely inactive conformation as a 
soluble monomer that cannot bind to 
mRNAs. Through some as yet unspeci-
fied mechanism activated by serotonin 
and PI3 kinase, some copies of CPEB 
convert to an active conformation that 
forms aggregates. The aggregates 
function like prions in that they are able 
to recruit monomers to join the aggre-
gate, thereby activating the monomers. 
The CPEB aggregates bind the cyto-
plasmic polyadenylation element (CPE) 
site of mRNAs. This binding recruits 
the poly(A) polymerase machinery 
and allows poly(A) tails of adenine 
nucleotides (A) to be added to dormant 
mRNAs. The polyadenylated mRNAs 
can now be recognized by ribosomes, 
allowing the translation of these 
mRNAs to several proteins. For exam-
ple, in addition to CPEB, this leads to 
the local synthesis of N-actin and tubu-
lin, which stabilize newly grown synap-
tic structures. (Model based on Bailey, 
Kandel, and Si 2004.)
Whereas conventional prion mechanisms are 
pathogenic—the aggregated state of most prion pro-
teins causes cell death—the Aplysia CPEB is a new form 
of a prion-like protein, one whose aggregated state 
5x
5-HT
1x
5-HT
N-Actin, 
tubulin
Motor
neuron
Motor
neuron
Sensory
neuron
mRNA
mRNA
CPE
Inactive (soluble) CPEB
Active (aggregated) CPEB
1x 5-HT
CPE
AAA
CPE
AAA
mRNA
AAA
PKA
PI3 kinase
MAPK 
PKA
A
CRE
plays an important physiological function. The active 
self-perpetuating form of Aplysia CPEB maintains long-
term molecular changes in a synapse that are necessary 
for the persistence of memory storage (Figure 53–12).


===== Page 7 =====
1330    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Memory Stored in a Sensory-Motor Synapse 
Becomes Destabilized Following Retrieval but  
Can Be Restabilized
A variety of studies in mammals by Karim Nader and 
others have found that in its early stages long-term 
memory storage is dynamic and can be disrupted. 
In particular, a memory trace can become labile after 
retrieval and require an additional round of consolida-
tion (so-called reconsolidation).
Until recently, it was unclear whether the same 
set of synapses involved in storing a memory are 
destabilized and restabilized following retrieval or 
whether, after synaptic reactivation following a mem-
ory, a new set of synapses is regulated. This question 
was examined for retrieval of long-term sensitization 
of the gill- and siphon-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia. 
These experiments revealed that a retrieved memory 
becomes labile as a result of ubiquitin-mediated pro-
tein degradation and is then reconsolidated by means 
new protein synthesis.
Does a similar reconsolidation mechanism occur 
at sensory-motor synapses that have undergone long-
term facilitation? Indeed, when a synapse that has 
undergone long-term facilitation is reactivated by a 
brief burst of presynaptic action potentials, that syn-
apse becomes destabilized through protein degrada-
tion and requires protein synthesis for restabilization. 
Such results suggest that reconsolidation of memory 
involves restabilization of synaptic facilitation at the 
same synapses at which the initial memory was stored.
Classical Threat Conditioning of Defensive 
Responses in Flies Also Uses the  
cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway
Do the cellular mechanisms for implicit memory stor-
age found in Aplysia have parallels in other animals? 
Studies on aversive learning indicate that the same 
mechanisms are also used to store memory in the fruit 
fly Drosophila and in rodents, indicating conserved 
mechanisms throughout Metazoan evolution. The fruit 
fly is particularly convenient for the study of implicit 
memory storage because its genome is easily manipu-
lated and, as first demonstrated by Seymour Benzer 
and his colleagues, the fly can be classically condi-
tioned. In a typical classical conditioning paradigm, 
an odor is paired with repeated electrical shocks to the 
feet. The extent of learning is then examined by allow-
ing the flies to choose between two arms of a maze, 
where one arm contains the odor that had been paired 
with a shock and the other arm contains an unpaired 
odor. Following training, a large fraction of wild type 
flies avoids the arm with the conditioned odor. Several 
fly mutants have been identified that do not learn to 
avoid the conditioned odor. These learning-defective 
mutants have been given imaginatively descriptive 
names such as dumb, dunce, rutabaga, amnesiac, and 
PKA-R1. Of great interest, all of these mutants have 
defects in the cAMP cascade.
Olfactory conditioning depends on a region of the 
fly brain called the mushroom bodies. Neurons of the 
mushroom bodies, called Kenyon cells, receive olfac-
tory input from the antennal lobes, structures similar 
to the olfactory lobes of the mammalian brain. The 
Kenyon cells also receive input from dopaminergic 
neurons that respond to aversive stimuli, such as a foot 
shock. The dopamine binds to a metabotropic receptor 
(encoded by the dumb gene) that activates a stimula-
tory G protein and a specific type of Ca2+/calmodulin-
dependent adenylyl cyclase (encoded by the rutabaga 
gene), similar to the cyclase involved in classical condi-
tioning in Aplysia. The convergent action of dopamine 
released by the unconditioned stimulus (foot shock) 
and a rise in intracellular Ca2+ triggered by olfactory 
input leads to the synergistic activation of adenylyl 
cyclase, producing a large increase in cAMP.
Recent experiments have demonstrated that flies 
can be classically conditioned when an odorant is 
paired with direct stimulation of the dopaminergic 
neurons, bypassing the foot shock. In these experi-
ments, the mammalian P2X receptor (an adenosine 
triphosphate [ATP]-gated cation channel) is expressed 
as a transgene in the dopaminergic neurons. The flies 
are then injected with a caged derivative of ATP. The 
dopaminergic neurons can then be excited to fire action 
potentials by shining light on the flies to release ATP 
from its cage and activate the P2X receptors. When the 
dopaminergic neurons are activated in this manner 
in the presence of an odor, the flies undergo aversive 
conditioning—they learn to avoid the odor. Thus, the 
unconditioned stimulus activates a dopamine signal 
that reinforces aversive conditioning, much as seroto-
nin acts as an aversive reinforcement signal for learned 
defensive responses in Aplysia.
A reverse genetic approach has also been used 
to explore memory formation in Drosophila. In these 
experiments, various transgenes are placed under the 
control of a promoter that is heat sensitive. The heat 
sensitivity permits the gene to be turned on at will by 
elevating the temperature of the chamber housing the 
flies. This was done in mature animals to minimize any 
potential effect on the development of the brain. When 
the catalytic subunit of PKA was blocked by transient 
expression of an inhibitory transgene, flies were unable 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1331
Figure 53–13  Threat learning 
engages parallel pathways from the 
thalamus to the amygdala.  The signal 
for the conditioned stimulus, here a 
neutral tone, is carried by two pathways 
from the auditory thalamus to the lateral 
nucleus of the amygdala: by a direct 
pathway and by an indirect pathway via 
the auditory cortex. Similarly, the signal 
for the unconditioned stimulus, here a 
shock, is conveyed through parallel noci-
ceptive pathways from the somatosen-
sory part of the thalamus to the lateral 
nucleus, one a direct pathway and one 
an indirect pathway via the somatosen-
sory cortex. The lateral nucleus in turn 
projects to the central nucleus, the 
output nucleus of the amygdala, which 
activates neural circuits that increase 
heart rate, produce other autonomic 
changes, and elicit defensive behaviors 
that constitute the defensive state. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from 
Kandel 2006.)
to form short-term memory, indicating the importance 
of the cAMP signal transduction pathway for associa-
tive learning and short-term memory in Drosophila.
Long-term memory in Drosophila requires new 
protein synthesis just as in Aplysia and other animals. 
Knockout of a CREB activator gene selectively blocks 
long-term memory without interfering with short-
term memory. Conversely, when the gene is overex-
pressed, a training procedure that ordinarily produces 
only short-term memory produces long-term memory.
As in Aplysia, certain forms of long-term memory 
in Drosophila also involve CPEB and may depend on 
prion-like behavior in this protein. Male flies learn to 
suppress their courtship behavior after exposure to 
unreceptive females. When the N-terminal domain of 
CPEB is deleted genetically, there is a loss of long-term 
courtship memory; the male fly fails to recognize the 
unreceptive female. This N-terminal domain is rich in 
glutamine residues and corresponds to the glutamine 
rich prion-like domain of CPEB in Aplysia. Thus sev-
eral molecular mechanisms involved in implicit mem-
ory are conserved from Aplysia to flies, and as we will 
see next, this conservation extends to mammals.
Memory of Threat Learning in Mammals 
Involves the Amygdala
Research over the past several decades has resulted 
in a detailed understanding of the neural circuits for 
both innate and learned defensive responses to threats 
in mammals, often referred to as “fear learning.” In 
particular, as we have noted in Chapter 42, both types 
of defensive responses crucially involve the amygdala, 
which participates in the detection and evaluation of a 
broad range of significant and potentially dangerous 
environmental stimuli. The amygdala-based defense 
system quickly learns about new dangers. It can asso-
ciate a new neutral stimulus (conditioned stimulus) 
with a known threat (unconditioned stimulus) after a 
single paired exposure, and this learned association is 
often retained throughout life.
The amygdala receives information about threats 
directly from sensory systems. The input nucleus of 
the amygdala, the lateral nucleus, is the site of conver-
gence for signals from both unconditioned and con-
ditioned stimuli. Both signals are carried by a rapid 
pathway that goes directly from the thalamus to the 
amygdala and a slower indirect pathway that projects 
from the thalamus to sensory areas of neocortex and 
from there to the amygdala. These parallel pathways 
both contribute to conditioning (Figure 53–13). The 
amygdala also receives higher-order cognitive infor-
mation by means of connections from cortical associa-
tional areas, especially medial cortical regions in the 
frontal and temporal lobes.
During Pavlovian conditioning, the strength of 
synaptic transmission is modified in the amygdala. 
In response to a tone, an extracellular electrophysi-
ological signal proportional to the excitatory synaptic 
response is recorded in the lateral nucleus. Following 
pairing of the tone with a shock, the electrophysiologi-
cal response to the tone is enhanced by an increase 
in synaptic transmission, which depends on the 
Amygdala
Indirect
Direct
Lateral 
nucleus
Central 
nucleus
Fear 
responses
Auditory
thalamus
Somatosensory
thalamus
Auditory  
cortex
Somatosensory  
cortex
Shock 
Tone 
Noxious shock
Neutral 
tone
Thalamus


===== Page 9 =====
1332    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 53–14  Threat learning produces correlated behavio-
ral and electrophysiological changes.
A. An animal ordinarily ignores a neutral tone. The tone produces 
a small synaptic response in the amygdala recorded by an extra-
cellular field electrode. This field excitatory postsynaptic potential 
(field EPSP) is generated by the small voltage drop between the 
recording electrode in the amygdala and a second electrode on 
the exterior of the brain as excitatory synaptic current enters the 
dendrites of a large population of amygdala neurons.
B. When the tone is presented immediately before a foot 
shock, the animal learns to associate the tone with the shock. 
As a result, the tone alone will elicit what the shock previously 
elicited: It causes the mouse to freeze, an instinctive defense 
response. After threat conditioning, the electrophysiological 
response in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala to the tone is 
greater than the response prior to conditioning. (Abbreviations: 
CS, conditioned stimulus; US, unconditioned stimulus.)  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Rogan et al. 2005.)
convergence of the tone (conditioned stimulus) and 
the shock (unconditioned stimulus) onto single neu-
rons in the lateral amygdala (Figure 53–14).
It is generally thought that behavioral learning 
depends on synaptic plasticity. In an effort to under-
stand how such plasticity might occur during learning 
in the lateral amygdala, researchers have studied long-
term potentiation (LTP), a cellular model of plasticity. 
We initially discussed LTP in connection with excita-
tory synapse function in Chapter 13 and will examine 
it in detail in Chapter 54 in connection with explicit 
memory and the hippocampus. In brain slices that 
include the lateral amygdala, LTP can be induced by 
high-frequency tetanic stimulation of either the direct 
or indirect sensory pathways, which produces a long-
lasting increase in the excitatory postsynaptic response 
to these inputs. This change results from a form of 
homosynaptic plasticity (Figure 53–15).
Long-term potentiation in the lateral nucleus of 
the amygdala is triggered by Ca2+ influx into the post-
synaptic neurons in response to strong synaptic activ-
ity. The Ca2+ entry is mediated by the opening of both 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate recep-
tors and L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the post-
synaptic cell. Because NMDA receptors are normally 
blocked by extracellular Mg2+, they require a large 
Behavioral testing 
Training
Fear response to tone
Shock
Tone
Tone
Electrophysiological testing 
(lateral nucleus of the amygdala)
Before 
conditioning
Tone
Field EPSP
Tone
After 
conditioning
Neutral response
Tone 
alone
Tone (CS)
paired with
shock (US)
A
B
20 µV
20 ms
synaptic input to generate enough postsynaptic depo-
larization to relieve this blockade (Chapter 13). L-type 
channels also require a strong depolarization to open. 
Thus, LTP is only generated in response to coincident 
synaptic activity. Calcium influx triggers a biochemical 
cascade that enhances synaptic transmission through 
both the insertion of additional α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-type glu-
tamate receptors in the postsynaptic membrane and 
an increase in transmitter release from the presynaptic 
terminals. As in Aplysia, monoamine neurotransmitters, 
such as norepinephrine and dopamine, released during 
tetanic stimulation provide a heterosynaptic modula-
tory signal that contributes to the induction of LTP.
Studies in awake behaving rodents indicate that 
similar mechanisms contribute to the acquisition of 
Pavlovian threat conditioning. This form of learning 
requires postsynaptic NMDA receptors and voltage-
gated calcium channels in the lateral amygdala, and 
it is enhanced by norepinephrine released in lateral 
amygdala from the locus ceruleus.
In addition, the size of the LTP elicited by elec-
trical stimulation in slices of the amygdala from ani-
mals previously trained is less than that found in 
slices from untrained animals. Because there is an 
upper limit to the amount by which synapses can be 


