===== Page 1 =====
24
High-Level Visual Processing:  
From Vision to Cognition
the identification of so-called visual primitives, such as 
contours and fields of motion, and the segregation of 
surfaces. High-level visual processing integrates infor-
mation from a variety of sources and is the final stage 
in the visual pathway leading to visual perception.
High-level visual processing is concerned with 
identifying behaviorally meaningful features of the 
environment and thus depends on descending sig-
nals that convey information from short-term working 
memory, long-term memory, and executive areas of 
cerebral cortex.
High-Level Visual Processing Is Concerned 
With Object Recognition
Our visual experience of the world is fundamentally 
object-centered. We can recognize the same object 
even when the patterns of light it casts onto the retina 
vary greatly with viewing conditions, such as lighting, 
angle, position, and distance. And this is the case even 
for visually complex objects, those that include a large 
number of conjoined visual features.
Moreover, objects are not mere visual entities, but 
are commonly associated with specific experiences, 
other remembered objects, and sensations—such as 
the hum of the coffee grinder or the aroma of a lover’s 
perfume—and a variety of emotions. It is the behav-
ioral significance of objects that guides our action 
based on visual information. In short, object recogni-
tion establishes a nexus between vision and cognition 
(Figure 24–1).
High-Level Visual Processing Is Concerned With  
Object Recognition
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is the Primary Center for 
Object Recognition
Clinical Evidence Identifies the Inferior Temporal Cortex 
as Essential for Object Recognition
Neurons in the Inferior Temporal Cortex Encode 
Complex Visual Stimuli and Are Organized in 
Functionally Specialized Columns
The Primate Brain Contains Dedicated Systems for  
Face Processing
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is Part of a Network of 
Cortical Areas Involved in Object Recognition
Object Recognition Relies on Perceptual Constancy
Categorical Perception of Objects Simplifies Behavior
Visual Memory Is a Component of High-Level  
Visual Processing
Implicit Visual Learning Leads to Changes in the 
Selectivity of Neuronal Responses
The Visual System Interacts With Working Memory and 
Long-Term Memory Systems
Associative Recall of Visual Memories Depends on Top-Down 
Activation of the Cortical Neurons That Process Visual Stimuli
Highlights
A
s we have seen, low-level visual processing is 
responsible for detecting various types of con-
trasts in the patterns of light projected onto the 
retina. Intermediate-level processing is concerned with 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     565
Figure 24–1  Representation of entire objects is central to 
high-level visual processing. Representation of entire objects 
involves integration of visual features extracted at earlier stages 
in the visual pathways. This integration is a generalization of the 
numerous retinal images generated by the same object and of 
different members of an object category. The representation also 
incorporates information from other sensory modalities, attaches 
emotional valence, and associates the object with the memory of 
other objects or events. Object representations can be stored in 
working memory and recalled in association with other memories.
ASSOCIATIVE LINKING:
Association between 
different objects/
events
Detection
of visual
primitives,
surfaces
Recall
Working
memory
IMAGE LINKING: 
Generalization across 
different images of an object
Signals from other 
sensory modalities
Emotional
valence
Integration of 
visual primitives
CATEGORICAL  LINKING:
Generalization across
different members
of an object category
SEMANTIC CONTENT
Object
representation
Low-level visual 
processing
Intermediate-level
visual processing
High-level visual processing
Detection
of image
contrast
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is the Primary 
Center for Object Recognition
Primate studies implicate neocortical regions of the 
temporal lobe, principally the inferior temporal cortex, 
in object perception. Because the hierarchy of synaptic 
relays in the cortical visual system extends from the 
primary visual cortex to the temporal lobe, the tempo-
ral lobe is a site of convergence of many types of visual 
information.
Neuropsychological studies have found that dam-
age to the inferior temporal cortex can produce spe-
cific failures of object recognition. Neurophysiological 
and functional imaging studies have, in turn, yielded 
remarkable insights into the ways in which the activity 
of inferior temporal neurons represents objects, how 
these representations relate to perceptual and cogni-
tive events, and how they are modified by experience.
Visual signals originating in the retina are pro-
cessed in the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus 
before reaching the primary visual cortex (V1). Ascend-
ing visual pathways from V1 follow two main paral-
lel and hierarchically organized streams: the ventral 
and dorsal streams (Chapter 21). The ventral stream 
extends ventrally and anteriorly from V1 through V2, 
via V4, into inferior temporal cortex, which, in macaque 
monkeys, comprises the lower bank of the superior 
temporal sulcus and the ventrolateral convexity of the 
temporal lobe (Figure 24–2). Neurons at each synaptic 
relay in this ventral stream receive convergent input 
from the preceding stage. At the top of the hierarchy, 
inferior temporal neurons are in a position to integrate 
a large and diverse quantity of visual information over 
a vast region of visual space.
The inferior temporal cortex is a large brain region. 
The patterns of anatomical connections to and from 
this region indicate that it comprises at least two main 
functional subdivisions—the posterior area temporo-
occipital cortex and the anterior area temporal cortex—
and functional evidence suggests further subdivisions 


===== Page 3 =====
566    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–2  Cortical pathway for object recognition.
A. A lateral view of the macaque brain shows the major pathways 
involved in visual processing, including the pathway for object rec-
ognition (red). (Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal cortex; FEF, 
frontal eye fields; IT, inferior temporal cortex; LIP, lateral intrapari-
etal cortex; MIP, medial intraparietal cortex; MST, medial superior 
temporal cortex; MT, middle temporal cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; 
PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; TEO, 
temporo-occipital cortex; VIP, ventral intraparietal cortex.)
B. Lateral and ventral views of the macaque monkey brain 
show the cortical areas involved in object recognition.  
(Abbreviations: IT, inferior temporal cortex; PF, prefrontal 
cortex; STP, superior temporal polysensory area; TEO, 
temporo-occipital cortex.)
C. The inferior temporal cortex (IT) is the end stage of the 
ventral stream (red arrows) and is reciprocally connected 
with neighboring areas of the medial temporal lobe and pre-
frontal cortex (gray arrows). This chart illustrates the main 
connections and predominant direction of information flow. 
(Abbreviations: ER, entorhinal cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; PH, 
parahippocampal cortex; PR, perirhinal cortex; STP, superior 
temporal polysensory area; TEO, temporo-occipital cortex.)
IT
V3
V1
V4
V2
FEF
PMv
PMd
TEO
MT/
MST
AIP
VIP
MIP
LIP
PF
A
Ventral pathway
(object recognition) 
TEO
V4
V1
STP
IT
PF
V2
Perirhinal
cortex
Parahippocampal
cortex
Hippocampus
(deep)
B
Entorhinal 
cortex
STP
ER
Hippocampus
PF
PH
PR
IT
TEO
V4
V2
V1
C
into multiple functionally specialized areas. As we shall 
see, the distinction between anterior and posterior parts 
of the inferior temporal cortex is supported by both neu-
ropsychological and neurophysiological evidence.
Clinical Evidence Identifies the Inferior Temporal 
Cortex as Essential for Object Recognition
The first clear insight into the neural pathways medi-
ating object recognition was obtained in the late 19th 
century when the American neurologist Sanger Brown 
and the British physiologist Edward Albert Schäfer 
found that experimental lesions of the temporal lobe 
in primates abolished the ability to recognize objects. 
Unlike the deficits that accompany lesions of occipital 
cortical areas, temporal lobe lesions do not impair sen-
sitivity to basic visual attributes, such as color, motion, 
and distance. Because of the unusual type of visual 
loss, the impairment was originally called psychic 
blindness, but this term was later replaced by visual 
agnosia (“without visual knowledge”), a term coined 
by Sigmund Freud.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     567
Figure 24–3  Neurons in the temporal lobe of humans are 
involved in object recognition. Damage to the inferior tempo-
ral cortex impairs the ability to recognize visual objects, a condi-
tion known as visual agnosia. There are two major categories 
of visual agnosia: Apperceptive agnosia results from damage to 
the posterior region, and associative agnosia results from dam-
age of the anterior region. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Farah 1990. © 1990 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.)
In humans, there are two basic categories of visual 
agnosia, apperceptive and associative, the description 
of which led to a two-stage model of object recogni-
tion in the visual system. With apperceptive agnosia, 
the ability to match or copy complex visual shapes 
or objects is impaired (Figure 24–3). This impairment 
results from disruption of the first stage of object recog-
nition: integration of visual features into sensory rep-
resentations of entire objects. With associative agnosia, 
the ability to match or copy complex objects remains 
intact, but the ability to identify objects is impaired. 
This impairment results from disruption of the second 
stage of object recognition: association of the sensory 
representation of an object with knowledge of the 
object’s meaning or function.
Consistent with this functional hierarchy, apper-
ceptive agnosia is most common following damage to 
the posterior inferior temporal cortex, whereas asso-
ciative agnosia, a higher-order perceptual deficit, is 
more common following damage to the anterior infe-
rior temporal cortex. Neurons in the anterior subdivi-
sion exhibit a variety of memory-related properties not 
seen in the posterior area.
More focal lesions within temporal cortex can 
lead to specific deficits. Damage to a small region of 
the human temporal lobe results in an inability to 
Associative agnosia
Apperceptive agnosia
Model
Model
Patient’s drawing
Patient’s drawing
Verbal 
identiﬁcation
of object
Verbal 
identiﬁcation
of object
“Circle”
“Square”
“Diamond”
“Three”
“Four”
Ability to copy 
or match 
visual stimuli
Deﬁciency of 
object perception
Clinical 
interpretation
Cannot interpret, understand, 
or assign meaning to objects
Cannot see object parts 
as a uniﬁed whole
Sensory representation is created 
normally but cannot be associated 
with meaning, function, or utility
Unable to construct sensory
representations of visual stimuli


===== Page 5 =====
568    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–4  Neurons in the inferior temporal cortex of the 
monkey are involved in face recognition. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Desimone et al. 1984. Copyright © 1984 Society 
for Neuroscience.)
A. The location of the inferior temporal cortex of the monkey is 
shown in a lateral view and coronal section. The colored area is 
the location of the recorded neurons.
B. Peristimulus time histograms illustrate the frequency of 
action potentials in a single neuron in response to different 
images (shown below the histograms). This neuron responded 
selectively to faces. Masking of critical features, such as the 
mouth or eyes (4, 5), led to a substantial but not complete 
reduction in response. Scrambling the parts of the face (2) 
nearly eliminated the response.
recognize faces, a form of associative agnosia known 
as prosopagnosia. Patients with prosopagnosia can iden-
tify a face as a face, recognize its parts, and even detect 
specific emotions expressed by the face, but they are 
unable to identify a particular face as belonging to a 
specific person.
Prosopagnosia is an example of a category-specific 
agnosia, in which patients with temporal lobe damage 
fail to recognize particular items belonging to a spe-
cific semantic category. Category-specific agnosias for 
living things, fruits, vegetables, tools, or animals have 
also been reported. Owing to the pronounced behav-
ioral significance of faces and the normal ability of 
people to recognize an extraordinarily large number 
of faces, prosopagnosia may simply be the most com-
monly diagnosed variety of category-specific agnosia.
Neurons in the Inferior Temporal Cortex Encode 
Complex Visual Stimuli and Are Organized in 
Functionally Specialized Columns
The coding of visual information in the temporal lobe 
has been studied extensively using electrophysiological 
Inferior
temporal
cortex
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
No color
6
A
B
2.5°
techniques, beginning with the work of Charles Gross 
and colleagues in the 1970s. Neurons in this region 
have distinctive response properties. They are rela-
tively insensitive to simple stimulus features such as 
orientation and color. Instead, the vast majority pos-
sess large, centrally located receptive fields and encode 
complex stimulus features. These selectivities often 
appear somewhat arbitrary. An individual neuron 
might, for example, respond strongly to a crescent-
shaped pattern of a particular color and texture. Cells 
with such unique selectivities likely provide inputs to 
higher-order neurons that respond to specific mean-
ingful objects.
In fact, within the inferior temporal cortex, sev-
eral small subpopulations of neurons are activated by 
highly meaningful objects, such as faces and hands 
(Figure 24–4), as Charles Gross discovered. For cells 
that respond to the sight of a hand, individual fingers 
are particularly critical. Among cells that respond to 
faces, the most effective stimulus for some cells is a 
frontal view of the face, whereas for others it is a side 
view. Although some neurons respond preferentially 
to faces in general, others respond only to specific 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     569
Figure 24–5  Neurons in the anterior portion of the inferior 
temporal cortex that respond to complex visual stimuli are 
organized into columns. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Tanaka 2003. Copyright © 2003 Oxford University Press.)
A. Optical images of the surface of the anterior inferior tempo-
ral cortex illustrate regions selectively activated by the objects 
shown at the right.
B. Neurons of the inferior temporal cortex are organized in func-
tionally specialized columns that extend from the surface of the 
cortex. According to this model, each column includes neurons 
that respond to a specific visually complex object. Columns of 
neurons that represent variations of an object, such as different 
faces or different fire extinguishers, constitute a hypercolumn.
facial expressions. It seems likely that such cells con-
tribute directly to face recognition.
In initial relays in the cortical visual system, neu-
rons that respond to the same stimulus features, such 
as orientation or direction of motion, but from differ-
ent parts of the visual field are organized in columns. 
Cells within the inferior temporal cortex are simi-
larly organized. Columns of neurons representing the 
same or similar stimulus properties commonly extend 
throughout the cortical thickness and over a range 
of approximately 400 μm. The columns are arranged 
such that different stimuli that possess some similar 
features are represented in partially overlapping col-
umns (Figure 24–5). Thus, one stimulus can activate 
multiple columns. Horizontal connections can span 
many millimeters and may facilitate the formation of 
distributed networks for encoding objects.
The Primate Brain Contains Dedicated Systems for 
Face Processing
Prosopagnosia often occurs in the absence of any other 
form of agnosia. Such a highly specific perceptual defi-
cit could be explained by focal lesions of face-selective 
neurons located in exclusive clusters. This idea was 
strengthened by the discovery of face-selective regions 
in the human brain by Nancy Kanwisher and col-
leagues using functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) and by Gregory McCarthy and colleagues using 
direct electrophysiological recordings from the surface 
of the human brain. Kanwisher and colleagues found 
that during the presentation of pictures of faces and 
other objects one area in the human temporal lobe, the 
fusiform face area, responded significantly more dur-
ing the presentation of faces compared to other objects.
Subsequently, several more face-selective areas 
were found, primarily in temporal but also in pre-
frontal cortex. Early studies of these areas provided 
circumstantial evidence for clustering of face-selective 
neurons. In later studies, Doris Tsao, Winrich Freiwald, 
and colleagues directly demonstrated such clustering 
and showed that face processing might be performed 
by a dedicated face-processing network spanning from 
the posterior part of inferior temporal cortex to prefron-
tal cortex. Using fMRI, they found six areas in tempo-
ral cortex and three in prefrontal cortex of the macaque 
monkey that responded more selectively to faces than 
to other objects. These areas, called face patches, are 
found at highly consistent locations across individuals 
and thus are named based on their location. Each face 
patch is a few millimeters in diameter and thus differs 
organizationally from the inferior temporal col-
umns. Intracellular recordings from the face patches 
1 mm
10 deg
A
B


===== Page 7 =====
570    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–6  The temporal lobe contains a network of  
face-selective areas.
A. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of macaque mon-
keys watching pictures of faces and other objects identified six 
face-selective areas in the temporal lobe, inside and around 
the superior temporal sulcus. These areas occur at the same 
locations across subjects and have been given names based on 
their anatomical location (PL, posterior lateral; ML, medial lat-
eral; MF, medial fundus of the superior temporal sulcus;  
AL, anterior lateral; AF, anterior fundus; AM, anterior medial). These 
areas are interconnected to form a face-processing network.
B. Single-neuron recordings from areas ML, AL, and AM show 
tuning to head orientation. ML cells are tuned to specific head 
orientations, many AL cells are tuned to multiple orientations 
that are mirror-symmetric versions of each other, and AM cells 
are broadly and more weakly tuned to head orientation. These 
three representations in interconnected areas can be thought 
of as transformations of each other (arrows).
revealed that the vast majority of cells respond selec-
tively more to faces than to other objects. Thus, mil-
lions of face cells are clustered into a fixed number of 
small areas. These areas are directly connected to each 
other, thus forming a face-processing network. Within 
this network, each node appears to be functionally spe-
cialized. From posterior to anterior locations within 
the temporal lobe, the initial face patches respond 
to particular views of the face, and then face patches 
become gradually more selective to identity and less 
selective for angle of view. Furthermore, dorsal face 
areas within the temporal lobe exhibit a selectivity for 
natural facial motion, which ventral areas lack. Thus, 
a highly specialized network, located primarily in 
temporal cortex, processes the multiple dimensions of 
information conveyed by a face (Figure 24–6).
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is Part of a Network 
of Cortical Areas Involved in Object Recognition
Object recognition is intimately intertwined with vis-
ual categorization, visual memory, and emotion, and 
AM
AL
ML
ML
AL
AM
PL
MF
AF
A
B
the outputs of the inferior temporal cortex contribute 
to these functions (see Figure 24–2). Among the princi-
pal projections are those to the perirhinal and parahip-
pocampal cortices, which lie medially adjacent to the 
ventral surface of the inferior temporal cortex (Figure 
24–2C). These regions project, in turn, to the entorhinal 
cortex and the hippocampal formation, both of which 
are involved in long-term memory storage and retrieval. 
A second major projection from the inferior temporal 
cortex is to the prefrontal cortex, an important site for 
high-level visual processing. As we shall see, prefrontal 
neurons play important roles in object categorization, 
visual working memory, and memory recall.
The inferior temporal cortex also provides input—
directly and indirectly via the perirhinal cortex—to the 
amygdala, which is believed to apply emotional valence 
to sensory stimuli and to engage the cognitive and vis-
ceral components of emotion (Chapter 42). Finally, the 
inferior temporal cortex is a major source of input to 
multimodal sensory areas of cortex such as the superior 
temporal polysensory area (Figure 24–2B), which lies 
dorsally adjacent to the inferior temporal cortex.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     571
Object Recognition Relies on  
Perceptual Constancy
The ability to recognize objects as the same under 
different viewing conditions, despite the sometimes 
markedly different retinal images, is one of the most 
functionally important requirements of visual experi-
ence. The invariant attributes of an object—for exam-
ple, spatial and chromatic relationships between 
image features or characteristic features such as the 
stripes of a zebra—are cues to the identity and mean-
ing of the objects.
For object recognition to take place, these invari-
ant attributes must be represented independently of 
other image properties. The visual system does this 
with proficiency, and its behavioral manifestation is 
termed perceptual constancy. Perceptual constancy has 
many forms ranging from invariance across simple 
transformations of an object, such as changes of size 
or position, to more difficult ones, such as rotation in 
depth or changes in lighting, and even to the sameness 
of objects within a category: All zebras look alike.
One of the best examples is size constancy. An 
object placed at different distances from an observer 
is perceived as having the same size, even though the 
object produces images of different absolute size on 
the retina. Size constancy has been recognized for cen-
turies, but only in the past several decades has it been 
possible to identify the neural mechanisms responsible. 
An early study found that lesions of the inferior tem-
poral cortex lead to failures of size constancy in mon-
keys, suggesting that neurons in this area play a critical 
role in size constancy. Indeed, one of the most striking 
properties of individual inferior temporal neurons is 
the invariance of their shape selectivity even to very 
big changes in stimulus size (Figure 24–7A).
Another type of perceptual constancy is position 
constancy, in which objects are recognized as the same 
regardless of their location in the visual field. The pat-
tern of selective response of many inferior temporal 
neurons does not vary when an object changes posi-
tion within their large receptive fields (Figure 24–7B). 
Form-cue invariance refers to the constancy of a form 
when the cues that define the form change. The sil-
houette of Abraham Lincoln’s head, for example, is 
readily recognizable whether it is black on white, 
white on black, or red on green. The responses of 
many inferior temporal neurons do not change with 
changes in contrast polarity (Figure 24–7C), color, or 
texture.
Viewpoint invariance refers to the perceptual con-
stancy of three-dimensional objects observed from 
different angles. Because most objects we see are 
three-dimensional and opaque, when looked at from 
different viewpoints, some parts become invisible, 
while others are revealed, and all others change in 
appearance. Yet despite the limitless range of reti-
nal images that might be cast by a familiar object, an 
observer can readily recognize an object independently 
of the angle at which it is viewed. There are notable 
exceptions to this rule, which generally occur when an 
object is viewed from an angle that yields an unchar-
acteristic retinal image, such as a bucket viewed from 
directly above.
Thus, object recognition mechanisms must infer 
the identity of objects from apparent complex shapes. 
Many neurons in inferior temporal cortex do not 
exhibit viewpoint invariance. In fact, many are system-
atically tuned to viewing angle. Yet at more anterior 
locations, neurons are not only more size and posi-
tion invariant, but they also exhibit greater invariance 
to viewpoint. The face-processing system is a case in 
point. Neurons in posterior face patches are tuned to 
viewing angle, while neurons in anterior face patches 
exhibit great robustness to changes in viewpoint. Thus, 
population responses in posterior face areas contain 
more information about head orientation than those in 
anterior areas, while the anterior face patches provide 
more information about face identity across head ori-
entations compared to posterior face areas. The degree 
of viewpoint invariance achieved in anterior inferior 
temporal cortex, by individual neurons and popula-
tions of neurons, might be sufficient to account for 
perceptual viewpoint invariance. But this has not been 
directly shown yet. Alternatively, viewpoint invari-
ance may be achieved at a higher stage of cortical pro-
cessing, such as the prefrontal cortex.
Studies of the conditions under which viewpoint 
invariance fails may lead to insights into the neu-
ral mechanisms of the behavior. One such condition 
is presentation of mirror images. Although mirror 
images are not identical, they are frequently perceived 
as such, a confusion reflecting a false-positive identi-
fication by the system for viewpoint invariance. Carl 
Olson and colleagues examined the responses of neu-
rons in a particular region of the inferior temporal cor-
tex to stimuli that were mirror images. Consistent with 
the perceptual confusion, many inferior temporal neu-
rons responded similarly to both images. Similarly, in 
one face area between the posterior and anterior ones 
described earlier, profile-selective cells respond simi-
larly to the left and right profile of a face. These results 
reinforce the conclusion that activity in the inferior 
temporal cortex reflects perceptual invariance, albeit 
incorrectly in this case, rather than the actual features 
of a stimulus.


===== Page 9 =====
572    Part IV / Perception
Light
Dark
Frequency
50 deg2
28 deg2
13 deg2
1
1
1
3
2
5
1
4
2
3
4
5
5
5
2, 3, 4
Light
Dark
A  Size constancy
B  Position constancy
C  Form-cue invariance
Neural response (spikes/s)
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
 400
 300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Figure 24–7  Perceptual constancy is reflected in the 
behavior of neurons in the inferior temporal cortex.  The 
responses of many inferior temporal neurons are selective for 
stimuli with a particular frequency (number) of lobes but invari-
ant to object size, position, and reflectance. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Schwartz et al. 1983.)
A. Size constancy. An object is perceived to be the same even 
when the retinal image size decreases with the distance of the 
object in the visual field. The response of the vast majority of infe-
rior temporal neurons to substantial changes in retinal image size 
is invariant, as illustrated here by the record of a single cell.
B. Position constancy. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in position in the retinal image. Almost all infe-
rior temporal neurons respond similarly to the same stimulus in 
different positions in the visual field, as illustrated here by the 
record of a single neuron.
C. Form-cue invariance. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in reflectance. Most inferior temporal neurons 
respond similarly to the two images illustrated, as shown in the 
record of an individual neuron.
Categorical Perception of Objects  
Simplifies Behavior
All forms of perceptual constancy are the product of 
the visual system’s attempts to generalize across dif-
ferent retinal images generated by a single object. A 
still more general type of constancy is the perception 
of individual objects as belonging to the same semantic 
category. The apples in a basket or the many appear-
ances of the letter A in different fonts, for example, are 
physically distinct but are effortlessly perceived as 
categorically identical.
Categorical perception is classically defined as the 
ability to distinguish objects of different categories better 
than objects of the same category. For example, it is more 
difficult to discriminate between two red lights that differ 
in wavelength by 10 nm than to discriminate between red 
and orange lights with the same wavelength difference.
Categorical perception simplifies behavior. For 
example, it usually does not matter whether an apple 


