===== Page 1 =====
940    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–6  The diagram illustrates the principle of selec-
tion operating at the level of the basal ganglia output 
nuclei.  Throughout the figure, the relative levels of activity 
within the competing channels are represented by the thick-
ness of projections, and for clarity, the indirect pathway and 
the return connections of the loops via the thalamus have been 
omitted. One of the competing inputs to the striatum (the mid-
dle one) is more active than its competitors. Relative activities 
in the direct inhibitory pathways (shown here) differentially sup-
press activity in the different channels within the output nuclei. 
Because output nuclei neurons are also inhibitory and tonically 
active, the selected channel will be the one with the strong-
est inhibitory input from the striatum. Tonic inhibitory output is 
maintained on the nonselected channels. This selective disin-
hibitory mechanism operating at the level of the output nuclei 
means that selection will be an emergent property of the entire 
reentrant network. Disinhibition of selected external targets 
will allow them to direct movement, while nonselected targets 
remain inhibited and unable to influence behavior. Red, excita-
tory; gray, inhibitory.
globus pallidus and excitatory signals from the sub-
thalamic nucleus. The midbrain raphe nuclei provide 
important modulatory serotonergic input, while both 
the pedunculopontine nucleus and lateral dorsal teg-
mental nucleus provide cholinergic and glutamatergic 
inputs. An important functional question concerning 
the wide range of afferent signals to dopaminergic 
neurons is whether dopamine performs a highly inte-
grative role or performs an essential function that is 
accessed by numerous different systems at different 
times.
Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of Basal 
Ganglia Output
The basal ganglia exercise influence over external 
structures by the fundamental processes of inhibition 
and disinhibition (Figure 38–6). GABAergic neurons 
in the basal ganglia output nuclei typically have high 
tonic firing rates (40–80 Hz). This activity ensures that 
target regions of the thalamus and brain stem are main-
tained under a tight and constant inhibitory control.
Focused excitatory inputs from external structures 
to the striatum can impose focused suppression (medi-
ated via direct pathway GABAergic inhibitory con-
nections) on subpopulations of output nuclei neurons. 
This focused reduction of inhibitory output effectively 
releases or disinhibits targeted regions in the thalamus 
(eg, ventromedial nucleus) and brain stem (eg, supe-
rior colliculus) from normal inhibitory control. This 
sudden release from tonic inhibition allows activity 
in the targeted region to influence behavioral output, 
which in the case of the midbrain superior colliculus is 
to elicit saccadic eye movements.
The patterns of signaling within the basal ganglia 
architecture provide important insights into what the 
overall functional properties of these networks might 
be (see below). Further constraints on the likely core 
functions of the basal ganglia also become apparent 
when considering the evolutionary history of the ver-
tebrate brain.
Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal 
Ganglia Have Been Highly Conserved
Detailed comparisons between the mammalian basal 
ganglia and those found in phylogenetically ancient 
vertebrates (eg, the lamprey) have found striking simi-
larities in their individual components, internal organ-
ization, inputs from external structures (the cortex/
pallium and thalamus), and the efferent projections 
of their output nuclei. For example, both direct and 
Selective disinhibition
Cortex
Striatum
Output
nucleus
indirect pathways from striatal medium spiny neurons 
have been observed in the lamprey. Similarly, tonically 
active GABAergic output neurons are present in the 
lamprey internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra 
pars reticulata. The neurotransmitters and membrane 
properties of basal ganglia neurons are also remarkably 
similar in evolutionarily ancient and modern species.
This high degree of morphological and neuro-
chemical conservation implies that the architecture and 
operation of basal ganglia circuits have been retained 
for more than 500 million years. The basal ganglia are 
therefore an essential component of brain architecture 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    941
that is shared by all vertebrate species. Bearing in mind 
that a function emerges from specific patterns of sig-
nals being processed in specific neural networks, the 
conservation of basal ganglia architecture across verte-
brate species places an additional important constraint 
on their overall function. Whatever computational 
problems the basal ganglia evolved to solve in evolu-
tionarily ancient species, the same problems are likely 
to have remained unchanged and to confront all verte-
brate species, including humans.
Thus far, we have identified features of basal gan-
glia morphology, connectional architecture, signal pro-
cessing, and evolution that provide potential insights 
as to the role of the basal ganglia in overall brain func-
tion. Thus, proposed functions must be consistent with 
the predominant looped architecture that connects 
external structures with the basal ganglia and with an 
internal circuitry that is shared across the limbic, asso-
ciative, and sensorimotor territories of the basal gan-
glia nuclei, and they must be shared by all vertebrate 
species. With these constraints in mind, we now con-
sider functional properties that could be supported by 
the basal ganglia.
Action Selection Is a Recurring Theme in Basal 
Ganglia Research
Despite numerous suggestions that the basal ganglia 
are involved in a wide range of functions, including 
perception, learning, memory, attention, many aspects 
of motor function, and even analgesia and seizure sup-
pression, evidence is accumulating that these nuclei 
have an underlying role in a variety of selection pro-
cesses. Thus, throughout the prodigious literature on 
the basal ganglia there are recurring references to the 
involvement of these nuclei in the essential brain func-
tions of action selection and reinforcement learning. In 
this and the next section we will evaluate the extent 
to which these core processes are consistent with the 
functional constraints identified above.
All Vertebrates Face the Challenge of Choosing One 
Behavior From Several Competing Options
Vertebrates are multifunctional organisms: They have 
to maintain energy and fluid balances, defend against 
harm, and engage in reproductive activities. Differ-
ent areas of the brain operate in parallel to deliver 
these essential functions but must share limited 
motor resources. Sherrington’s “final common motor 
path” means it is impossible to talk and drink at the 
same time. Thus, a fundamental selection problem, 
continually faced by all vertebrates, is determining 
which functional system should be allowed to direct 
behavioral output at any point in time. This is a prob-
lem that has not changed materially over the course 
of 500 million years of evolutionary history. What has 
changed over this time are the behavioral options that 
have evolved in different species to implement the core 
functions of survival and reproduction. Consequently, 
there has to be a system in the vertebrate brain that 
can adjudicate between the motivational systems that 
simultaneously compete for behavioral expression.
A similar selection problem also arises within 
vertebrate multimodal sensory systems. The visual, 
auditory, olfactory, and tactile systems are continually 
faced with multiple external stimuli, each one of which 
could drive a movement incompatible with one speci-
fied by others (eg, orienting/approach, avoidance/
escape). It is therefore imperative to select a stimu-
lus that will become the focus of attention and direct 
movement. The problem is which stimulus should 
be given access to the motor systems at any one time. 
Selective attention provides an effective solution to 
this problem, making it an essential feature of verte-
brate brain function.
In summary, despite great evolutionary changes 
in the range, power, and sophistication of the sensory, 
motivational, cognitive, and motor systems that com-
pete for behavioral expression in different species, 
the fundamental computational problems of selection 
have remained unaltered. And, if the basal ganglia 
provide a generic solution to the problems of selection, 
a high degree of structural and functional conservation 
within vertebrate brain evolution would be expected.
Selection Is Required for Motivational, Affective, 
Cognitive, and Sensorimotor Processing
In his Principles of Psychology (1890), William James 
observed, “Selection is the very keel on which our men-
tal ship is built.” In this statement, he is telling us that 
the neural systems of motivation, emotion, cognition, 
perception, and motor performance, at some stage, 
need to consult a mechanism that can select between 
parallel processed but incompatible options (Figure 
38–7). It is therefore significant that intrinsic circuits in 
the basal ganglia nuclei are similar across the limbic, 
associative, and sensorimotor territories.
Such repetition within the basal ganglia circuitry 
suggests that the same or similar computational pro-
cesses are applied to inputs from very different func-
tional origins. This duplicated circuitry would therefore 
be in a position to resolve competitions between 
high-level motivational goals in the limbic territories; 


===== Page 3 =====
942    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–7  Cooperative mechanisms in the basal ganglia 
that would promote selection.
1. Because cortical and some thalamic inputs make compara-
tively few contacts with individual striatal neurons, a large pop-
ulation of sufficiently synchronized excitatory inputs is required 
to depolarize the membrane of a medium spiny neuron to an 
“up” state sufficient for it to fire action potentials. This mecha-
nism can be seen as an input filter to exclude weak or less bio-
logically significant competitors. The internal arrows in striatal 
neurons denote “up” (red) and “down” (gray) states.
2. Local GABAergic and peptidergic inhibitory collaterals 
between striatal spiny neurons and longer-range inhibitory 
effects of interneurons should cause highly activated striatal 
elements to suppress activity in adjacent more weakly acti-
vated channels.
3. The combination of focused inhibition from the striatum with 
the more diffuse excitation from the subthalamus would both 
decrease the activity in selected channels and increase activity 
in nonselected channels in the basal ganglia output nuclei. The 
output from just one of the striatal and subthalamic neurons 
has been illustrated to make this point.
4. Local inhibitory collaterals between output nuclei neurons 
should further sharpen the difference between inhibited and 
noninhibited channels.
Striatum
Output
nuclei
Subthalamus
Inputs
Cortex/Limbic/Thalamus
4
3
1
2
competitions between incompatible cognitive represen-
tations in the central associative territories; and competi-
tions between incompatible sensory and motor options 
resolved in the lateral sensorimotor regions.
The Neural Architecture of the Basal Ganglia Is 
Configured to Make Selections
At various times during the past 40 years, and more so 
recently, it has been argued that the principle function 
of the basal ganglia is to select between competing and 
incompatible behavioral options. It has now been rec-
ognized that many aspects of the basal ganglia archi-
tecture are consistent with this view (Figure 38–6). 
The parallel loops originating from and returning to 
diverse cortical and subcortical functional systems can 
be viewed as the basic substrate for selection.
The phasic excitatory input signals from the cer-
ebral cortex and thalamus to the different functional 
territories of the striatum can be seen to carry signals 
representing the behavioral options competing for 
expression. To ensure that all options could in princi-
ple be assessed against all others, there needs to be a 
“common currency.” This term refers to the parameter 
according to which qualitatively different functional 
options can be compared for the purpose of selection. 
This parameter would be represented by the relative 
magnitudes of input signals to the striatum, thereby 
providing each competitor with a measure of rela-
tive biological importance or salience. In principle, 
it should be necessary only for the basal ganglia to 
appreciate which option is most salient in terms of the 
common currency.
Processing within the parallel projecting internal 
architecture (Figure 38–6) would ensure that channels 
associated with the most salient input activity would 
cause focused inhibition at the level of the output 
nuclei (the winning options), while at the same time 
maintaining or increasing the tonic inhibitory activ-
ity in output channels returning to regions specify-
ing weaker (losing) options. Experiments that have 
recorded neural activity in basal ganglia output nuclei 
in active animals describe populations of task-sensitive 
neurons whose activity is reduced or paused prior to 
movement (the winning option). Conversely, there is 
a separate, often larger population whose high level of 
tonic activity is further increased or at least maintained 
(the losing options). The returning signals within the 
disinhibited channel(s) are necessary to permit the 
structures providing the strongest motivational, cogni-
tive, or sensorimotor inputs to access the shared motor 
resources. Importantly, the maintained or increased 
levels of inhibitory efferent signals within nonselected 
channels would prevent the output of nonselected 
target structures from distorting the selected option’s 
input to the motor system. Thus, this model of the 
basal ganglia works by keeping all potential behav-
ioral options under tight inhibitory control and selec-
tively removing the inhibition from the option proving 
the most salient input.
A central-selection control architecture, similar to 
the systems-level architecture of the basal ganglia just 
described, was used successfully to select actions for 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    943
an autonomous mobile robot. Subsequently, it was con-
firmed that a biologically constrained computer simu-
lation of basal ganglia architecture could do likewise. 
This work with artificial agents is important because it 
confirms that selection is indeed an emergent property 
of systems-level basal ganglia circuitry. The next ques-
tion is: If the overall architecture can select, are there 
mechanisms within the basal ganglia that would sup-
port or facilitate this function?
Intrinsic Mechanisms in the Basal Ganglia  
Promote Selection
At each of the major relay points within each of the reen-
trant loops passing though the basal ganglia (external 
structures, input nuclei, intrinsic nuclei, output nuclei, 
and the thalamus), signals flowing within the paral-
lel channels can be subjected to influences originating 
outside the loop. The selection model outlined above 
requires features within the internal circuitry of the 
basal ganglia that permit different channels to interact 
competitively with each other. Several of these can be 
identified (Figure 38–7). Together, these mechanisms 
can be viewed as a cooperative sequence of processes, 
each of which would facilitate the overall goal of selec-
tion. In addition, there is substantial evidence that the 
relative activity of direct and indirect striatal projection 
pathways is critical for action selection. The traditional 
and widely accepted view is that the relative activity in 
the direct and indirect pathways determines whether 
or not an animal will perform a particular movement. 
For example, recent optogenetic stimulation of direct 
pathway neurons leads to more movement, while 
optogenetic stimulation of indirect pathway neurons 
leads to less movement. However, an alternative view 
for which there is increasing evidence is that simultane-
ous activity in both pathways is critical for the process 
of selecting what to do. Here, the idea is that the direct 
pathway conveys signals representing the most sali-
ent options, while the indirect pathway is important 
for inhibiting the competing weaker options. The latter 
idea is consistent with the now repeated observations 
that both projection pathways are concurrently active 
during movement initiation and that specific patterns 
of activity in each pathway are associated with differ-
ent movements.
Selection Function of the Basal Ganglia  
Questioned
Despite the wide appeal of the selection hypothesis of 
basal ganglia function, it is by no means universally 
accepted. Indeed, arguments against it have been 
voiced based on different studies, the results of which 
are considered incompatible with the selection model. 
For example, it has been reported that lesions or sup-
pression of neural activity in motor territories of the 
internal globus pallidus failed to alter the reaction time 
between a sensory cue and the triggered movement.
These results could indicate that the basal ganglia 
are mainly involved in selecting and executing actions 
that are self-paced, or memory-driven, rather than 
cue-driven. However, a possibility not considered by 
these studies is that for well-practiced tasks it is likely 
that the sensory regions of the basal ganglia will be 
the most important. This is because such tasks can 
be performed under stimulus–response habitual con-
trol, where selection of the stimulus that triggers the 
response would be the critical selection. Thus, a failure 
to disrupt sensory cue selection in such tasks following 
experimental disruption of the relevant sensory region 
of basal ganglia would be far stronger evidence against 
the selection model.
Another recent study claims that in some tasks 
action choice is already clear in cortical activity even 
before it reaches the basal ganglia and that the basal 
ganglia activity is mainly related to reinforcing the 
commitment to perform the action. This study, and 
many others like it, base their claims on recordings 
from afferent structures showing that the neurons 
are coding the selected stimulus/action/motor pro-
gram prior to relevant neural responses recorded from 
within the basal ganglia. An alternative interpretation 
of these data would be that recordings from all afferent 
structures that provide competing inputs to the basal 
ganglia will have shorter latencies than related sig-
nals recorded from within the basal ganglia. If in these 
experiments afferent recordings were from the struc-
ture proving the most salient of the competing inputs, 
then it will be coding for the ultimately selected option 
before it has been selected by basal ganglia.
Other findings are that recordings in the basal gan-
glia correlate with metrics of movement (eg, speed) 
and that dopamine signals in the striatum can affect 
the probability and also the vigor of movement. It is 
sometimes argued that these results are more indica-
tive of the basal ganglia helping to commit to move-
ment and determining the parameters of movement 
rather than simply selecting what to do. At least two 
alternative views could explain why recorded activity 
in the basal ganglia correlates with movement metrics. 
First, as mentioned above, one of the significant inputs 
to the striatum is an efference copy of signals relayed 
to the motor plant. It would be strange if these signals 
did not contain information about movement metrics. 
Second, at this point, it is probably wise to recognize 


===== Page 5 =====
944    Part V / Movement
that actions are multidimensional and, as they are 
learned, require selections about not only what to do 
but also where to do it, when to do it, and how to do it.
The fact that correlates of these various proper-
ties of action can be recorded within the basal ganglia 
nuclei should not necessarily be surprising. Recent 
studies suggest that what and where options may arrive 
to the basal ganglia via glutamatergic input, for exam-
ple, from the cortex, while when options may be modu-
lated by dopaminergic inputs. One of the reasons we 
know that actions comprise these different dimensions 
is that each of them can be independently manipulated 
by reinforcement learning. It is to that topic, which is 
likely to be an inherent property of a selection architec-
ture, that we now turn.
Reinforcement Learning Is an Inherent 
Property of a Selection Architecture
The basal ganglia have long been associated with fun-
damental processes of reinforcement learning. In his 
famous Law of Effect, first published in his book Animal 
Intelligence (1911), Edward Lee Thorndike proposed 
that “any act which in a given situation produces sat-
isfaction becomes associated with that situation so that 
when the situation recurs the act is more likely than 
before to recur also.” Using contemporary language, 
Thorndike is stating that in a given context an action 
that has been associated with reward is more likely to 
be selected in the future when the same or similar con-
texts are encountered.
Stated in this way, reinforcement learning can be 
seen as a process for biasing action selection; conse-
quently, it would be expected to operate by modulating 
activity in the mechanism(s) responsible for selection. 
How would a reinforcer (reward or punishment) bias 
selection in the basal ganglia architecture described 
above? Theoretically, competition between the options 
represented in the reentrant loops could be biased by 
sensitizing a reward-related loop at any of its relay 
points (cortex, input nuclei, globus pallidus, output 
nuclei, and thalamus). Here, we present just two exam-
ples where there is good evidence that reward operating 
at different nodes within the basal ganglia’s reentrant 
loop circuitry can bias selection (Figure 38–8).
Intrinsic Reinforcement Is Mediated by Phasic 
Dopamine Signaling Within the Basal  
Ganglia Nuclei
The popular view of reinforcement in the basal gan-
glia is that action selection is biased by a dopamine 
teaching signal that adjusts the sensitivity of intrinsic 
circuitry so that responses to inputs associated with 
unpredicted rewards are enhanced (Figure 38–8A). 
In this model, therefore, the process of reinforcement 
learning is intrinsic to the basal ganglia nuclei. How-
ever, as we have seen above, dopaminergic neurons 
have highly divergent axons that terminate in wide 
areas of targeted nuclei. Add to this the problem of 
volume transmission and the fact that dopaminergic 
neurons often respond together as a population to rel-
evant events and the problem of how to reinforce only 
those elements associated with reward or punishment 
immediately becomes apparent.
It is thought that this issue is addressed by invok-
ing the concept of a decaying eligibility trace. That is, 
spiking activity in the population of neurons associ-
ated with an action that leads to reward is thought 
to alter the state specifically of those neurons, mak-
ing them receptive to later widely broadcast reward-
related reinforcement signals. There is evidence that 
this process operates within the basal ganglia. Thus, 
in most contemporary models, competing behavioral 
options are represented by specific neurons, the activ-
ity of which can be reinforced by phasic increases or 
decreases in afferent dopamine signals.
Because behavioral experiments have established 
that unpredicted reward rather than reward per se is 
critical for learning, the phasic response properties of 
dopaminergic neurons have captured the imagination 
of both the biological and computational neuroscience 
communities. The powerful combination of biologi-
cal experimentation and computational analyses now 
indicates clearly that the phasic activity of midbrain 
dopaminergic neurons provides a teaching signal for 
reinforcement learning.
While recording from dopaminergic neurons in 
the ventral midbrain, most studies presented sub-
jects (usually monkeys) either with rewards or neu-
tral stimuli that predicted rewards. The results of 
these experiments showed that the phasic dopamine 
responses evoked by unexpected rewards, or the onset 
of stimuli that predict them, had short response laten-
cies (~100 ms from stimulus onset) and short durations 
(again ~100 ms). The magnitude of these responses was 
shown to be influenced by a range of factors includ-
ing the size, reliability, and extent the reward would 
be delayed. Importantly, when a neutral stimulus pre-
dicted reward (as in traditional Pavlovian condition-
ing), the phasic dopamine response transferred from 
the reward to the predicting stimulus. Alternatively, if 
a reward was predicted but not delivered, the dopa-
minergic neurons paused briefly at the time the reward 
would have been delivered. A particularly exciting 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    945
Figure 38–8  Two separate reinforcement mechanisms can 
bias selection within the reentrant parallel-loop architecture 
of the basal ganglia. (Return connections of the loops via the 
thalamus have been omitted for clarity.)
A. Intrinsic reinforcement (red oval) involves the selective 
sensitization of corticostriatal neurotransmission (indicated by 
the relative thickness of striatal projection neurons in different 
channels). Transmission in recently active (selected) channel(s) 
is reinforced by the combined phasic release of dopamine and 
glutamate evoked by an unpredicted biologically salient sen-
sory event (eg, reward). Nonactive channels lack the eligibility 
trace required for dopamine reinforcement at the synapse. 
The resulting selective plasticity would cause reinforced ver-
sions of recent behavioral output to be preferentially rese-
lected, thereby establishing an association between action 
and outcome.
B. Recent investigations demonstrate that an association with 
reward (red oval) can potentiate processing in structures pro-
viding afferent signals to the striatum. Insofar as selection by 
the basal ganglia is determined in part by the relative strength 
of inputs to the striatum (the common currency), reward-related 
modulation of afferent signals would effectively bias selection 
to favor reward-related inputs. Again, the thickness of projec-
tions in the figure denotes relative levels of activation.
A  Intrinsic reinforcement
B  Extrinsic reinforcement
Cortex
Output
nucleus
Phasic
dopamine and 
glutamate
Tonic
dopamine 
Reward
Striatum
finding was that these responses resembled the reward 
prediction error term in a machine learning reinforce-
ment algorithm. It was therefore widely concluded 
that phasic dopamine responses could be operating as 
the brain’s teaching signal in reinforcement learning.
With the advent of optogenetic methodology, it 
has now been established beyond reasonable doubt 
that phasic dopamine responses can signal both positive 
and negative reward prediction errors and that these 
responses correspondingly increase and decrease the 
probability that prior behavior will be selected. It is 
thought that phasic dopamine acts by strengthening 
inputs onto direct pathway neurons in the striatum 
and weakening inputs onto indirect pathway neurons. 
Consequently, there is evidence that direct pathway 
activity can lead animals to do more of a certain action, 
while indirect pathway activity would lead animals 
not to do an action.
However, the roles of these pathways may be 
more complex than this simple dichotomy. In accord-
ance with the different action dimensions outlined 
above (what, where, when, and how), activity in both 
the direct and indirect pathways can reinforce or dis-
courage faster or slower movements, depending on 
which movements lead to reward in that context. Fur-
thermore, the effects of optogenetic self-stimulation 
of these pathways on action reinforcement seem to be 
different between the associative (dorsomedial) and 
sensorimotor (dorsolateral) domains of the striatum. 
This could be consistent with different dopamine sig-
nals observed in the ventral tegmental area, which 
projects more medially in the striatum, compared to 
those in the substantia nigra pars compacta, which 
projects more laterally. The latter has a higher propor-
tion of dopaminergic neurons that respond to stimulus 
salience and preferentially respond when the animal 


===== Page 7 =====
946    Part V / Movement
initiates self-paced movements (eg, pressing a lever for 
food whenever it wants, rather than when a sensory 
cue is presented).
Nonetheless, a wealth of experimental data indi-
cates that phasic dopamine-evoked neural plasticity in 
the basal ganglia can bias future behavioral selections 
according to the value of the predicted outcome. This 
conclusion is consistent with the view that the basal 
ganglia operate as a generic selection mechanism that 
can support reinforcement learning.
Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by 
Operating in Afferent Structures
A second, less widely acknowledged mechanism for 
biasing selection within the reentrant loop architecture 
is by modulation of the input salience of competing 
behavioral options that previously have been associ-
ated with a reinforcer—reward or punishment (Figure 
38–8B). Since the relative magnitudes of input saliences 
in competing channels are the common currency by 
which competing options are judged, reinforcement-
induced boosting of a particular channel’s input to a 
selection mechanism would increase the probability of 
that option being selected in the future.
Evidence in the literature indicates that when a 
particular stimulus is associated with reward, its rep-
resentation is enhanced in many of the afferent struc-
tures projecting to the basal ganglia. The origin of the 
reinforcement signals that modulate processing in 
the input structures is currently unknown. However, 
the pretuning of basal ganglia inputs by association 
with reward implies that options associated with high-
value outcomes would have a correspondingly higher 
probability of being selected. Continual updating of 
input saliences by reward and punishment would bias 
selections in such a way that the acquisition of reward 
(or avoidance of punishment) would be maximized in 
the long term. Finally, it is probably the reward-related 
tuning of afferent input to the ventral midbrain that 
enables dopaminergic neurons to accurately report 
reward prediction errors.
In summary, it is likely that reinforcement learning 
will be an additional inherent property of a selection 
architecture. The synaptic relay points at various loca-
tions around the parallel reentrant loop architecture 
provide ample opportunity for the activity in specific 
loops to be modulated by reward and punishment. 
There is now good evidence that selection bias can be 
achieved by reward via a mechanism involving the 
widespread release of dopamine within the basal gan-
glia. Reinforcement selectivity is likely to be achieved 
via some form of eligibility mechanism. A second 
possibility is that the relative salience of behavioral 
options can be modulated by reward and punishment 
acting directly within the structures that provide input 
to the basal ganglia.
Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is 
Under Goal-Directed and Habitual Control
Over the past decades, it has become apparent that 
actions can be learned and then selected based on goal-
directed or habitual control. Initially, as we learn to 
perform particular actions to obtain specific outcomes, 
these actions are goal-directed, and their performance 
is highly sensitive to changes in the expected value of 
the outcome or to changes in the contingency between 
the action and the outcome. With repetition and con-
solidation, actions can become not only more efficient 
but also more automatic, controlled by a stimulus–
response type circuit.
In the case of habits, performance becomes less 
sensitive to changes in the outcome value or changes 
in contingency between action and the outcome, but 
rather is controlled by the salience of antecedent stim-
uli or contexts. Interestingly, shifts from goal-directed 
to habitual behaviors can be produced not only by 
extended training, but also by different schedules of 
reinforcement. Thus, the formation of habits is favored 
when rewards are delivered according to random 
time intervals, while goal-directed control is favored 
when rewards are delivered after a random number of 
actions.
Different cortical-basal ganglia loops seem to  
support the learning and performance of goal-
directed actions versus habits. The acquisition of 
goal-directed actions appears to rely on the associa-
tive cortical-basal ganglia circuit involving the dorso-
medial or associative striatum, the prelimbic cortex, 
the mediodorsal thalamus, the orbitofrontal cortex, 
and the amygdala. On the other hand, the formation 
of habits depends upon circuits coursing through the 
dorsolateral or sensorimotor striatum, infralimbic 
cortex, and the central amygdala.
It has been shown that since these two fundamen-
tal modes of behavioral control operate through dif-
ferent reentrant loops it has been possible to cause 
shifts between them through specific manipulations 
within the basal ganglia. Thus, damage to or inacti-
vation of the associative territories effectively blocks 
goal-directed control while leaving automatic habitual 
control relatively unimpaired. Conversely, disruption 
of the sensorimotor basal ganglia causes habitual per-
formance to switch back to goal-directed control.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    947
Finally, efficient habits, where known stimuli or 
circumstances trigger a particular response, are very 
helpful in everyday life such as tying one’s shoelaces 
or locking the front door. However, we also encounter 
circumstances that cause us to reevaluate our actions. 
Shifting between goal-directed actions and habits 
allows us to act flexibly in the environment, and inabil-
ity to do so may underlie distorted behaviors observed 
in addiction and other behavioral and neurological 
disorders of the basal ganglia. It is to this topic that we 
now turn.
Diseases of the Basal Ganglia May Involve 
Disorders of Selection
The focus of this chapter has been how the functional 
architecture of the basal ganglia and their evolution-
ary history have determined their role in overall brain 
function. One of the motivations for this exercise that 
we all have is an intrinsic scientific interest in trying to 
understand something we currently do not. However, 
there is another important reason to better understand 
how the basal ganglia operate. In humans, basal ganglia 
dysfunction is associated with numerous debilitating 
conditions including Parkinson disease, Huntington 
disease, Tourette syndrome, schizophrenia, attention 
deficit disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and 
many addictions. Numerous studies have attempted 
to shed light on how basal ganglia dysfunction leads 
to the symptoms that characterize these disorders. This 
effort can only be helped if we have a better under-
standing of what a complicated system like the basal 
ganglia is trying to do when it is operating normally.
A Selection Mechanism Is Likely to Be Vulnerable 
to Several Potential Malfunctions
Thus far, we have considered the theoretical and 
empirical evidence supporting the idea that the looped 
circuitry of the basal ganglia acts as a generic selection 
mechanism within which reinforcement learning oper-
ates to maximize reward and minimize punishment. 
If action selection and reinforcement learning are the 
normal functions of the basal ganglia, it should be pos-
sible to interpret many of the human basal ganglia–
related disorders in terms of selection or reinforcement 
malfunctions.
Normal selection requires that the selected option 
is disinhibited at the level of basal ganglia output, 
while inhibition of nonselected or losing options is 
maintained or increased (Figure 38–9A). An obvious 
failure in such a system would be if none of the options 
were able to achieve sufficient disinhibition to reach a 
Figure 38–9  Potential disorders of behavior selection.
A. Normal selection within the basal ganglia is characterized 
by a reduction in inhibition of selected channels below a pro-
posed selection threshold (central channel) while maintaining 
or increasing inhibition of nonselected channels (left and right 
channels). Consequently, the disinhibited target structure is 
able to initiate the action it controls, while the nonselected tar-
gets are maintained under inhibitory control.
B. Insufficient reduction in tonic inhibition of all channels means 
no target structure would be sufficiently disinhibited. This cir-
cumstance could explain the akinesia in Parkinson disease.
C. A failure to adequately disinhibit the selected channel or sup-
press disinhibitory activity in competing channels would cause 
current selections to be vulnerable to interruption. This disorder 
could account for the inability to maintain a train of thought and 
easy distraction by nonattended events in schizophrenia and 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
D. One channel may become pathologically dominant either 
through abnormal disinhibition of the selected channel or 
excessive tonic inhibition of competing channels. This would 
make the relevant option easy to select and highly resistant to 
interruption. Hard selections may explain obsessive-compulsive 
disorder and addictive behaviors.
A  Normal selection
Inhibitory output activity
B  Selection failure
C  Soft selection
D  Hard selection
Output of competing channels
Selection
threshold


===== Page 9 =====
948    Part V / Movement
critical selection threshold (Figure 38–9B). However, a 
further important point when thinking about selection 
malfunctions is to appreciate that output inhibition 
and disinhibition are likely to be continuously variable 
rather than discrete on/off states. In that case, the dif-
ference between the disinhibited and inhibited channels 
would determine how “hard” or “soft” the selection is. 
When the difference is large (Figure 38–9D), competing 
options are likely to find the current selection is resist-
ant to interruption—a larger than normal input salience 
would be required to cause the system to switch selec-
tions. Conversely, when the difference is small (Figure 
38–9C), it would be comparatively easy for a competing 
option to initiate a selection switch.
Support for these ideas comes from behavioral 
observations showing that at the beginning of task 
learning there is frequently easy switching between 
strategies. However, as the task becomes well learned, 
the system becomes increasingly resistant to alterna-
tive strategies. Appreciation of the concepts of hard 
and soft selection could therefore play an important 
role when thinking about how a selection mechanism 
might become dysfunctional in the context of basal 
ganglia diseases.
Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a 
Failure to Select Sensorimotor Options
The cardinal symptoms of Parkinson disease are akine-
sia (difficulties in initiating movement), bradykinesia 
(initiated movements are slow), and rigidity (stiffness 
and resistance to passive movement). Tremor is often 
but not always present. The principal neurological 
deficit responsible for the motor symptoms of Parkin-
son disease is thought to be the progressive degenera-
tion of dopaminergic neurotransmission in the basal  
ganglia.
A consequence of this loss of dopamine is increased 
tonic and oscillatory activity in the recordings from 
basal ganglia output nuclei. Since the output of the 
basal ganglia is GABAergic and inhibitory, in Par-
kinson disease, targeted structures are receiving high 
and uneven levels of inhibitory input. This condition 
impairs the normal selective (disinhibitory) function 
of the basal ganglia; movements are difficult to select 
and, when possible, are slow to execute.
Parkinson disease is, however, more nuanced than 
this. Over much of this progressive condition, the loss of 
dopaminergic transmission differentially affects the sen-
sorimotor territories of the basal ganglia, leaving the lim-
bic and associative territories comparatively unaffected. 
As discussed in the section on goal-directed and habitual 
control, the sensorimotor territories of the basal ganglia 
play an essential role in selecting habitual actions. Per-
haps, therefore, it is not surprising that many of the 
motor features of Parkinson disease can be interpreted 
in terms of a loss of automatic habits. While patients 
can do things, they are trapped in the slower, serial, and 
voluntary mode of goal-directed control. In the future, 
it will be interesting to see if subtle losses of habitual 
control can be detected before clinical symptoms appear, 
thereby acting as an early marker for the condition.
Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional 
Imbalance Between the Direct and  
Indirect Pathways
Huntington disease is a genetically transmitted disor-
der, the initial symptoms of which are subtle changes 
in mood, personality, cognition, and physical skills. 
The abnormal movements are characterized by jerky, 
random, and uncontrollable movements called chorea. 
The disease is associated with neuronal degeneration. 
Damage in the early stage is most evident in the stri-
atal medium spiny neurons, but later spreads to other 
regions of the nervous system.
Observations that neuronal degeneration is evi-
dent in limbic, associative, and sensorimotor terri-
tories of the striatum would explain why the disease 
is characterized by disturbances of affect, cognition, 
and sensorimotor function. Also noteworthy is that 
the most vulnerable neurons are those in the striatum 
that project to the external globus pallidus (the indirect 
pathway) rather than the neurons that project directly 
to the basal ganglia output nuclei. At the level of the 
output nuclei, this disturbance would tip the balance 
in favor of the striatal projection responsible for disin-
hibition. Consequently, the symptoms of Huntington 
disease could reflect interference with expression of the 
selected affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor behav-
iors by competitors not being sufficiently suppressed.
Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General 
Failure to Suppress Nonselected Options
Schizophrenic psychosis is a condition in which there 
are also disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensori-
motor function. Typical symptoms include delusions 
(false beliefs not based in reality), hallucinations (hear-
ing or seeing things that do not exist), disorganized 
thinking (inferred from disorganized speech), and 
abnormal motor behavior (unpredictable agitation, 
stereotypy, and failure to concentrate on the matter in 
hand). The disease is progressive, and in later stages, 
negative symptoms characterized by flattened affect, 
social withdrawal, absence of thought, and reduced 
motor behavior become evident (Chapter 60).


