===== Page 1 =====
340    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
30 s
During retrieval of membrane
During exocytosis
B  Membrane capacitance during and after exocytosis of mast cell vesicles
C  Retinal bipolar neuron terminal
25 fF
10 s
20 ms
Depolarize Repolarize
Capacitance (pF)
Vm
ICa
2.2
2.1
2.0
[Ca]i (µM)
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
A  Mast cell before and after exocytosis of secretory vesicles
5 µm


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    341
Figure 15–8  (Opposite) Changes in capacitance reveal the 
time course of exocytosis and endocytosis.
A. Electron micrographs show a mast cell before (left) and after 
(right) exocytosis. Mast cells are secretory cells of the immune 
system that contain large dense-core vesicles filled with the 
transmitters histamine and serotonin. Exocytosis of the secre-
tory vesicles is normally triggered by the binding of antigen 
complexed to an immunoglobulin (IgE). Under experimental 
conditions, massive exocytosis can be triggered by the inclu-
sion of a nonhydrolyzable analog of guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP) in an intracellular recording electrode. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Lawson et al. 1977. Permission conveyed 
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
B. Stepwise increases in capacitance reflect the successive 
fusion of individual secretory vesicles with the mast cell mem-
brane. The step increases are unequal because of variability in 
the membrane area of the vesicles. After exocytosis, the mem-
brane added through fusion is retrieved through endocytosis. 
Endocytosis of individual vesicles gives rise to the stepwise 
decreases in membrane capacitance. In this way, the  
cell maintains a constant size. (Units are femtofarads, where 
1 fF = 0.1 μm2 of membrane area.) (Adapted, with permission, 
from Fernandez, Neher, and Gomperts 1984.)
C. The giant presynaptic terminals of bipolar neurons in the retina 
are more than 5 μm in diameter, permitting direct patch-clamp 
recordings of membrane capacitance and Ca2+ current. A brief 
depolarizing voltage-clamp step in membrane potential (Vm) elicits 
a large sustained Ca2+ current (ICa) and a rise in the cytoplasmic 
Ca2+ concentration, [Ca]i. This results in the fusion of several thou-
sand small synaptic vesicles with the cell membrane, leading to 
an increase in total membrane capacitance. The increments in 
capacitance caused by fusion of individual vesicles are too small 
to resolve. As the internal Ca2+ concentration falls back to its rest-
ing level upon repolarization, the extra membrane area is retrieved 
and capacitance returns to its baseline value. The increases in 
capacitance and Ca2+ concentration outlast the brief depolariza-
tion and Ca2+ current (note different time scales) because of the 
relative slowness of endocytosis and Ca2+ metabolism. (Micro-
graph reproduced, with permission, from Zenisek et al. 2004. 
Copyright © 2004 Society for Neuroscience.)
current, corresponding to the exocytosis of the contents 
of a single dense-core vesicle. In some instances, these 
large transient increases are preceded by smaller, longer-
lasting current signals that reflect leakage of transmitter 
through a fusion pore that flickers open and closed sev-
eral times prior to complete fusion (Figure 15–9B).
It is possible that transmitter can also be released 
solely through transient fusion pores that fleetingly 
connect vesicle lumen and extracellular space without 
full collapse of the vesicle membrane into the plasma 
membrane. Capacitance measurements for exocytosis 
of large dense-core vesicles in neuroendocrine cells 
show that the fusion pore can open and close rapidly 
and reversibly. The reversible opening and closing of 
a fusion pore represents a very rapid method of mem-
brane retrieval. The circumstances under which the 
small clear vesicles at fast synapses discharge trans-
mitter through a fusion pore, as opposed to full mem-
brane collapse, are uncertain.
The Synaptic Vesicle Cycle Involves Several Steps
When firing at high frequency, a typical presynaptic 
neuron is able to maintain a high rate of transmitter 
release. This can result in the exocytosis of a large 
number of vesicles over time, more than the number 
morphologically evident within the presynaptic termi-
nal. To prevent the supply of vesicles from being rap-
idly depleted during fast synaptic transmission, used 
vesicles are rapidly retrieved and recycled. Because 
nerve terminals are usually some distance from the 
cell body, replenishing vesicles by synthesis in the cell 
body and transport to the terminals would be too slow 
to be practical at fast synapses.
Synaptic vesicles are released and reused in a sim-
ple cycle. Vesicles fill with neurotransmitter and clus-
ter in the nerve terminal. They then dock at the active 
zone where they undergo a complex priming process 
that makes vesicles competent to respond to the Ca2+ 
signal that triggers the fusion process (Figure 15–10A). 
Numerous mechanisms exist for retrieving the synap-
tic vesicle membrane following exocytosis, each with a 
distinct time course (Figure 15–10B).
The first, most rapid mechanism involves the 
reversible opening and closing of the fusion pore, with-
out the full fusion of the vesicle membrane with the 
plasma membrane. In the kiss-and-stay pathway, the 
vesicle remains at the active zone after the fusion pore 
closes, ready for a second release event. In the kiss-and-
run pathway, the vesicle leaves the active zone after the 
fusion pore closes, but is competent for rapid rerelease. 
These pathways are thought to be used preferentially 
during stimulation at low frequencies.
Jorgensen and colleagues have described a second 
pathway of ultrafast clathrin-independent endocytosis 
that is 200 times faster than the classical clathrin-mediated 
pathway. Beginning just 50 ms after exocytosis, ultrafast 
endocytosis occurs just outside of the active zone.
Stimulation at higher frequencies recruits a third, 
slower recycling pathway that uses clathrin to retrieve 
the vesicle membrane after fusion with the plasma 
membrane. Clathrin forms a lattice-like structure that 
surrounds the membrane during endocytosis, giv-
ing rise to the appearance of a coat around the coated 
pits observed by Heuser and Reese. In this pathway, 
the retrieved vesicular membrane must be recycled 
through an endosomal compartment before the vesicles 
can be reused. Clathrin-mediated recycling requires up 


===== Page 3 =====
342    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
I
Full fusion
Foot
Fusion pore alone
Complete
fusion
Carbon
electrode
Serotonin
release
Cell 
surface
area
Reversible opening
of a fusion pore
Im
Patch
electrode
Carbon
electrode
Irelease
A2
A1
B  Transmitter release through fusion pore 
Cg
rp
Cm
A  Electrical events associated with opening of fusion pore 
0.1 pF
10 pA
Cm
I
2 ms
Pore diameter (nm)
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
5
Time (ms)
10
0
Figure 15–9  Reversible opening and closing of fusion pores.
A. A whole cell patch clamp is used to record membrane cur-
rent associated with the opening of a fusion pore. As a vesicle 
fuses with the plasma membrane, the capacitance of the 
vesicle (Cg) is initially connected to the capacitance of the rest 
of the cell membrane (Cm) through the high resistance of the 
fusion pore (rp). Because the membrane potential of the vesicle 
(lumenal side negative) is normally much more negative than 
the membrane potential of the cell, charge flows from the vesi-
cle to the cell membrane during fusion. This transient current (I) 
is associated with the increase in membrane capacitance (Cm).
    The magnitude of the conductance of the fusion pore (gp) can 
be calculated from the time constant of the transient current 
according to τ = Cgrp = Cg /gp. The pore diameter can be calcu-
lated from the pore conductance, assuming that the pore spans 
two lipid bilayers and is filled with a solution whose resistivity is 
equal to that of the cytoplasm. The plot on the right shows the 
pore has an initial conductance of approximately 200 pS, similar 
to the conductance of a gap-junction channel, corresponding 
to a pore diameter of approximately 2 nm. The pore diameter 
and conductance rapidly increase as the pore dilates to approxi-
mately 7 to 8 nm in 10 ms (filled circles). (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Monck and Fernandez 1992. Permission conveyed 
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc; and adapted, with per-
mission, from Spruce et al. 1990.)
B. Transmitter release is measured by amperometry. A cell is 
voltage-clamped with a whole cell patch electrode while an 
extracellular carbon fiber is pressed against the cell surface. 
A large voltage applied to the tip of the carbon electrode 
oxidizes certain amine transmitters (such as serotonin or nor-
epinephrine). This oxidation of one molecule generates one or 
more free electrons, which results in an electrical current that 
is proportional to the amount of transmitter release. The cur-
rent can be recorded through an amplifier (A2) connected to 
the carbon electrode. Membrane current and capacitance are 
recorded through the patch electrode amplifier (A1). Record-
ings of serotonin release (top traces) and capacitance meas-
urements (bottom traces) from mast cell secretory vesicles 
are shown at the right. The records indicate that serotonin 
may be released through the reversible opening and closing 
of the fusion pore prior to full fusion (traces on left). During 
these brief openings, small amounts of transmitter escape 
through the pore, resulting in a low-level signal (a foot) that 
precedes a large spike of transmitter release upon full fusion. 
During the foot, the cell surface area (proportional to mem-
brane capacitance) undergoes reversible step-like changes as 
the fusion pore opens and closes. Sometimes the reversible 
opening and closing of the fusion pore are not followed by 
full fusion (traces on right). (Adapted, with permission, from 
Neher 1993.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    343
2 Clathrin mediated
1 Reversible fusion pore 
3 Bulk retrieval
Clathrin
Early endosome
1 Neurotransmitter
 uptake
3 Docking
4 Priming
5 Fusion
2 Reserve
   pool
6 Endocytosis
ATP
Receptors
Postsynaptic cell
B  Mechanisms for recycling synaptic vesicles
Presynaptic cell
Ca2+
H+
8
A  Synaptic vesicle cycle
 Recycling
1 
7
Figure 15–10  The synaptic vesicle cycle.
A. Synaptic vesicles are filled with neurotransmitters by active 
transport (step 1) and join the vesicle cluster that may repre-
sent a reserve pool (step 2). Filled vesicles dock at the active 
zone (step 3) where they undergo an ATP-dependent priming 
reaction (step 4) that makes them competent for Ca2+-triggered 
fusion (step 5). After discharging their contents, synaptic vesi-
cles are recycled through one of several routes (see part B). In 
one common route, vesicle membrane is retrieved via clathrin-
mediated endocytosis (step 6) and recycled directly (step 7) or 
via endosomes (step 8).
B. Retrieval of vesicles after transmitter discharge is thought to 
occur via three mechanisms, each with distinct kinetics. 1. A 
reversible fusion pore is the most rapid mechanism for reusing 
vesicles. The vesicle membrane does not completely fuse with 
the plasma membrane, and transmitter is released through the 
fusion pore. Vesicle retrieval requires only the closure of the 
fusion pore and thus can occur rapidly, in tens to hundreds of 
milliseconds. This pathway may predominate at lower to nor-
mal release rates. The spent vesicle may either remain at the 
membrane (kiss-and-stay) or relocate from the membrane to 
the reserve pool of vesicles (kiss-and-run). 2. In the classical 
pathway, excess membrane is retrieved through endocytosis 
by means of clathrin-coated pits. These pits are found through-
out the axon terminal except at the active zones. This pathway 
may be important at normal to high rates of release. 3. In the 
bulk retrieval pathway, excess membrane reenters the termi-
nal by budding from uncoated pits. These uncoated cisternae 
are formed primarily at the active zones. This pathway may be 
used only after high rates of release and not during the usual 
functioning of the synapse. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Schweizer, Betz, and Augustine 1995; Südhof 2004.)
to a minute for completion and also appears to shift 
from the active zone to the membrane surrounding 
the active zone (see Figure 15–7). A fourth mechanism 
operates after prolonged high-frequency stimulation. 
Under these conditions, large membranous invagina-
tions into the presynaptic terminal are visible, which 
are thought to reflect membrane recycling through a 
process called bulk retrieval.
Exocytosis of Synaptic Vesicles Relies on a 
Highly Conserved Protein Machinery
Many key proteins of synaptic vesicles as well as their 
interacting partners in the plasma membrane have 
been isolated and purified. Proteomic analysis of iso-
lated synaptic vesicles has provided a census of the 
many types of proteins they contain (Figure 15–11). 


===== Page 5 =====
SNAP-25
N
C
A
B
Synaptotagmin
Synaptobrevin
(VAMP)
V-ATPase
V-GluT
Rab
C
N
Vesicle
membrane
Synaptobrevin
(VAMP)
Synaptotagmin
Munc13
RIM
RIM BP
GTP
Syntaxin
SNARE 
complex
Ca2+ channel
Neurotransmitter
transporter
Plasma
membrane
Rab3/27
C
N
Munc18
Cytoplasmic
side
Extracellular
side
Complexin
C2A
C2B
Figure 15–11  Molecular components of exocytosis.
A. Depiction of protein constituents of a glutamatergic synaptic 
vesicle (and their approximate copy numbers). Proteins are 
shown embedded in a synaptic vesicle, drawn to scale.  
Components include the vesicular ATPase (V-ATPase; 1–2 per 
vesicle), vesicular glutamate transporter (V-GluT; ~10 per  
vesicle), synaptobrevin/VAMP (~70 per vesicle), synaptotagmin 
(~15 per vesicle) and the small GTPases Rab3 and/or Rab27. 
Estimates are obtained as an average over many vesicles. (Repro-
duced from Takamori et al. 2006. Copyright © 2006 Elsevier.)
B. The molecular machinery mediating Ca2+-triggered vesicle 
fusion with the presynaptic cell membrane. This depiction of a 
portion of a docked synaptic vesicle and the presynaptic active 
zone illustrates the interactions of several key functional proteins 
of the neurotransmitter release machinery. Right: The dotted 
box shows the core fusion machine, which is comprised of the 
SNARE proteins synaptobrevin/VAMP, syntaxin-1, and SNAP-25, 
along with Munc18-1. The Ca2+ sensor synaptotagmin-1 functions 
in coordination with complexin (shown bound to the SNARE 
complex). Left: The active zone protein complex also contains 
RIM, Munc13, and RIM-BP and a Ca2+ channel in the presynaptic 
plasma membrane. RIM plays a central role in this complex, 
coordinating multiple functions of the active zone by binding 
to specific target proteins: (1) vesicular Rab proteins (Rab3 and 
Rab27) to mediate vesicle docking; (2) Munc13 to activate vesi-
cle priming; and (3) the Ca2+ channel, both directly and indirectly 
via RIM-BP, to tether Ca2+ channels within 100 nm of docked 
vesicles. The active zone protein complex puts into close proxim-
ity key elements that enable vesicles to dock, prime, and fuse 
rapidly in response to action potential–triggered Ca2+ entry near 
the docked vesicle. (Reproduced from Südhof 2013.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    345
Two of the most abundant proteins, synaptobrevin and 
synaptotagmin-1, are involved in vesicle fusion and 
are discussed later. Another key class of vesicle proteins 
are the neurotransmitter transporters (Chapter 16). 
These transmembrane proteins (exemplified by the 
glutamate transporter v-GluT) harness energy stored 
in the electrochemical gradient for protons to pump 
transmitter molecules against their concentration gra-
dient from the cytoplasm into the vesicle. The proton-
motive force is generated by a vesicular H+ pump, the 
V-ATPase, that pumps protons into the lumen of the 
vesicle from the cytoplasm, leading to an acidic vesicu-
lar pH of around 5.0.
Other synaptic vesicle proteins direct vesicles to 
their release sites, participate in the discharge of trans-
mitter by exocytosis, and mediate recycling of the 
vesicle membrane. The protein machinery involved in 
these three steps has been conserved throughout evo-
lution, in species ranging from worms to humans, and 
forms the basis for the regulated release of neurotrans-
mitter. We consider each of these steps in turn.
The Synapsins Are Important for Vesicle Restraint 
and Mobilization
The vesicles outside the active zone represent a reserve 
pool of transmitter. Paul Greengard discovered a family 
of proteins, synapsins, that are thought to be important 
regulators of the reserve pool of vesicles. Synapsins are 
peripheral membrane proteins that are bound to the 
cytoplasmic surface of synaptic vesicles. Synapsins con-
tain a conserved central ATPase domain that accounts 
for most of their structure, but whose function remains 
unknown. In addition, synapsin-1 binds actin.
The synapsins are substrates for both protein kinase 
A and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. 
When the nerve terminal is depolarized and Ca2+ enters, 
the synapsins become phosphorylated by the kinase 
and are thus released from the vesicles. Strikingly, 
stimulation of synapsin phosphorylation, genetic dele-
tion of synapsins or intracellular injection of a synapsin 
antibody leads to a decrease in the number of synaptic 
vesicles in the nerve terminal and a resulting decrease in 
the ability of a terminal to maintain a high rate of trans-
mitter release during repetitive stimulation.
SNARE Proteins Catalyze Fusion of Vesicles With 
the Plasma Membrane
Because a membrane bilayer is a stable structure, fusion 
of the synaptic vesicle and plasma membrane must 
overcome a large unfavorable activation energy. This 
is accomplished by a family of fusion proteins now 
referred to as SNAREs (soluble N-ethylmaleimide–
sensitive factor attachment receptors) (Figure 15–12).
SNAREs are universally involved in membrane 
fusion, from yeast to humans. They mediate both con-
stitutive membrane trafficking during the movement of 
proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi 
apparatus to the plasma membrane, as well as synap-
tic vesicle trafficking important for regulated exocyto-
sis. SNAREs have a conserved protein sequence, the 
SNARE motif, that is 60 residues long. They come in two 
forms. Vesicle SNAREs, or v-SNAREs (also referred to 
as R-SNAREs because they contain an important cen-
tral arginine residue), reside in the vesicle membranes. 
Target-membrane SNAREs, or t-SNAREs (also referred 
to as Q-SNAREs because they contain an important 
glutamine residue), are present in target membranes, 
such as the plasma membrane.
Each synaptic vesicle contains a v-SNARE called 
synaptobrevin (also called vesicle-associated membrane 
protein or VAMP). By contrast, the presynaptic active 
zone contains two types of t-SNARE proteins, syntaxin 
and SNAP-25. (Synaptobrevin and syntaxin have one 
SNARE motif; SNAP-25 has two.) The first clue that 
synaptobrevin, syntaxin, and SNAP-25 are all involved 
in fusion of the synaptic vesicle with the plasma mem-
brane came from the finding that all three proteins 
are substrates for botulinum and tetanus toxins, bac-
terial proteases that are potent inhibitors of transmit-
ter release. James Rothman then provided the crucial 
insight that these three proteins interact in a tight 
biochemical complex. In experiments using purified 
v-SNAREs and t-SNAREs in solution, four SNARE 
motifs bind tightly to each other to form an α-helical 
coiled-coil complex (Figure 15–12B).
How does formation of the SNARE complex drive 
synaptic vesicle fusion? During exocytosis, the SNARE 
motif of synaptobrevin on the synaptic vesicle forms a 
tight complex with the SNARE motifs of SNAP-25 and 
syntaxin on the plasma membrane (Figure 15–12B). 
The crystal structure of the SNARE complex suggests that 
this complex draws the membranes together. The ter-
nary complex of synaptobrevin, syntaxin, and SNAP-
25 is extraordinarily stable. The energy released in its 
assembly is thought to draw the negatively charged 
phospholipids of the vesicle and plasma membranes 
in close apposition, forcing them into a prefusion inter-
mediate state (Figure 15–12). Such an unstable state 
may start the formation of the fusion pore and generate 
the rapid opening and closing (flickering) of the fusion 
pore observed in electrophysiological measurements.
However, the SNAREs do not fully account for 
fusion of the synaptic vesicle and plasma membranes. 
Reconstitution experiments with purified proteins in 


===== Page 7 =====
346    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
lipid vesicles indicate that synaptobrevin, syntaxin, and 
SNAP-25 can catalyze fusion, but the in vitro reaction 
shows little regulation by Ca2+, and the reaction is much 
slower and less efficient than vesicle fusion in a real 
synapse. One important additional protein required for 
exocytosis of synaptic vesicles is Munc18 (mammalian 
unc18 homolog). Homologs of Munc18, referred to as SM 
proteins (sec1/Munc18-like proteins), are essential for all 
SNARE-mediated intracellular fusion reactions. Munc18 
binds to syntaxin before the SNARE complex assembles. 
Deletion of Munc18 prevents all synaptic fusion in neu-
rons. The core fusion machinery is thus composed of 
SNARE and SM proteins that are modulated by various 
accessory factors specific for particular fusion reactions. 
Finally, the synaptic SNARE complex also interacts 
with a small soluble protein called complexin, which 
suppresses the spontaneous release of transmitter but 
enhances Ca2+-dependent evoked release.
Synaptobrevin
1
2
3
SNAP-25
Syntaxin
Syntaxin
Synaptobrevin
1
Ca2+
Fusion
SNAP  
NSF
ATP
4
ADP + Pi
Zippering
SNAP  
NSF
A  SNARE cycle
B  SNARE complex
C
C
C
N
N
N
Core 
complex
SNAP-25
Habc domain
Munc18
Munc18
Figure 15–12  Formation and dissociation of the SNARE com-
plex drives fusion of the synaptic vesicle and plasma mem-
branes. (Adapted, with permission, from Rizo and Südhof 2002. 
Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
A. The SNARE cycle. 1. Synaptobrevin interacts with two plasma 
membrane proteins, the transmembrane protein syntaxin and the 
peripheral membrane protein SNAP-25. 2. The three proteins form 
a tight complex bringing the vesicle and presynaptic membranes in 
close apposition. Munc18 binds to the SNARE complex. 3. Calcium 
influx triggers rapid fusion of the vesicle and plasma membranes; 
the SNARE complex now resides in the plasma membrane. 4. 
Two proteins, NSF and SNAP (unrelated to SNAP-25), bind to the 
SNARE complex and cause it to dissociate in an ATP-dependent 
reaction.
B. The SNARE complex consists of a bundle of four α-helixes, one 
each from synaptobrevin and syntaxin and two from SNAP-25. 
The structure shown here is for the docked vesicle prior to fusion. 
(The actual structure of the transmembrane domains has not been 
determined, but the domains are drawn here along with the vesicle 
and plasma membranes for illustrative purposes.)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    347
After fusion, the SNARE complex must be disas-
sembled for efficient vesicle recycling to occur. Roth-
man discovered that a cytoplasmic ATPase called NSF 
(N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein) binds to 
SNARE complexes via an adaptor protein called SNAP 
(soluble NSF-attachment protein, not related to the 
SNARE protein SNAP-25). NSF and SNAP use the energy 
of ATP hydrolysis to dissociate SNARE complexes, thereby 
regenerating free SNARE (Figure 15–12A). SNAREs and 
NSF also participate in the cycling of postsynaptic AMPA-
type glutamate receptors in dendritic spines.
Calcium Binding to Synaptotagmin Triggers 
Transmitter Release
Because fusion of synaptic vesicles with the plasma 
membrane must occur within a fraction of a millisec-
ond, it is thought that most proteins responsible for 
fusion are assembled prior to Ca2+ influx. According to 
this view, once Ca2+ enters the presynaptic terminal, it 
binds a Ca2+ sensor on the vesicle, triggering immedi-
ate fusion of the membranes.
Members of a family of closely related proteins, 
the synaptotagmins, have been identified as the major 
Ca2+ sensors that trigger fusion of synaptic vesicles. 
Synaptotagmins are membrane proteins with a single 
N-terminal transmembrane region that anchors them 
to the synaptic vesicle (Figure 15–13A,B). The cytoplas-
mic region of each synaptotagmin protein is largely 
composed of two domains, the C2 domains, which are 
a common protein motif homologous to the Ca2+ and 
phospholipid-binding C2 domain of protein kinase C. 
The finding that the C2 domains bind not only Ca2+ but 
also phospholipids is consistent with their importance 
in Ca2+-dependent exocytosis. Synaptotagmin-1, -2, 
and -9 have been identified as Ca2+ sensors for fast and 
synchronous vesicle fusion. Each exhibits distinct Ca2+ 
binding affinities and kinetics, endowing different syn-
apses with distinct release properties on the basis of the 
particular synaptotagmin isoform that is expressed. In 
contrast, synaptotagmin-7 mediates a slower form of 
Ca2+-triggered exocytosis that is important for synap-
tic transmission during prolonged periods of activity 
periods of repeated firing of action potential. All of 
these synaptotagmins also function as Ca2+ sensors in 
other forms of exocytosis, such as exocytosis in endo-
crine cells and the insertion of AMPA-type glutamate 
receptors into the postsynaptic cell membrane from 
a pool of intracellular vesicles during NMDA-receptor-
dependent long-term potentiation.
Studies with mutant mice in which synaptotagmin-1 
is deleted or in which its Ca2+ affinity is altered through 
genetic engineering provide important evidence that 
synaptotagmin is the physiological Ca2+ sensor. When 
the affinity of synaptotagmin for Ca2+ is decreased 
two-fold, the Ca2+ required for transmitter release is 
changed by the same amount. When synaptotagmin-1 
is deleted in mice, flies, or worms, an action potential 
is no longer able to trigger fast synchronous release. 
However, Ca2+ is still capable of stimulating a slower form 
of transmitter release referred to as asynchronous release 
(Figure 15–13A), mediated by synaptotagmin-7. Thus, 
nearly all Ca2+-triggered neurotransmitter release 
depends on the synaptotagmins.
How does Ca2+ binding to synaptotagmin trigger 
vesicle fusion? The two C2 domains bind a total of 
five Ca2+ ions, the same minimal number of Ca2+ ions 
required to trigger release of a quantum of transmit-
ter (Figure 15–13B). However, as multiple synaptotag-
mins may be engaged to trigger release, more than five 
bound Ca2+ ions may be distributed among the multi-
ple synaptotagmin molecules on a single vesicle.
The binding of the Ca2+ ions to synaptotagmin 
is thought to act as a switch, promoting the interac-
tion of the C2 domains with phospholipids. The C2 
domains of synaptotagmin also interact with SNARE 
proteins and complexin. Crystal structures of synap-
totagmin reveal a conserved primary interface with 
the associated SNARE complex. In addition, a second 
molecule of synaptotagmin forms a tripartite interac-
tion with the same SNARE complex and complexin. 
Brunger and colleagues found that both the primary 
SNARE complex/synaptotagmin interface and the tri-
partite SNARE complex/synaptotagmin/complexin 
interface are essential for fast Ca2+-triggered fusion. 
These findings have led to the hypothesis that: (1) 
at rest, synaptotagmin of primed vesicles exists in a 
complex with partially pre-zippered SNARE proteins 
and complexin; (2) upon action potential–triggered 
Ca2+ influx, Ca2+ binds to synaptotagmin. This trig-
gers an interaction between synaptotagmin and the 
plasma membrane that causes the complex to rotate 
en bloc, which induces complexin to partly dissociate 
from the SNARE complex; (3) this rotation causes a 
dimpling of the plasma membrane, rearrangement of 
its cytoplasm-facing lipids, and ultimately the fusion 
of plasma and vesicle membranes (Figure 15–13C). In 
this way, the energy of the favorable interaction of syn-
aptotagmin, Ca2+, and the membrane can be harnessed 
to both relieve the complexin-mediated lock on fusion 
and promote the energetically unfavorable merging of 
a vesicle membrane with the plasma membrane.
The Fusion Machinery Is Embedded in a Conserved 
Protein Scaffold at the Active Zone
As we have seen, a defining feature of fast synaptic 
transmission is that neurotransmitters are released by 


===== Page 9 =====
348    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Synaptotagmin
Snap-25
Synaptobrevin
Synaptobrevin
Synaptotagmin
Syntaxin
Syntaxin
Complexin
N
C
C2A
C2B
C2A
C2B
Synaptic 
vesicle
membrane
A
B1  Calcium-bound synaptotagmin
B2  Synaptotagmin/SNARE complex
C
Ca2+
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic
side
1
2
Wild-type
Locked
Unlocking and triggering
Fusion pore formation
Mutant lacking
synaptotagmin
50 ms
160 pA
50 ms
40 pA
Complexin
VM
PM
VM
PM
Ca2+
C2A
C2B
C2A
Ca2+
SNAP-25


