===== Page 1 =====
1116    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A  Induction of segmental identity
B  Establishment of mutually exclusive expression
C  Cell segregation and border sharpening
D
Hoxb1
Krox20
Dual expressing cell;
intermediate identity
Ephrin
B3
Eph
A4
r4 identity
r3 identity
Retinoic
acid
Anterior
Posterior
Figure 45–7  (Left) Repressive interactions divide the hindbrain 
into rhombomeres.  The sharp border between hindbrain rhom-
bomeres 3 and 4 forms in several steps. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Addison and Wilkinson 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc.)
A. A gradient of retinoic acid upregulates expression of hoxb1 in 
anterior cells (blue) and krox20 in posterior cells (yellow), with 
some cells at the prospective border expressing both genes 
(green).
B. Hoxb1 expression and Krox20 expression become mutually exclu-
sive, thus endowing each cell with a unique molecular identity.
C. Cells trapped in the wrong domain migrate to sharpen the border.
D. Inhibitory interactions underlying border formation. Hoxb1 and 
Krox20 repress each other’s expression in individual cells, so a mod-
est imbalance in level leads to exclusive expression of one factor. 
Krox20 then upregulates EphA4 in r3 cells, whereas ephrinB3 is 
upregulated in r4 cells. EphA4 and ephrinB3 repel each other, driving 
migration of isolated cells and sharpening the segment border.
the strategies and principles that establish dorsoven-
tral pattern. We focus initially on the mechanisms of 
dorsoventral patterning at caudal levels of the neural 
tube that give rise to the spinal cord and then describe 
how similar strategies are used to pattern the forebrain.
Neurons in the spinal cord serve two major func-
tions. They relay cutaneous sensory input to higher 
centers in the brain, and they transform sensory input 
into motor output. The neuronal circuits that medi-
ate these functions are segregated anatomically. Cir-
cuits involved in the processing of cutaneous sensory 
information are located in the dorsal half of the spinal 
cord, whereas those involved in the control of motor 
output are mainly located in the ventral half of the spi-
nal cord.
The neurons that form these circuits are generated 
at different positions along the dorsoventral axis of the 
spinal cord in a patterning process that begins with the 
establishment of distinct progenitor cell types. Motor 
neurons are generated close to the ventral midline, and 
most of the interneuron classes that control motor out-
put are generated just dorsal to the position at which 
motor neurons appear (Figure 45–8). The dorsal half of 
the neural tube generates projection neurons and local 
circuit interneurons that process incoming sensory 
information.
How are the position and identity of spinal neu-
rons established? The dorsoventral patterning of the 
neural tube is initiated by signals from mesodermal 
and ectodermal cells that lie close to the ventral and 
dorsal poles of the neural tube and is perpetuated by 
signals from two midline neural organizing centers. 
Ventral patterning signals are initially provided by the 
notochord, a mesodermal cell group that lies immedi-
ately under the ventral neural tube (Figure 45–1). This 
signaling activity is transferred to the floor plate, a 
specialized glial cell group that sits at the ventral mid-
line of the neural tube itself. Similarly, dorsal signals 
are provided initially by cells of the epidermal ecto-
derm that span the dorsal midline of the neural tube, 
and subsequently by the roof plate, a glial cell group 
embedded at the dorsal midline of the neural tube 
(Figure 45–8).
Thus, neural patterning is initiated through a 
process of homogenetic induction, in which like begets 
like: Notochord signals induce the floor plate, which 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1117
Figure 45–8  Distinct precursor popu-
lations form along the dorsoventral 
axis of the developing spinal cord.
A. The neural plate is generated from 
ectodermal cells that overlie the noto-
chord (N) and the future somites (S).  
It is flanked by the epidermal  
ectoderm. (See also Figure 45–1)
B. The neural plate folds dorsally at its 
midline to form the neural fold. Floor 
plate cells (blue) differentiate at the  
ventral midline of the neural tube.
C. The neural tube forms by fusion of 
the dorsal tips of the neural folds. Roof 
plate cells form at the dorsal midline 
of the neural tube. Neural crest cells 
migrate from the neural tube into and 
past the somites before populating the 
sensory and sympathetic ganglia.
D. Distinct classes of neurons are gener-
ated at different dorsoventral positions 
in the embryonic spinal cord. Ventral 
interneurons (V0–V3) and motor neu-
rons (MN) differentiate from progenitor 
domains in the ventral spinal cord. Six 
classes of early dorsal interneurons 
(D1–D6) develop in the dorsal half of  
the spinal cord. (Adapted from  
Goulding et al. 2002.)
Roof plate
D1
D2
D3
D4
D5
D6
V0
V1
V2
MN
V3
Notochord
Floor plate
A  Neural plate
B  Neural fold
C  Neural tube
D  Embryonic spinal cord
S
S
Ectoderm
N
S
S
S
S
N
Roof plate
Floor plate
Neural crest
N
induces ventral neurons, and signals from ectoderm 
induce the roof plate, which induces dorsal neurons. 
This strategy ensures that inductive signals are posi-
tioned appropriately to control neural cell fate and 
pattern over a prolonged period of development, as 
tissues grow and cells move.
The Ventral Neural Tube Is Patterned by Sonic 
Hedgehog Protein Secreted from the Notochord and 
Floor Plate
Within the ventral half of the neural tube, the identity 
and position of developing motor neurons and local 
interneurons depend on the inductive activity of the 
Shh protein, which is secreted by the notochord and 
subsequently by the floor plate. Shh is a member of 
a family of secreted proteins related to the Drosophila 
hedgehog protein, which had been discovered ear-
lier and shown to control many aspects of embryonic 
development.
Shh signaling is necessary for the induction of 
each of the neuronal classes generated in the ventral 
half of the spinal cord. How can a single inductive 
signal specify the fate of at least half a dozen neuronal 
classes? The answer lies in the ability of Shh to act as a 
morphogen—a signal that can direct different cell fates 
at different concentration thresholds. The secretion of 
Shh from the notochord and floor plate establishes a 
ventral-to-dorsal gradient of Shh protein activity in the 
ventral neural tube, such that progenitor cells occupy-
ing different dorsoventral positions within the neural 
epithelium are exposed to small (two- to three-fold) 
differences in ambient Shh signaling activity. Different 
levels of Shh signaling activity direct progenitor cells 
in different ventral domains to differentiation as motor 
neurons and interneurons (Figure 45–9A).
These findings raise two additional questions. 
How is the spread of Shh protein within the ventral 
neural epithelium controlled in such a precise manner? 
And how are small differences in Shh signaling activ-
ity converted into all-or-none decisions about the iden-
tity of progenitor cells in the ventral neural tube?
Active Shh protein is synthesized from a larger 
precursor protein, cleaved through an unusual auto-
catalytic process that involves a serine protease-like 
activity resident within the carboxy terminus of the 
precursor protein. Cleavage generates an amino 


===== Page 3 =====
1118    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 45–9  A sonic hedgehog signaling gradient controls 
neuronal identity and pattern in the ventral spinal cord.
A. A ventral-to-dorsal (V–D) gradient of sonic hedgehog (Shh) 
signaling establishes dorsoventral domains of homeodomain 
protein expression in progenitor cells within the ventral half 
of the neural tube. At each concentration, a different homeo-
domain transcription factor (Pax7, Dbx1, Dbx2, Irx3, or Pax6) 
is repressed, with Pax7 the most sensitive and Pax6 the least 
sensitive to repression. Other homeodomain transcription fac-
tors (Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2) are induced at different Shh levels. 
The homeodomain proteins that abut a common progenitor 
domain boundary have similar Shh concentration thresholds 
for repression and activation. Graded Shh signaling generates a 
corresponding gradient of Gli transcription factor activity  
(not shown).
B. Cross-repression between transcription factors induced 
or repressed by Shh/Gli signaling specifies different neuronal 
classes. For example, Pax6 and Nkx2.2, and Dbx2 and Nkx6.1, 
act in a cell-autonomous manner to repress each other’s expres-
sion (inset), conferring cell identity to progenitor cells in an unam-
biguous manner. The sequential influence of graded Shh and 
Gli signaling, together with homeodomain transcriptional cross-
repression, establishes five cardinal progenitor domains.
C. The postmitotic neurons that emerge from these domains 
give rise to the five major classes of ventral neurons: the 
interneurons V0–V3 and motor neurons (MN).
D
V
Pax7
Dbx1
Dbx2
Irx 3
Pax6
Pax6
Dbx2
p0
V0
p1
V1
p2
V2
pMN
MN
p3
V3
Nkx2.2 Nkx6.1
Nkx2.2
Nkx6.1
Shh
Neuronal
fate
A
B
C
MN
V2
V1
V0
Floor
plate
Pax6Nkx2.2
Pax6Nkx2.2
Pax6Nkx2.2
V3
terminal protein fragment that possesses all of the sign-
aling activity of Shh. During cleavage, the active amino 
terminal fragment is modified covalently by the addi-
tion of a cholesterol molecule. Following Shh secretion, 
this lipophilic anchor tethers most of the protein to the 
surface of notochord and floor plate cells. Neverthe-
less, a small fraction of the anchored protein is released 
from the cell surface and transferred from cell to cell 
within the ventral neural epithelium. In reality, the 
molecular machinery that ensures the formation of a 
long-distance gradient of extracellular Shh protein is 
more complex, involving specialized transmembrane 
proteins that promote the release of Shh from the floor 
plate, as well as proteins that regulate Shh protein 
transfer between cells.
How does the gradient of Shh protein within the 
ventral neural tube direct progenitor cells along dif-
ferent pathways of differentiation? Shh signaling is 
initiated by its interaction with a transmembrane recep-
tor complex that consists of a ligand-binding subunit 
called patched and a signal-transducing subunit called 
smoothened (named for the corresponding Drosophila 
genes). The binding of Shh to patched relieves its inhi-
bition of smoothened and so activates an intracellular 
signaling pathway that involves several protein kinase 
enzymes, transport proteins, and most important, the 
Gli proteins, a class of zinc finger transcription factors.
In the absence of Shh, the Gli proteins are proteo-
lytically processed into transcriptional repressors that 
prevent the activation of Shh target genes. Activation 
of the Shh signaling pathway inhibits this proteolytic 
processing, with the result that transcriptional acti-
vator forms of Gli predominate, thus directing the 
expression of Shh target genes. In this way, an extra-
cellular gradient of Shh protein is converted into a 
nuclear gradient of Gli activator proteins. The ratio of 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1119
Gli repressor and activator proteins at different dors-
oventral positions determines which target genes are 
activated.
What genes are activated by Shh-Gli signaling, 
and how do they participate in the specification of ven-
tral neuronal subtypes? The major Gli targets are genes 
encoding yet more transcription factors. One major 
class of Gli targets encodes homeodomain proteins, 
transcription factors that contain a conserved DNA-
binding motif termed a homeobox. A second major class 
of target genes encodes proteins with a basic helix-
loop-helix DNA-binding motif. Some homeodomain 
and basic helix-loop-helix proteins are repressed and 
others activated by Shh signaling, each at a particular 
concentration threshold. In this way, cells in the ventral 
neural tube are allocated to one of five cardinal pro-
genitor domains, each marked by its own transcription 
factor profile (Figure 45–9B,C).
The transcription factors that define adjacent 
progenitor domains repress each other’s expression. 
Thus, although a cell may initially express several 
transcription factors that could direct the cell along 
different pathways of differentiation, a minor imbal-
ance in the starting concentration of the two factors is 
rapidly amplified through repression, and only one of 
these proteins is stably expressed. This winner-take-
all strategy of transcriptional repression sharpens the 
boundaries of progenitor domains and ensures that 
an initial gradient of Shh and Gli activity will resolve 
itself into clear distinctions in transcription factor 
profile. The transcription factors that specify a ven-
tral progenitor domain then direct the expression of 
downstream genes that commit progenitor cells to a 
particular postmitotic neuronal identity. Thus, stud-
ies of Shh signaling have not only revealed the logic 
of ventral neuronal patterning but also demonstrated 
that the fate of a neuron is determined in part by the 
actions of transcriptional repressors rather than acti-
vators. This principle operates in many other tissues 
and organisms.
Although originally studied in the context of neural 
development, defects in Shh signaling have now been 
implicated in a wide variety of human diseases. Muta-
tions in human Shh pathway genes result in defects in 
the development of ventral forebrain structures (holo-
prosencephaly), as well as neurological defects such as 
spina bifida, limb deformities, and certain cancers.
The Dorsal Neural Tube Is Patterned by Bone 
Morphogenetic Proteins
A signaling strategy based on graded morphogen lev-
els activating sets of transcriptional programs has also 
been found to determine the patterning of cell types 
in the dorsal spinal cord. The differentiation of roof 
plate cells at the dorsal midline of the neural tube is 
triggered by BMP signals from epidermal cells that ini-
tially border the neural plate and later flank the dorsal 
neural tube.
After the neural tube has closed, roof plate cells 
themselves begin to express BMP as well as Wnt pro-
teins. Wnt proteins promote the proliferation of pro-
genitor cells in the dorsal neural tube. BMP proteins 
induce the differentiation of neural crest cells at the 
very dorsal margin of the neural tube and later induce 
generation of diverse populations of sensory relay 
neurons that settle in the dorsal spinal cord.
Dorsoventral Patterning Mechanisms Are 
Conserved Along the Rostrocaudal Extent  
of the Neural Tube
The strategies used to establish dorsoventral pattern 
in the spinal cord also control cell identity and pattern 
along the dorsoventral axis of the hindbrain and mid-
brain, as well as throughout much of the forebrain.
In the mesencephalic region of the neural tube, Shh 
signals from the floor plate act in concert with the ros-
trocaudal patterning signals discussed earlier to spec-
ify dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and 
ventral tegmental area as well as serotonergic neurons 
of the raphe nuclei (see Figure 45–5C). In the forebrain, 
Shh signals from the ventral midline and BMP signals 
from the dorsal midline act in combination to estab-
lish different regional domains. Shh signaling from the 
ventral midline sets up early progenitor domains that 
later produce neurons of the basal ganglia and some 
cortical interneurons, whereas BMP signaling from the 
dorsal midline is involved in establishing early neocor-
tical character.
Local Signals Determine Functional  
Subclasses of Neurons
To this point, we have seen how a uniform group of 
neural precursor cells, the neural plate, is progres-
sively partitioned into discrete rostrocaudal and dor-
soventral domains within the neural tube, largely 
by morphogen-dependent differential expression of 
different sets of transcriptional regulators. The next 
question is how cells within these domains go on to 
generate the extraordinary diversity of neuronal types 
that characterize the vertebrate central nervous system. 
We address that question by focusing on development 
of the motor neuron.


===== Page 5 =====
1120    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Motor neurons can be distinguished from all other 
classes of neurons in the central nervous system by the 
simple fact that they have axons that extend into the 
periphery. Viewed in this light, motor neurons represent 
a coherent and distinct class. But motor neuron types 
can be distinguished by their position within the central 
nervous system as well as by the target cells they inner-
vate. The primary job of most motor neurons is to inner-
vate skeletal muscles, of which there are approximately 
600 in a typical mammal. From this, it follows that there 
must be an equal number of motor neuron types.
In this section, we discuss the developmental 
mechanisms that direct the differentiation of these 
different functional subclasses. The details of motor 
neuron development are also important for under-
standing the basis of neurological disorders that affect 
these neurons, including spinal muscular atrophy and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig disease). In 
both diseases, some motor neuron types are highly vul-
nerable whereas others are relatively resilient. Similar 
principles drive the diversification of other neuronal 
classes into distinct types.
Rostrocaudal Position Is a Major Determinant  
of Motor Neuron Subtype
Motor neurons are generated along much of the ros-
trocaudal axis of the neural tube, from the midbrain to 
the spinal cord. Distinct motor neuron types develop 
at each rostrocaudal level (Figure 45–10), suggesting 
that one goal of the patterning signals that establish 
rostrocaudal positional identity within the neural tube 
is to make motor neurons different.
One major class of genes involved in specifying 
motor neuron types is the Hox gene family. Their name 
reflects the fact that they were the first transcription fac-
tors found that contain a homeodomain, a DNA binding 
domain now known to be present in many transcrip-
tion factors that regulate developmental processes in 
organisms as diverse as yeast, plants, and mammals. 
For example, the Otx and Gbx genes discussed above 
contain homeodomains. The mammalian Hox gene fam-
ily is especially large, containing 39 genes organized in 
four chromosomal clusters. These genes derive from an 
ancestral Hox complex that also gave rise to the HOM-C 
gene complex in Drosophila, where they were initially 
discovered and analyzed (Figure 45–11).
Members of the vertebrate Hox gene family are 
expressed in overlapping domains along the rostro-
caudal axis of the developing midbrain, hindbrain, and 
spinal cord. As in Drosophila, the position of an individ-
ual Hox gene within its cluster predicts its rostrocaudal 
domain of expression within the neural tube. In most 
but not all cases, Hox genes located at more 3′ positions 
within the chromosomal cluster are expressed in more 
rostral domains, within the midbrain and hindbrain, 
whereas genes at more 5′ positions are expressed in 
progressively more caudal positions within the spinal 
cord (Figures 45–10 and 45–11). This spatial array of 
Hox gene expression determines many aspects of neu-
ronal diversity.
Genetic studies, mostly in mice, have revealed 
how Hox genes control motor neuron identity in the 
hindbrain and spinal cord. We saw above that Hox 
genes contribute to formation of the rhombomeres, the 
fundamental cellular building blocks of the hindbrain. 
Later, the same genes help to determine the identity 
of motor neurons within rhombomeres. For example, 
Hoxb1 is expressed at high levels in rhombomere 4, the 
domain that gives rise to facial motor neurons, but is 
absent from rhombomere 2, the domain that gives rise 
to trigeminal motor neurons (Figure 45–10).
In the mouse, mutations that eliminate the activ-
ity of Hoxb1 change the fate of cells in rhombomere 4; 
there is a switch in the identity and connectivity of the 
motor neurons that emerge from this domain. In the 
absence of Hoxb1 function, cells in rhombomere 4 gen-
erate motor neurons that innervate trigeminal rather 
than facial targets, that is, the motor neuron subtype 
normally generated within rhombomere 2 (Figure 
45–12). Many additional studies have confirmed the gen-
eral principle that motor neuron identity in the hind-
brain is controlled by the spatial distribution of Hox 
gene expression.
The control of spinal motor neuron identity is 
more complicated. Spinal motor neurons are clustered 
within longitudinal columns that occupy discrete 
segmental positions, in register with their peripheral 
targets. Motor neurons that innervate forelimb and 
hindlimb muscles are found in the lateral motor col-
umns at cervical and lumbar levels of the spinal cord, 
respectively. In contrast, motor neurons that innervate 
sympathetic neuronal targets are found within the 
preganglionic motor column at thoracic levels of the 
spinal cord. Within the lateral motor columns, motor 
neurons that innervate a single limb muscle are clus-
tered together into discrete groups, termed motor pools. 
Because each limb in higher vertebrates contains more 
than 50 different muscle groups, a corresponding num-
ber of motor pools are required.
The identity of motor neurons in the spinal cord 
is controlled by the coordinate activity of Hox genes 
found at more 5′ positions within the chromosomal 
Hox clusters. For example, the spatial domains of 
expression and activity of Hox6 and Hox9 proteins 
establish the identities of motor neurons in the 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1121
Figure 45–10  The anteroposterior profile of 
Hox gene expression determines the subtype 
of motor neurons in the hindbrain and spinal 
cord. Different Hox proteins are expressed in 
discrete but partially overlapping rostrocaudal 
domains of the hindbrain and spinal cord. The 
position of Hox genes on the four mammalian 
chromosomal clusters roughly corresponds to 
their domain of expression along the anteroposte-
rior axis of the neural tube.
   At hindbrain levels, motor neurons sending 
axons into cranial nerves V (trigeminal), VII (facial), 
IX (glossopharyngeal), and X (vagus) are depicted. 
These cranial motor nerves project to peripheral 
targets in the branchial arches b1–b3. The hind-
brain rhombomeres (r1–r8) and Hox profiles are 
shown on the left.
   At spinal levels, motor neurons that send axons 
to the forelimb and hind limb are contained within 
the lateral motor columns (LMC), located at bra-
chial and lumbar levels of the spinal cord, respec-
tively. Preganglionic autonomic motor neurons 
(PGC) destined to innervate sympathetic ganglion 
targets are generated at thoracic levels. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Kiecker and Lumsden 
2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
Anterior
Forelimb
Sympathetic
neurons
Hind limb
b1
Face, cornea, 
mouth
N. V
N. VII
N. IX
N. X
b2
b3
Posterior
Hoxa2
Hoxb2
Hoxb1
Hoxa1
Hoxb3
Hoxa3
Hoxb4
Hoxa4
Hoxa6
Hoxc6
Hoxa9
Hoxc9
Hoxa10
Hoxd10
Hoxc4
Face
Parotid gland
Soft palate,
pharynx
LMC
PGC
LMC
brachial lateral motor column and the preganglionic 
motor column. Hox6 proteins specify brachial lat-
eral motor column identity, whereas Hox9 proteins 
specify preganglionic motor column identity. Motor 
neurons at the boundary of the forelimb and thoracic 
regions acquire an unambiguous columnar identity 
because the Hox6 and Hox9 proteins are mutually 
repressive (Figure 45–13A), similar to the transcrip-
tional cross-repression that occurs in the dorsoventral 
patterning of the spinal cord.
Local Signals and Transcriptional Circuits Further 
Diversify Motor Neuron Subtypes
How do motor neurons within the lateral motor col-
umns develop more refined identities, directing their 
axons to specific limb muscles? Once again, Hox genes 
control this stage of motor neuron diversification. We 
illustrate this function of Hox proteins by considering 
the pathway that generates the distinct divisional and 
pool identities of neurons within the brachial lateral 


===== Page 7 =====
1122    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 45–11  The clustered organization of Hox genes is 
conserved from flies to vertebrates.  The diagram shows the 
chromosomal arrangement of Hox genes in the mouse and 
HOM-C genes in Drosophila. Insects have one ancestral Hox 
gene cluster, whereas higher vertebrates such as birds and 
mammals have four duplicate Hox gene clusters. The position 
of a given Hox or HOM-C gene on the chromosomal cluster is 
typically related to the position on the anteroposterior body axis 
where the gene is expressed. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Wolpert et al. 1998. Permission conveyed through Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc.)
A
P
lab
3′
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7
a9
a10
a11
a13
3′
Drosophila
Mouse
5′
5′
pb
(Zen)
Antennapedia complex
Hoxa, chromosome 6
c4
c5
c6
c9
c10
c11
c12
c13
Hoxc, chromosome 15
b1
b2
b3
b4
b5
b6
b7
b8
c8
d3
d4
d9
d10
d11
d12
d13
Hoxd, chromosome 2 
d8
b9
Hoxb, chromosome 11
Bithorax complex
Dfd
Scr
Antp
Ubx
Abd-A
Abd-B
d1
A
P
motor column that innervate the muscles of the fore-
limb (Figure 45–13A).
Repressive interactions between Hox proteins 
expressed by the neurons in different lateral motor 
columns ensure that neurons that populate different 
motor pools express distinct profiles of Hox protein 
expression. These Hox profiles direct the expression 
of downstream transcription factors as well as the 
axonal surface receptors that enable motor axons to 
respond to local cues within the limb that guide them 
to specific muscle targets. For example, the expression 
of Hox6 proteins activates a retinoic acid signaling 
pathway that directs the expression of two homeodo-
main transcription factors, Is11 and Lhx1. These fac-
tors in turn assign motor neurons to two divisional 
classes and determine the pattern of expression of the 
ephrin receptors that guide motor axons in the limb. 
The axons of motor neurons in these two divisions 
project into the ventral and dorsal halves of the limb 
mesenchyme under the control of ephrin signaling 
(Figure 45–14).
Not all motor neuron columns are determined by 
Hox protein activity, however. The median motor col-
umn is generated at all segmental levels of the spinal 
cord in register with axial muscles. Development of 
median motor column cells is controlled by Wnt4/5 
signals secreted from the ventral midline of the spi-
nal cord and by the expression of the homeodomain 
proteins Lhx3 and Lhx4, which render neurons in this 
column immune to the segmental patterning actions of 
Hox proteins.
Thus, in both the hindbrain and spinal cord, the 
point-to-point connectivity of motor neurons with 
specific muscles emerges through tightly orchestrated 
programs of homeodomain protein expression and 
activity. In vertebrates, these genes have evolved to 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1123
Figure 45–12  The mouse Hoxb1 gene 
controls the identity and projection 
of hindbrain motor neurons. Hoxb1 
is normally expressed at highest levels 
by cells in rhombomere r4. In wild-type 
mice, trigeminal motor neurons are gen-
erated in rhombomere r2, and their cell 
bodies migrate laterally before projecting 
their axons out of the hindbrain at the 
r2 level. In contrast, the cell bodies of 
facial motor neurons generated in rhom-
bomere r4 migrate caudally yet project 
their axons out of the hindbrain at the r4 
level. In mouse Hoxb1 mutants, motor 
neurons generated in rhombomere r4 
migrate laterally instead of caudally, 
acquiring the features of r2 level trigemi-
nal motor neurons. Ellipses indicate 
axonal exit points. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Struder et al. 1996. Copyright 
© 1996 Springer Nature.)
r2
r2
r4
Trigeminal
motor
neurons
Trigeminal-
like motor
neurons
Wild type
r2
r4
Facial
motor
neurons
Trigeminal
motor
neurons
Hoxb1 mutant
direct neuron subtype and connectivity as well the 
basic body plan.
The Developing Forebrain Is Patterned by 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Influences
Neurons in the mammalian forebrain form circuits 
that mediate emotional behaviors, perception, and 
cognition and participate in the storage and retrieval 
of memories. Much like the hindbrain, the embryonic 
forebrain is initially divided along its rostrocaudal axis 
into transversely organized domains called prosomeres. 
Prosomeres 1 to 3 develop into the caudal part of the 
diencephalon, from which the thalamus emerges. 
Prosomeres 4 to 6 give rise to the rostral diencepha-
lon and telencephalon. The ventral region of the rostral 
diencephalon gives rise to the hypothalamus and basal 
ganglia, whereas the telencephalon gives rise to the 
neocortex and hippocampus.
Inductive Signals and Transcription Factor 
Gradients Establish Regional Differentiation
Finally, we turn to the patterning of the neocortex 
itself, asking whether the developmental mechanisms 
and principles that govern the development of other 
regions of the central nervous system also control the 
emergence of cortical areas specialized for particular 
sensory, motor, and cognitive functions.
From the time of Brodmann’s classical anatomi-
cal description at the beginning of the 20th century, 
we have known that the cerebral cortex is subdivided 
into many different areas. Recent studies of cortical 
development have begun to provide insight into the 
signaling mechanisms that establish somatosensory, 
auditory, and visual areas.
There is now evidence for the existence of a corti-
cal “protomap,” a basic plan in which different corti-
cal areas are established early in development before 
inputs from other brain regions can influence develop-
ment. This view is supported by studies of transcrip-
tion factor expression in the developing neocortex. 
Two homeodomain transcription factors, Pax6 and 
Emx2, are expressed in complementary anteroposterior  
gradients in the ventricular zone of the developing  
neocortex—high levels of Pax6 at anterior levels and 
high levels of Emx2 at posterior levels. These early pat-
terns are established in part by a local rostral source 
of FGF signals, which promote Pax6 and repress 
Emx2 expression (Figure 45–15A). As is the case in the 
hindbrain, the distinct spatial domains of expression 
of Pax6 and Emx2 are sharpened by cross-repressive 
interactions between the two transcription factors.


===== Page 9 =====
1124    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Pec
FCU
Rostral
LMC
PGC
LMC
Caudal
Hox9
Hox6
Hox10
Hoxc6
Hoxc8
Hox5
Hoxc4
Pea3
Runx1
Scip
FCU
Wild type
Pec
FCU
CMV Hoxc6
Pec
FCU
RNAi Hoxc6
Pec
A
B
Figure 45–13  Hox proteins control the identity of neurons 
in motor columns and pools. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Dasen et al. 2005.)
A. Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins are expressed in motor 
neurons at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the spinal cord and 
direct motor neuron identity and peripheral target connectiv-
ity. Hox6 activities control the identity of cells in the brachial 
lateral motor column (LMC), Hox9 controls the identity of cells 
in the preganglionic column (PGC), and Hox10 controls the 
identity of cells in the lumbar column (LMC). Cross-repressive 
interactions between Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins refine 
Hox profiles, and Hox activator functions define LMC and PGC 
identities. A more complex Hox transcriptional network controls 
motor pool identity and connectivity. Hox genes determine the 
rostrocaudal position of motor pools within the LMC. Hoxc8 is 
required in caudal LMC neurons to generate the motor pools 
for the pectoralis (Pec) and flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) muscles; 
these neurons express the transcription factors Pea3 and Scip, 
respectively. The patterns of Hox expression in the Pec and 
FCU pools are established through a transcriptional network 
that appears to be driven largely by Hox cross-repressive 
interactions.
B. Changing the Hox code within motor pools changes the  
pattern of muscle connectivity. Alterations in the profile  
of Hox6 expression determine the expression of Pea3 and Scip 
and control the projection of motor axons to the Pec or FCU 
muscles. RNA interference (RNAi) knock-down of Hox6 sup-
presses innervation of the Pec muscle so that motor axons 
innervate the FCU muscle only. Ectopic expression of Hoxc6 
driven by a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter represses  
connectivity with FCU, so that motor axons innervate only the 
Pec muscle.
The spatial distribution of Pax6 and Emx2 helps to 
establish the initial regional pattern of the neocortex. 
In mice lacking Emx2 activity, there is an expansion 
of rostral neocortex—the motor and somatosensory 
areas—at the expense of the more caudal auditory and 
visual areas. Conversely, in mice lacking Pax6 activity, 
visual and auditory areas are expanded at the expense 
of motor and somatosensory areas (Figure 45–15B).
Thus, as in the spinal cord, hindbrain, and mid-
brain, early neocortical patterns are established 
through the interplay between local inductive signals 
and gradients of transcription factor expression. How 
these gradients specify discrete functional areas in the 
neocortex remains unclear. Unlike segmentation in 
the hindbrain, where transcription factors precisely 
specify rhombomeres, transcriptional markers of indi-
vidual neocortical areas have not yet been identified.
Afferent Inputs Also Contribute to Regionalization
In the adult neocortex, different functional areas can 
be distinguished by differences in the layering pattern 
of neurons—the cytoarchitecture of the areas—and by 
their neuronal connections. One striking instance of 


