===== Page 1 =====
A
B
C
I
II
III
IVA
IVB
IVC
V
VI
Connections 
with columns 
of similar 
orientation 
Site of injection
(purple column)
Axis of
orientation
Figure 21–16  Long-range horizontal connections in each 
layer of the visual cortex integrate information from differ-
ent parts of the visual field.
A. The axons of pyramidal cells extend for many millimeters 
parallel to the cortical surface. Axon collaterals form connec-
tions with other pyramidal cells as well as with inhibitory 
interneurons. This arrangement enables neurons to integrate 
information over large parts of the visual field. An important 
characteristic of these connections is their relationship to 
the functional columns. The axon collaterals are found in 
clusters (arrows) at distances greater than 0.5 mm from the 
cell body. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gilbert and 
Wiesel 1983. Copyright © 1983 Society for Neuroscience.)
B. Horizontal connections link columns of cells with similar  
orientation specificity.
C. The pattern of horizontal connections is visualized by inject-
ing an adenoviral vector containing the gene encoding green 
fluorescent protein into one orientation column and superim-
posing the labeled image (black) on an optically imaged map of 
the orientation columns in the vicinity of the injection. (Diameter 
of white circle is 1 mm.) (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Stettler et al. 2002.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    517
Visual Information Is Represented by a Variety 
of Neural Codes
Individual neurons in a sensory pathway respond to 
a range of stimulus values. For example, a neuron in a 
color-detection pathway is not limited to responding 
to one wavelength but is instead tuned to a range of 
wavelengths. A neuron’s response peaks at a particular 
value and tails off on either side of that value, forming a 
bell-shaped tuning curve with a particular bandwidth. 
Thus, a neuron with a peak response at 650 nm and a 
bandwidth of 100 nm might give identical responses at 
600 nm and 700 nm.
To be able to determine the wavelength from neu-
ronal signals, one needs at least two neurons repre-
senting filters centered at different wavelengths. Each 
neuron can be thought of as a labeled line in which 
activity signals a stimulus with a given value. When 
more than one such neuron fires, the convergent sig-
nals at the postsynaptic relay represent a stimulus with 
a wavelength that is the weighted average of the val-
ues represented by all the inputs.
A single visual percept is the product of the 
activity of a number of neurons operating in a spe-
cific combinatorial and interactive fashion called a 
Orientation
preference
Response
Vector 
components
Stimulus
Orientation 
tuning
(spikes/s)
Vector 
average
Perceived
orientation
Figure 21–17  Vector averaging is one model for popula-
tion coding in neural circuits.  Vector averages describe the 
possible relationship between the responses in an ensemble 
of neurons, the tuning characteristics of individual neurons in 
the ensemble, and the resultant percept. Individual neurons 
respond optimally to a particular orientation of a stimulus in 
the visual field, but also respond at varying rates to a range of 
orientations. The stimulus orientation to which a neuron fires 
best can be thought of as a line label—when the cell fires 
briskly, its activity signifies the presence of a stimulus with 
that orientation. A number of neurons with different orienta-
tion preferences will respond to the same stimulus. Each neu-
ron’s response can be represented as a vector whose length 
indicates the strength of its response and whose direction 
represents its preferred orientation, or line label. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Kapadia, Westheimer, and Gilbert 2000.)
population code. Population coding has been modeled 
in various ways. The most prevalent model is called 
vector averaging.
We can illustrate population coding with a pop-
ulation of orientation-selective cells, each of which 
responds optimally to a line with a specific orientation. 
Each neuron responds not just to the preferred stimu-
lus but rather to any line that falls within a range of ori-
entations described by a Gaussian tuning curve with a 
particular bandwidth. A stimulus of a particular orien-
tation most strongly activates cells with tuning curves 
centered at that orientation; cells with tuning curves 
centered away from but overlapping that orientation 
are excited less strongly.
Each cell’s preferred orientation, the line label, 
is represented as a vector pointing in the direction of 
that orientation. Each cell’s firing is a “vote” for the 
cell’s line label, and the cell’s firing rate represents the 
weighting of the vote. The cell’s signal can thus be rep-
resented by a vector pointing in the direction of the 
cell’s preferred orientation with a length proportional 
to the strength of the cell’s response. For all the acti-
vated cells, one can calculate a vector sum with a 
direction that represents the value of the stimulus 
(Figure 21–17).


===== Page 3 =====
518    Part IV / Perception
Another aspect of the population code is the vari-
ability of a neuron’s response to the same stimulus. 
Repeated presentation of a stimulus to a neuron sensi-
tive to that stimulus will elicit a range of responses. 
The most sensitive part of a neuron’s tuning curve lies 
not at the peak but along the flanks, where the tuning 
curve is steepest. Here, small changes in the value of 
a stimulus produce the strongest change in response. 
Changes in stimulus value must, however, be suffi-
cient to elicit a change in response that significantly 
exceeds the normal variability in the response of the 
neuron. One can compare that amount of change to 
the perceptual discrimination threshold. When many 
neurons contribute to the discrimination, the signal-
to-noise ratio increases, a process known as probabil-
ity summation, and the critical difference in stimulus 
value required for a significant change in neuronal 
response is less.
When the brain represents a piece of information, 
an important consideration is the number of neurons 
that participate in that representation. Although all 
information about a visual stimulus is present in the 
retina, the retinal representation is not sufficient for 
object recognition. At the other end of the visual path-
way, some neurons in the temporal lobe are selective 
for complex objects, such as faces. Can an individual 
cell represent something as complex as a particular 
face? Such a hypothetical neuron has been dubbed a 
“grandmother cell” because it would represent exclu-
sively a person’s grandmother, or a “pontifical cell” 
because it would represent the apex of a hierarchical 
cognitive pathway.
The nervous system does not, however, represent 
entire objects by the activity of single neurons. Instead, 
some cells represent parts of an object, and an ensemble 
of neurons represents an entire object. Each member of 
the ensemble may participate in different ensembles 
that are activated by different objects. This arrange-
ment is known as a distributed code. Distributed codes 
can involve a few neurons or many. In any case, a dis-
tributed code requires complex connectivity between 
the cells representing a face and those representing the 
name and experiences associated with that person.
The foregoing discussion assumes that neurons 
signal information by their firing rate and their line 
labels. An alternative hypothesis is that the timing of 
action potentials itself carries information, analogous 
to Morse code. The code might be read from the syn-
chronous firing of different sets of neurons over time. 
At one instant, one group of cells might fire together 
followed by the synchronous firing of another group. 
Over a single train of action potentials, a single cell 
could participate in many such ensembles. Whether 
sensory information is represented this way and 
whether the nervous system carries more informa-
tion than that represented by firing rate alone are not 
known.
Highlights
  1.  Vision is a constructive process fundamentally 
different from the mere recording of visual input 
as in a camera. Rather, the brain uses visual input 
to infer information about the world around it, 
including information about objects, such as 
their sizes, shapes, distances, and identities and 
how rapidly they are moving.
  2.  The tuning of neural circuits for visual features 
such as contrast, orientation, and motion often 
matches the distribution of the feature in the 
natural environment. This suggests an evolu-
tionary, ethologically driven origin for the neural 
circuitry.
  3.  Visual circuitry, and thus vision, are modulated 
by individual visual experience.
  4.  Vision makes extensive use of parallel process-
ing. The higher visual centers form two distinct 
pathways. The dorsal pathway, located in pari-
etal cortex, is involved in motion perception, 
attention, and visually guided action. The ventral 
pathway, located in temporal cortex, processes 
form and objects. Further subdivisions of the 
ventral pathway are specialized, for example, for 
recognizing faces. These pathways, although dis-
tinct, communicate with each other; this is likely 
important for the perception of objects as coher-
ent wholes.
  5.  Parallel processing starts at the retina. Distinct 
retinal circuits analyze each point of the visual 
input for different local features including local 
contrasts of achromatic bright versus dark, 
red versus green, and blue versus yellow. The 
information is sent out through distinct classes 
of retinal ganglion cells (magnocelluar, parvo-
celluar, and koniocellular, respectively, for the 
three features noted) whose axons form the 
optic nerves.
  6.  The optic nerves from the two eyes regroup at the 
optic chiasm such that all fibers from the left vis-
ual hemifield project to the right hemisphere of 
the brain, and vice versa. However, the parallel 
retinal channels remain anatomically segregated 
by eye and by visual feature, past a thalamic relay 
station, the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), up 
to primary visual cortex (V1).


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    519
  7.  The different channels enter V1 at different layers, 
although primarily they enter at the major input 
layers 4 and 6. The visual input is recombined to 
extract new sets of features. These include tuning 
for orientation, motion, and object depth (obtained 
by combining left- and right-eye inputs).
  8.  V1 neurons sharing basic properties such as spa-
tial location or orientation preference form col-
umns extending vertically from the pia to the 
white matter.
  9.  V1 neurons also form systematic horizontal maps 
of their response properties over cortex. The tun-
ing for location forms a smooth “visuotopic” map 
of visual space, which changes gradually with 
distance, and is most finely resolved at the fovea, 
growing progressively coarser toward the periph-
ery. Superimposed on the spatial map are locally 
smooth maps of orientation preference and left- 
versus right-eye preference, with interspersed 
columns that preferentially process color. These 
visual response features cycle over relatively 
short cortical distances, in effect completing one 
full cycle over each partial shift of the spatial 
map. Thus, V1 circuits effectively analyze each 
visual location, in parallel, for the full set of V1 
visual features.
10.  Neural processing in V1 reflects its architecture, 
with local vertical processing along columns and 
lateral processing across columns. In addition, 
there is long-range processing that spans multi-
ple columns.
11.  The output of V1 feeds into progressively higher 
visual areas comprising more than 30 centers dis-
tributed along the dorsal and ventral pathways. 
The connectivity is reciprocal, with higher loci 
sending dense feedback targeting lower areas 
including the LGN.
12.  A useful measure of visual processing is pro-
vided by changes in neuronal “receptive fields” 
along the visual pathway. The receptive field is 
the region of visual space from which the neu-
ron receives input; it is further characterized by 
the neuron’s optimal visual stimulus. Receptive 
fields grow larger and more complex at succes-
sive stages along the visual pathway. Their opti-
mal stimuli also increase in complexity from 
simple pixel-like dots for photoreceptors, to ori-
ented lines for V1, to faces in higher face-selective 
centers of the ventral pathway.
13.  Looking forward, one of the most important 
unsolved questions is the interaction between 
feedforward visual processing through pro-
gressively “higher” neural computations and 
feedback mediated via the dense plexus of con-
nections from higher to lower levels. Under-
standing this interaction may be the key to 
understanding how the brain effortlessly forms 
complex visual percepts.
 Charles D. Gilbert 
  Aniruddha Das 
Selected Reading
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1962. Receptive fields, binocular 
interaction and functional architecture in the cat’s visual 
cortex. J Physiol 160:106–154.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1977. Functional architecture of 
macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 198:1–59.
Hubener M, Shohan D, Grinvald A, Bonhoeffer T. 1997. Spa-
tial relationships among three columnar systems in cat 
area 17. J Neurosci 17:9270–9284.
Isaacson JS, Scanziani M. 2011. How inhibition shapes corti-
cal activity. Neuron 72:231–243.
Nassi JJ, Callaway EM. 2009. Parallel processing strategies of 
the primate visual system. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:360–372.
Orban GA, Van Essen D, Vanduffel W. 2004. Comparative 
mapping of higher visual areas in monkeys and humans. 
Trends Cogn Sci 8:315–324.
Stryker MP. 2014. A neural circuit that controls cortical state, 
plasticity, and the gain of sensory responses in mouse. 
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 79:1–9.
Tsao DY, Moeller S, Freiwald WA. 2008. Comparing face 
patch systems in macaques and humans. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 105:19514–19519.
VanEssen DC, Anderson CH, Felleman DJ. 1992. Information 
processing in the primate visual system: an integrated 
systems perspective. Science 255:419–423.
Wertheimer M. 1938. Laws of Organization in Perceptual Forms. 
London: Harcourt, Brace & Jovanovitch.
Wiesel TN, Hubel DH. 1966. Spatial and chromatic interac-
tions in the lateral geniculate body of the rhesus monkey. 
J Neurophysiol 29:1115–1156.
References
Blasdel GG, Lund JS. 1983. Termination of afferent axons in 
macaque striate cortex. J Neurosci 3:1389–1413.
Callaway EM. 1998. Local circuits in primary visual cortex of 
the macaque monkey. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:47–74.
Field DJ, Hayes A, Hess RF. 1993. Contour integration by the 
human visual system: evidence for a local “association 
field.” Vision Res 33:173–193.


===== Page 5 =====
520    Part IV / Perception
Gilbert CD, Li W. 2012. Adult visual cortical plasticity. 
Neuron 75:250–264.
Gilbert CD, Li W. 2013. Top-down influences on visual 
processing. Nat Rev Neurosci 14:350–363.
Gilbert CD, Wiesel TN. 1983. Clustered intrinsic connections 
in cat visual cortex. J Neurosci 3:1116–1133.
Hartline HK. 1941. The neural mechanisms of vision. Harvey 
Lect 37:39–68.
Hubel DH. 1988. Eye, Brain and Vision. New York: Scientific 
American Library.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1974. Uniformity of monkey striate 
cortex. A parallel relationship between field size, scatter 
and magnification factor. J Comp Neurol 158:295–306.
Kapadia MK, Westheimer G, Gilbert CD. 2000. Spatial distri-
bution of contextual interactions in primary visual cortex 
and in visual perception. J Neurophysiol 84:2048–2062.
Kuffler SF. 1953. Discharge patterns and functional organiza-
tion of mammalian retina. J Neurophysiol 16:37–68.
Porter PB. 1954. Another puzzle-picture. Am J Psychol 
67:550–551.
Stettler DD, Das A, Bennett J, Gilbert CD. 2002. Lateral con-
nectivity and contextual interactions in macaque primary 
visual cortex. Neuron 36:739–750.


===== Page 6 =====
22
Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina
The Retina’s Sensitivity Adapts to Changes in Illumination
Light Adaptation Is Apparent in Retinal Processing and 
Visual Perception
Multiple Gain Controls Occur Within the Retina
Light Adaptation Alters Spatial Processing
Highlights
T
he retina is the brain’s window on the world. 
All visual experience is based on informa-
tion processed by this neural circuit in the eye. 
The retina’s output is conveyed to the brain by just 
one million optic nerve fibers, and yet almost half of 
the cerebral cortex is used to process these signals. 
Visual information lost in the retina—by design or 
deficiency—can never be recovered. Because retinal 
processing sets fundamental limits on what can be 
seen, there is great interest in understanding how the 
retina functions.
On the surface, the vertebrate eye appears to act 
much like a camera. The pupil forms a variable aper-
ture, and the cornea and lens provide the refractive 
optics that project a small image of the outside world 
onto the light-sensitive retina lining the back of the eye-
ball (Figure 22–1). But this is where the analogy ends. 
The retina is a thin sheet of neurons, a few hundred 
micrometers thick, composed of five major cell types 
that are arranged in three cellular layers separated by 
two synaptic layers (Figure 22–2).
The photoreceptor cells, in the outermost layer, 
absorb light and convert it into a neural signal, a pro-
cess known as phototransduction. These signals are 
The Photoreceptor Layer Samples the Visual Image
Ocular Optics Limit the Quality of the Retinal Image
There Are Two Types of Photoreceptors: Rods  
and Cones
Phototransduction Links the Absorption of a Photon to a 
Change in Membrane Conductance
Light Activates Pigment Molecules in the  
Photoreceptors
Excited Rhodopsin Activates a Phosphodiesterase 
Through the G Protein Transducin
Multiple Mechanisms Shut Off the Cascade
Defects in Phototransduction Cause Disease
Ganglion Cells Transmit Neural Images to the Brain
The Two Major Types of Ganglion Cells Are ON Cells 
and OFF Cells
Many Ganglion Cells Respond Strongly to Edges in the 
Image
The Output of Ganglion Cells Emphasizes Temporal 
Changes in Stimuli
Retinal Output Emphasizes Moving Objects
Several Ganglion Cell Types Project to the Brain Through 
Parallel Pathways
A Network of Interneurons Shapes the Retinal Output
Parallel Pathways Originate in Bipolar Cells
Spatial Filtering Is Accomplished by Lateral Inhibition
Temporal Filtering Occurs in Synapses and  
Feedback Circuits
Color Vision Begins in Cone-Selective Circuits
Congenital Color Blindness Takes Several Forms
Rod and Cone Circuits Merge in the Inner Retina


===== Page 7 =====
522    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–1  The eye projects the visual scene onto the 
retina’s photoreceptors.
A. Light from an object in the visual field is refracted by the cor-
nea and lens and focused onto the retina.
B. In the foveola, corresponding to the very center of gaze, the 
proximal neurons of the retina are shifted aside so light has 
direct access to the photoreceptors.
C. A letter from the eye chart used to assess normal visual 
acuity is projected onto the densely packed photoreceptors in 
the fovea. Although less sharply focused than shown here as a 
result of diffraction by the eye’s optics, the smallest discernible 
strokes of the letter are approximately one cone diameter in 
width. (Adapted, with permission, from Curcio and Hendrickson  
1991. Copyright © 1991 Elsevier Ltd.)
Fixation
point
Light
Cornea
Retina
Fovea
Optic
nerve
Optic 
disc
Pigment 
epithelium
Lens
Foveola
Light
Photoreceptor
Pigment
epithelium
Bipolar
cell
Ganglion
cell
Retina
A  Refraction of light onto the retina
B  Focusing of light in the fovea
C  Packing of photoreceptors 
 
in the fovea
10 µm
passed synaptically to bipolar cells, which in turn 
connect to retinal ganglion cells in the innermost 
layer. Retinal ganglion cells are the output neurons 
of the retina, and their axons form the optic nerve. In 
addition to this direct pathway from sensory to out-
put neurons, the retinal circuit includes many lateral 
connections provided by horizontal cells in the outer 
synaptic layer and amacrine cells in the inner synaptic 
layer (Figure 22–3).
The retinal circuit performs low-level visual 
processing, the initial stage in the analysis of visual 
images. It extracts from the raw images in the eyes cer-
tain spatial and temporal features and conveys them 
to higher visual centers. The rules of this processing 
are adapted to changes in environmental conditions. In 
particular, the retina must adjust its sensitivity to ever-
changing conditions of illumination. This adaptation 
allows our vision to remain more or less stable despite 
the vast range of light intensities encountered during 
the course of each day.
In this chapter, we discuss in turn the three impor-
tant aspects of retinal function: phototransduction, 
preprocessing, and adaptation. We will illustrate both 
the neural mechanisms by which they are achieved 
and their consequences for visual perception.
The Photoreceptor Layer Samples the  
Visual Image
Ocular Optics Limit the Quality of the  
Retinal Image
The sharpness of the retinal image is determined by 
several factors: diffraction at the pupil’s aperture, 
refractive errors in the cornea and lens, and scattering 
due to material in the light path. A point in the outside 
world is generally focused into a small blurred circle 
on the retina. As in other optical devices, this blur is 
smallest near the optical axis, where the image quality 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    523
Figure 22–2  The retina comprises five distinct layers of 
neurons and synapses.
A. A perpendicular section of the human retina seen through the 
light microscope. Three layers of cell bodies are evident. The outer 
nuclear layer contains cell bodies of photoreceptors; the inner 
nuclear layer includes horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells; and 
the ganglion cell layer contains ganglion cells and some displaced 
amacrine cells. Two layers of fibers and synapses separate these: 
the outer plexiform layer and the inner plexiform layer.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Boycott and Dowling 1969. 
Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center.)
B. Neurons in the retina of the macaque monkey based on 
Golgi staining. The cellular and synaptic layers are aligned with 
the image in part A. (Abbreviations: M ganglion, magnocellular 
ganglion cell; P ganglion, parvocellular ganglion cell.) (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Polyak 1941.)
Outer 
nuclear 
layer
Outer 
plexiform 
layer
Inner 
nuclear 
layer
Inner 
plexiform 
layer
Ganglion 
cell 
layer
Amacrine
Cone
Diffuse 
bipolar
Horizontal
M ganglion
M ganglion
Midget 
bipolar
P ganglion
Rod
Rod 
bipolar 
A  Section of retina
B  Neurons in the retina
50 µm
approaches the limit imposed by diffraction at the 
pupil. Away from the axis, the image is degraded sig-
nificantly owing to aberrations in the cornea and lens 
and may be degraded further by abnormal conditions 
such as light-scattering cataracts or refractive errors 
such as myopia.
The area of retina near the optical axis, the fovea, is 
where vision is sharpest and corresponds to the center 
of gaze that we direct toward the objects of our atten-
tion. The density of photoreceptors, bipolar cells, and 
ganglion cells is highest at the fovea (Figure 22–1B). 
The spacing between photoreceptors there is well 
matched to the size of the optical blur circle, and thus 
the image is sampled in an ideal fashion. Light must 
generally traverse several layers of cells before reach-
ing the photoreceptors, but in the center of the fovea, 
called the foveola, the other cellular layers are pushed 
aside to reduce additional blur from light scattering 
(Figure 22–1B). Finally, the back of the eye is lined by a 
black pigment epithelium that absorbs light and keeps 
it from scattering back into the eye.
The retina contains another special site, the optic disc, 
where the axons of retinal ganglion cells converge and 
extend through the retina to emerge from the back of 
the eye as the optic nerve (Figure 22–1A). By neces-
sity, this area is devoid of photoreceptors and thus 


===== Page 9 =====
524    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–3  The retinal circuitry.
A. The circuitry for cone signals, showing the split into ON 
cell and OFF cell pathways (see Figure 22–10) as well as the 
pathway for lateral inhibition in the outer layer. Red arrows 
indicate sign-preserving connections through electrical or 
glutamatergic synapses. Gray arrows represent sign-inverting 
connections through GABAergic, glycinergic, or glutamatergic 
synapses.
B. Rod signals feed into the cone circuitry through AII amacrine 
cells, where the ON and OFF cell pathways diverge.
A  Cone signal circuitry
B  Rod signal circuitry
Lateral Inhibition
ON
Photoreceptors
Horizontal 
cells
Bipolar 
cells
Amacrine 
cells
Ganglion 
cells
OFF
ON
OFF
AII 
amacrine
cell
Rod 
bipolar
Cone
Cone
Cone
Rod
corresponds to a blind spot in the visual field of each 
eye. Because the disc lies nasal to the fovea of each eye, 
light coming from a single point never falls on both 
blind spots simultaneously, so that normally we are 
unaware of them. We can experience the blind spot by 
using only one eye (Figure 22–4). The blind spot dem-
onstrates what blind people experience—not black-
ness, but simply nothing. This explains why damage to 
the peripheral retina often goes unnoticed. It is usually 
through accidents, such as bumping into an unnoticed 
object, or through clinical testing that a deficit of sight 
is revealed.
The blind spot is a necessary consequence of the 
inside-out design of the retina, which has puzzled and 
amused biologists for generations. The purpose of this 
organization may be to enable the tight apposition of 
photoreceptors with the retinal pigment epithelium, 
which plays an essential role in the turnover of retinal 
pigment and recycles photoreceptor membranes by 
phagocytosis.
There Are Two Types of Photoreceptors:  
Rods and Cones
All photoreceptor cells have a common structure with 
four functional regions: the outer segment, located at 
the distal surface of the neural retina; the inner seg-
ment, located more proximally; the cell body; and the 
synaptic terminal (Figure 22–5A).
Most vertebrates have two types of photorecep-
tors, rods and cones, distinguished by their morphol-
ogy. A rod has a long, cylindrical outer segment within 
which the stacks of discs are separated from the plasma 
membrane, whereas a cone often has a shorter, tapered 
outer segment, and the discs are continuous with the 
outer membrane (Figure 22–5B).


