===== Page 1 =====
372    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
B
200 µm
4  GAD65–GFP
5  GABA
I
I
II–III
II–III
IV
IV
1  GAD65–GFP
2  GAD65
3  Overlay
6  Overlay
Cortical 
layer
A
2  GAD
1  GAT-1
Figure 16–3  Techniques for visualizing chemical 
messengers.
A. A light-microscope section of the hippocampus of a rat. 
1. In situ hybridization using a probe for the mRNA encod-
ing GAT-1, a GABA transporter. The probe was end-labeled 
with α-35S-dATP and visualized by clusters of silver grains 
in the overlying autoradiographic photographic emulsion. 
2. In situ hybridization of the mRNA for glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD), the specific biosynthetic enzyme 
for GABA, was carried out with an oligonucleotide probe 
linked to the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. The GAD 
probe was visualized by accumulation of colored alkaline 
phosphatase reaction product in the cytoplasm. Neurons 
expressing both GAT-1 and GAD transcripts were labeled 
by silver grains and the phosphatase reaction, respec-
tively, and are indicated by circles enclosing cells bodies 
that contain both labels. (Used with permission of Sarah 
Augood.)
B. Images of neocortex from a GAD65-GFP transgenic 
mouse in which green fluorescent protein (GFP) is 
expressed under the control of the GAD65 promotor. GFP 
is co-localized with GAD65 (1–3) and GABA (4–6) (both 
detected by indirect immunofluorescence) in neurons in 
the different layers. Most of the GFP-positive neurons 
are immunopositive for GAD65 and GABA (arrows show 
selected examples). Scale bar = 100 μm. (Adapted, with 
permission, from López-Bendito et al. 2004. Copyright © 
2004 Oxford University Press.)
Powerful histochemical techniques are available for 
detecting both small-molecule transmitter substances 
and neuroactive peptides in histological sections of 
nervous tissue.
Catecholamines and serotonin, when reacted with 
formaldehyde vapor, form fluorescent derivatives. In an 
early example of transmitter histochemistry, the Swedish 
neuroanatomists Bengt Falck and Nils Hillarp found 
that the reaction can be used to locate transmitters with 
fluorescence microscopy under properly controlled 
conditions.
Because individual vesicles are too small to be 
resolved by the light microscope, the exact position of 
the vesicles containing the transmitter was inferred by 
comparing the fluorescence under the light microscope 
with the position of vesicles under the electron micro-
scope. A number of fluorescent false transmitters, par-
ticularly those that mimic catecholamines, are substrates 
for plasma membrane and/or vesicular transporters, 
enabling their use to label vesicles and assess their turn-
over in living tissue. In addition, a variety of genetically 
expressed neurotransmitter reporters based on green 
fluorescent protein can be used to detect extracellular 
levels of neurotransmitters.
Histochemical analysis can be extended to the ultra-
structure of neurons under special conditions. Fixation 
of nervous tissue in the presence of potassium perman-
ganate, chromate, or silver salts, or the dopamine analog 
Box 16–2  Detection of Chemical Messengers and Their Processing Enzymes Within Neurons


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    373
Figure 16–4  Electron-opaque gold particles linked to 
antibody are used to locate antigens in tissue at the 
ultrastructural level. The electron micrograph shows a 
section through the cell body of an Aplysia bag cell. Bag 
cells control reproductive behavior by releasing a group of 
neuropeptides cleaved from the egg-laying hormone (ELH) 
precursor. The cells contain several kinds of dense-core 
vesicles. The cell shown here was treated with two anti-
bodies against different amino acid sequences contained 
in different regions of the ELH precursor. One antibody 
was raised in rabbits and the other in rats. These antibod-
ies were detected with anti-rabbit or anti-rat immunoglobu-
lins (secondary antibodies) raised in goats. Each secondary 
antibody was coupled to colloidal gold particles of a dis-
tinct size. Vesicles identified by antigen 1 (labeled with the 
smaller gold particles) are smaller than vesicles identified 
by antigen 2 (labeled with the larger gold particles), indicat-
ing that the specific fragments cleaved from the precursor 
are localized in different vesicles. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Fisher et al. 1988.)
Antigen 1
Antigen 2
240 nm
Vesicle containing:
5-hydroxdopamine, which forms an electron-dense 
product, intensifies the electron density of vesicles 
containing biogenic amines and thus reveals the large 
number of dense-core vesicles that are characteristic of 
aminergic neurons.
It is also possible to identify neurons that express 
the gene for a particular transmitter enzyme or peptide 
precursor. Many methods for detecting specific mRNAs 
depend on nucleic acid hybridization. One such method 
is in situ hybridization.
Two single strands of a nucleic acid polymer will pair 
if their sequence of bases is complementary. With in situ 
hybridization, the strand of noncoding DNA (the negative 
or antisense strand or its corresponding RNA) is applied 
to tissue sections under conditions suitable for hybridizing 
with endogenous (sense) mRNA. If the probes are radiola-
beled, autoradiography reveals the locations of neurons 
that contain the complex formed by the labeled comple-
mentary nucleic acid strand and the mRNA.
Hybrid oligonucleotides synthesized with nucle-
otides containing base analogs tagged chemically, 
fluorescently, or with antibodies can be detected his-
tochemically. Multiple labels can be used at the same 
time (Figure 16–3A). RNAscope, a more recent mRNA 
hybridization method, allows for simultaneous detec-
tion of different mRNAs with lower background and 
single-molecule sensitivity. Another approach to detect-
ing the synthetic proteins involves viral or transgenic 
expression of proteins fused to variants of green fluores-
cent protein (Figure 16–3B).
Transmitter substances can also be detected using 
immunohistochemical techniques. Amino acid trans-
mitters, biogenic amines, and neuropeptides have a pri-
mary amino group that becomes covalently fixed within 
the neurons; this group becomes cross-linked to proteins 
by aldehydes, the usual fixatives used in microscopy for 
immunohistochemical techniques.
Specific antibodies against the transmitter sub-
stances are necessary. Antibodies specific to seroto-
nin, histamine, and many neuroactive peptides can be 
detected by a second antibody (in a technique called 
indirect immunofluorescence). As an example, if the first 
antibody is rabbit-derived, the second antibody can be 
goat antibody raised against rabbit immunoglobulin.
These commercially available secondary antibod-
ies are tagged with fluorescent dyes and used under the 
fluorescence microscope to locate antigens in regions of 
individual neurons—cell bodies, axons, and presynaptic 
release sites (Figure 16–3).
Immunohistochemical techniques are also used 
with electron microscopy to locate chemical transmit-
ters in the ultrastructure of neurons. Such techniques 
(continued)


===== Page 3 =====
374    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
0.0
–0.2
0.4
0.8
0.2
0.6
1.0
1.2
F/Fi (AUI)
0
100 200
Time (s)
Time (s)
300 400
500
A  Loading of
     ﬂuorescent false
     neurotransmitter
B  KCl-induced depolarization
1
2
C  Amphetamine-induced release
Pre-amphetamine
1 µM amphetamine
Pre-KCl
40 mM KCl
1
2
3
3
0.0
–0.2
0.4
0.8
0.2
0.6
1.0
1.2
F/Fi (AUI)
VMAT
Figure 16–5  Fluorescent false neurotransmitter (FFN) 
labeling permits optical monitoring of neurotransmit-
ter release.
A. FFN (blue dots) is transported by VMAT into synaptic 
vesicles in dopamine nerve terminals. Vesicles at steady 
state are acidic, as indicated by yellow shading.
B. 1. Raising the extracellular KCl concentration leads to 
depolarization and release of vesicles through exocytosis, 
resulting in the loss of fluorescent label (destaining). 2. KCl 
(40 mM) depolarization caused rapid FFN206 destaining 
in presynaptic dopamine nerve terminals. Whole fly brains 
were loaded to steady state with FFN206 (300 nM) and 
treated with KCl. Projected image stacks of the neuropil 
before (left) and after (right) KCl-induced depolarization. 
3. Kinetics of fluorescence decay from representative 
experiments. Black arrow indicates initiation of KCl addi-
tion. Scale bar = 25 µm.
C. 1. Amphetamine leads to deacidification of vesicles 
(loss of yellow shading) and their destaining through a 
nonexocytic mechanism discussed in the text. 2. Amphet-
amine (1 µM) caused FFN206 destaining. Whole fly brains 
were loaded to steady state with FFN206 (300 nM) and 
treated with amphetamine. Projected image stacks of 
neuropil before (left) and after (right) treatment. 3. Kinetics 
of fluorescence decay from representative experiments. 
Black arrow indicates initiation of drug addition. Scale bar 
= 25 µm. (Reproduced, with permission, from Freyberg  
et al. 2016.)
usually involve a peroxidase-antiperoxidase system that 
produces an electron-dense reaction product. Another 
method is to use antibodies linked to electron-dense 
gold particles. Spheres of colloidal gold can be gener-
ated with precise diameters in the nanometer range. 
When coated with an appropriate antibody, these gold 
particles can be used to detect proteins and peptides 
with high resolution. This technique has the additional 
useful feature that more than one specific antibody can 
be examined in the same tissue section if each antibody 
is linked to gold particles of different sizes (Figure 16–4).
A number of fluorescent vesicular transporter 
substrates have been used as fluorescent false neuro-
transmitters (FFNs) to monitor transmitter release in 
mouse brain slice or whole fly brain (Figure 16–5). This 
approach allows visualization of nerve terminals in 
which synaptic vesicles have been loaded with FFNs; 
release can then be monitored optically in real time in 
response to either depolarization, which leads to exocy-
tosis and synaptic vesicle emptying, or amphetamine, 
which leads to nonexocytic release of vesicular contents 
into the cytoplasm in response to vesicle deacidification.
Box 16–2  Detection of Chemical Messengers and Their Processing Enzymes Within Neurons 
(continued)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    375
butyrylcholinesterase, which can also degrade other 
molecules including cocaine and the paralytic drug 
succinylcholine. However, the precise functions of 
butyrylcholinesterase are not fully understood.
Many other enzymatic pathways that degrade 
released transmitters are not directly involved in ter-
minating synaptic transmission but are important for 
controlling the concentration of the transmitter within 
the neuron or for inactivating transmitter molecules 
that have diffused away from the synaptic cleft. Many 
of these degradative enzymes are important clinically—
they provide sites for drug action and serve as diag-
nostic indicators. For example, inhibitors of MAO, an 
intracellular enzyme that degrades amine transmitters, 
are used to treat depression and Parkinson disease.  
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is another cyto-
plasmic enzyme that is important for degrading bio-
genic amines. Measurement of its metabolites provides 
a useful clinical index of the efficacy of drugs that affect 
the synthesis or degradation of the biogenic amines 
in nervous tissue. COMT is thought to play a particu-
larly critical role in regulating cortical dopamine levels 
because of the low levels of the dopamine uptake trans-
porter. The relevance of this enzyme is underscored 
by the finding that a functional polymorphism in the 
COMT gene has been related to  cognitive performance.
Neuropeptides are removed relatively slowly 
from the synaptic cleft by slow diffusion and prote-
olysis by extracellular peptidases. In contrast, small-
molecule transmitters are removed more quickly from 
the synaptic cleft and extrasynaptic space. The critical 
mechanism for inactivation of most small molecule 
neurotransmitters is reuptake at the plasma mem-
brane. This mechanism serves the dual purposes of 
terminating the synaptic action of the transmitter as 
well as recapturing transmitter molecules for subse-
quent reuse. Although Elliott had hypothesized in 1914 
that uptake transporters might exist, their discov-
ery waited until 1958 when F. Barbara Hughes and  
Benjamin Brodie found that blood platelets accumulated 
norepinephrine and serotonin, which could compete 
with each other for uptake. Julius Axelrod,* also a mem-
ber of Brodie’s group, soon afterward characterized 
norepinephrine uptake into neurons using a radiola-
beled substrate.
High-affinity uptake is mediated by transporter 
molecules in the membranes of nerve terminals and 
glial cells. Unlike vesicular transporters, which are 
powered by the H+ electrochemical gradient in an anti-
port mechanism, plasma membrane transporters are 
driven by the Na+ electrochemical gradient through a 
symport mechanism in which Na+ ions and transmitter 
move in the same direction.
Each type of neuron has its own characteristic 
uptake mechanism. For example, noncholinergic neu-
rons do not take up choline with high affinity. Cer-
tain powerful psychotropic drugs can block uptake 
processes. For example, cocaine blocks the uptake of 
dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin; the tricyclic 
antidepressants block uptake of serotonin and norepi-
nephrine. The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
such as fluoxetine (Prozac), were an important thera-
peutic innovation and are generally better tolerated 
than tricyclic antidepressants, although treatment-
resistant depression remains a critical problem. The 
application of appropriate drugs that block transport-
ers can prolong and enhance synaptic signaling by the 
biogenic amines and GABA. In some instances, drugs 
act both on transporters on the neuron’s surface and 
on vesicular transporters within the cell. For example, 
amphetamines are actively taken up by the dopamine 
or other biogenic amine transporters on the external 
membrane of the neuron as well as by VMAT2.
Transporter 
molecules 
for 
neurotransmitters 
belong to two distinct groups that are different in both 
structure and mechanism. High-resolution structures 
of bacterial homologs from each of these families have 
been solved, which has greatly advanced our under-
standing of transporter mechanisms.
One group of transporters is the neurotransmitter 
sodium symporters (NSS), a superfamily of transmem-
brane proteins that thread through the plasma mem-
brane 12 times (11 times for many prokaryotic homologs). 
These proteins are comprised of a pseudo-symmetric 
inverted repeat in which membrane-spanning segments 
1 to 5 are homologous to membrane-spanning segments 
6 to 10. The NSS family includes the transporters of 
GABA, glycine, norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, 
osmolytes, and amino acids. Crystal structures for the 
human serotonin transporter and the fly dopamine 
transporter, which share the same structure and general 
mechanism as the bacterial homologs crystallized previ-
ously, have recently been solved.
The second family consists of transporters of glu-
tamate. These proteins traverse the plasma membrane 
eight times and contain two helical hairpins that are 
*Axelrod received a bachelor’s degree in chemistry and wrote many 
of his celebrated papers as a technician in Brodie’s lab before 
entering graduate school and receiving a PhD 21 years later. He was 
awarded a share of the Nobel Prize in 1970 for his co-discovery of 
neuronal norepinephrine uptake and his discovery of COMT. His co-
recipients of the prize that year were Bernard Katz, who described 
quantal neurotransmission, and Ulf von Euler, who also studied 
vesicular uptake and epinephrine release.


===== Page 5 =====
376    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
thought to serve a role in gating access of substrate 
from each side of the membrane (see Figure 8–16). 
Each group includes several transporters for each 
transmitter substance; for example, there are multi-
ple GABA, glycine, and glutamate transporters, each 
with somewhat different localization, function, and 
pharmacology.
The two groups can be distinguished function-
ally. Although both are driven by the electrochemi-
cal potential provided by the Na+ gradient, transport 
of glutamate requires the countertransport of K+, 
whereas transport by NSS proteins often requires 
the cotransport of Cl– (or H+ antiport in the case of 
prokaryotic homologs). During transport of gluta-
mate, one negatively charged molecule of the trans-
mitter is imported with three Na+ ions and one proton 
(symport) in exchange for the export of one K+. This 
leads to a net influx of two positive charges for each 
transport cycle, generating an inward current. As 
a result of this charge transfer, the negative resting 
potential of the cell generates a large inward driving 
force that results in an enormous gradient of gluta-
mate across the cell membrane. In contrast, the NSS 
proteins transport one to three Na+ ions and one Cl– 
ion together with their substrates. While under most 
conditions the electrochemical driving force is suf-
ficient for NSS transporters to carry transmitter into 
the cell, thereby increasing the cytoplasmic transmit-
ter concentration, the concentration of transmitter in 
the cytoplasm is quite low and ultimately determined 
by the action of vesicular transporters to load trans-
mitter into synaptic vesicles.
A fascinating aspect of the function of the NSS 
proteins is the ability of these transporters to run 
backward, allowing them to generate transmitter 
efflux. This is best characterized for the neurotrans-
mitter dopamine, as amphetamine and related ana-
logs lead to massive release of dopamine through 
a nonexocytotic mechanism. As discussed earlier, 
at pharmacological doses, amphetamine is actively 
transported by both the plasma membrane dopa-
mine transporter (DAT) and the vesicular VMAT2; the 
latter effect  dissipates the vesicular H+ gradient, lead-
ing to the escape of dopamine to the cytoplasm. This 
dopamine then moves “backward”, out of the cell, 
through DAT, a process that requires phosphoryla-
tion of its N-terminus. While essential for ampheta-
mine function, the normal physiological role of this 
phosphorylation remains a mystery, as it does not 
seem essential for dopamine uptake. Computational 
studies suggest that phosphorylation-regulated inter-
actions of the N-terminus with acidic lipids in the 
inner leaflet play a role in modulating transporter 
function. Nevertheless, the ultimate answer may 
require atomic resolution structures that include the 
N-terminal domain coupled with biophysical data on 
N-terminal dynamics.
Highlights
  1.  Information carried by a neuron is encoded in 
electrical signals that travel along its axon to a 
synapse, where these signals are transformed 
and carried across the synaptic cleft by one or 
more chemical messengers.
  2.  Two major classes of chemical messengers, small-
molecule transmitters and neuroactive peptides, 
are packaged in vesicles within the presynaptic 
neuron. After their synthesis in the cytoplasm, 
small-molecule transmitters are taken up and 
highly concentrated in vesicles, where they 
are protected from degradative enzymes in the 
cytoplasm.
  3.  Synaptic vesicles in the periphery are highly 
concentrated in nerve endings and, in the brain, 
tend to be at varicosities along the axon at pre-
synaptic sites. Classical excitatory synapses with 
ionotropic glutamate receptors are examples 
of “private” synapses that communicate with a 
closely apposed postsynaptic structure such as a 
dendritic spine. In contrast, the dopamine system 
exemplifies “social” synapses that can interact 
with extrasynaptic receptors on many neurons.
  4.  To prevent depletion of small molecule transmit-
ters during rapid synaptic transmission, most are 
synthesized locally at terminals.
  5.  The protein precursors of neuroactive peptides 
are synthesized only in the cell body, the site 
of transcription and translation. The neuropep-
tides are packaged in secretory granules and 
vesicles that are carried from the cell body to 
the terminals by axoplasmic transport. Unlike 
the vesicles that contain small-molecule trans-
mitters, these vesicles are not refilled at the 
terminal.
  6.  The enzymes that regulate transmitter biosynthe-
sis are under tight regulatory control, and changes 
in neuronal activity can produce homeostatic 
changes in the levels and activity of these enzymes. 
This regulation can occur both posttranslationally 
in the cytoplasm, as a result of phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation reactions, as well as by 
transcriptional control in the nucleus.
  7.  Precise mechanisms for terminating transmit-
ter actions represent a key step in synaptic 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    377
transmission that is nearly as important as trans-
mitter synthesis and release. Some released 
transmitter is lost as a result of simple diffusion 
out of the synaptic cleft. However, for the most 
part, transmitter actions are terminated by spe-
cific molecular reactions.
  8.  Acetylcholine is rapidly hydrolyzed by acetyl-
cholinesterase to choline and acetate. Glutamate, 
GABA, glycine, and the biogenic amines are 
taken up into presynaptic terminals and/or glia 
by specific transporters at the plasma membrane 
that are driven by the Na+ gradient.
  9.  Some of the most potent psychoactive com-
pounds act at neurotransmitter transporters. 
The psychostimulatory effects of cocaine result 
from its action to prevent reuptake of dopamine, 
thereby increasing its extracellular levels. In con-
trast, amphetamine and its derivatives promote 
nonexocytotic release of dopamine through a 
mechanism involving both the plasma mem-
brane DAT and the vesicular transporter VMAT2.
10.  The first step in understanding the molecu-
lar strategy of chemical transmission usually 
involves identifying the contents of synaptic ves-
icles. Except for those instances in which trans-
mitter is released by transporter molecules or 
by diffusion through the membrane (in the case 
of gases and lipid metabolites, see Chapter 14), 
only molecules suitably packaged in vesicles can 
be released from a neuron’s terminals. However, 
not all molecules released by a neuron are chemi-
cal messengers—only those that bind to appro-
priate receptors and initiate functional changes 
in that target neuron can usefully be considered 
neurotransmitters.
11.  Information is transmitted when transmitter mol-
ecules bind to receptor proteins in the membrane 
of another cell, causing them to change confor-
mation, leading either to increased ion conduct-
ance in the case of ligand-gated ion channels or to 
alterations in downstream signaling pathways in 
the case of G protein–coupled receptors.
12.  The co-release of several neuroactive substances 
onto appropriate postsynaptic receptors permits 
great diversity of information to be transferred in 
a single synaptic action.
 Jonathan A. Javitch  
 David Sulzer 
Selected Reading
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 
2002. Membrane transport of small molecules and the 
electrical properties of membranes. In: Molecular Biology 
of the Cell, 4th ed. New York and Oxford: Garland Science.
Axelrod J. 2003. Journey of a late blooming biochemical neu-
roscientist. J Biol Chem 278:1–13.
Burnstock G. 1986. Purines and cotransmitters in adrenergic 
and cholinergic neurones. Prog Brain Res 68:193–203.
Chaudhry FA, Boulland JL, Jenstad M, Bredahl MK, Edwards 
RH. 2008. Pharmacology of neurotransmitter transport 
into secretory vesicles. Handb Exp Pharmacol 184:77–106.
Cooper JR, Bloom FE, Roth RH. 2003. The Biochemical Basis of 
Neuropharmacology, 8th ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Dale H. 1935. Pharmacology and nerve endings. Proc R Soc 
Med (Lond) 28:319–332.
Edwards RH. 2007. The neurotransmitter cycle and quantal 
size. Neuron 55:835–858.
Falck B, Hillarp NÅ, Thieme G, Torp A. 1982. Fluorescence of 
catecholamines and related compounds condensed with 
formaldehyde. Brain Res Bull 9:11–15.
Fatt P, Katz B. 1950. Some observations on biological noise. 
Nature 166:597–598.
Jiang J, Amara SG. 2011. New views of glutamate trans-
porter structure and function: advances and challenges. 
Neuropharmacology 60:172–181.
Johnson RG. 1988 Accumulation of biological amines into 
chromaffin granules: a model for hormone and neuro-
transmitter transport. Physiol Rev 68:232–307.
Katz B. 1966. Nerve, Muscle, and Synapse. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Koob GF, Sandman CA, Strand FL (eds). 1990. A decade of 
neuropeptides: past, present and future. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci 579:1–281.
Loewi O. 1960. An autobiographic sketch. Perspect Biol Med 
4:3–25.
Lohr KM, Masoud ST, Salahpour A, Miller GW. 2017. 
Membrane transporters as mediators of synaptic dopa-
mine dynamics: implications for disease. Eur J Neurosci 
45:20–33.
Pereira D, Sulzer D. 2012. Mechanisms of dopamine quantal 
size regulation. Front Biosci 17:2740–2767.
Sames D, Dunn M, Karpowicz RJ Jr, Sulzer D. 2013. Visual-
izing neurotransmitter secretion at individual synapses. 
ACS Chem Neurosci 4:648–651.
Siegel GJ, Agranoff BW, Albers RW, Molinoff PB (eds). 1998. 
Basic Neurochemistry: Molecular, Cellular, and Medical 
Aspects, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Snyder SH, Ferris CD. 2000. Novel neurotransmitters 
and their neuropsychiatric relevance. Am J Psychiatry 
157:1738–1751.
Sossin WS, Fisher JM, Scheller RH. 1989. Cellular and molec-
ular biology of neuropeptide processing and packaging. 
Neuron 2:1407–1417.
Sulzer D, Cragg SJ, Rice ME. 2016. Striatal dopamine neu-
rotransmission: regulation of release and uptake. Basal 
Ganglia 6:123–148.


===== Page 7 =====
378    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Sulzer D, Pothos EN. 2000. Regulation of quantal size by pre-
synaptic mechanisms. Rev Neurosci 11:159–212.
Toei M, Saum R, Forgac M. 2010. Regulation and isoform 
function of the V-ATPases. Biochemistry 49:4715–4723.
Torres GE, Amara SG. 2007. Glutamate and monoamine 
transporters: new visions of form and function. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 17:304–312.
Van der Kloot W. 1991 The regulation of quantal size. Prog 
Neurobiol 36:93–130.
Weihe E, Eiden LE. 2000. Chemical neuroanatomy of the 
vesicular amine transporters. FASEB J 15:2435–2449.
References
Augood SJ, Herbison AE, Emson PC. 1995. Localization of 
GAT-1 GABA transporter mRNA in rat striatum: cellular 
coexpression with GAD67 mRNA, GAD67 immunoreactiv-
ity, and parvalbumin mRNA. J Neurosci 15:865–874.
Coleman JA, Green EM, Gouaux E. 2016. X-ray structures 
and mechanism of the human serotonin transporter. 
Nature 532:334–339.
Danbolt NC, Chaudhry FA, Dehnes Y, et al. 1998. Properties 
and localization of glutamate transporters. Prog Brain Res 
116:23–43.
Fisher JM, Sossin W, Newcomb R, Scheller RH. 1988. Multi-
ple neuropeptides derived from a common precursor are 
differentially packaged and transported. Cell 54:813–822.
Freyberg Z, Sonders MS, Aguilar JI, et al. 2016. Mechanisms 
of amphetamine action illuminated through in vivo optical 
monitoring of dopamine synaptic vesicles. Nat Commun 
7:10652.
Hnasko TS, Chuhma N, Zhang H, et al. 2010. Vesicular glu-
tamate transport promotes dopamine storage and gluta-
mate corelease in vivo. Neuron 65:643–656.
Khoshbouei, H, Sen N, Guptaroy B, et al. 2004. N-terminal 
phosphorylation of the dopamine transporter is required 
for amphetamine-induced efflux. PLoS Biol 2(3): E78.
Krieger DT. 1983. Brain peptides: what, where, and why? 
Science 222:975–985.
Liu Y, Kranz DE, Waites C, Edwards RH. 1999. Membrane 
trafficking of neurotransmitter transporters in the regula-
tion of synaptic transmission. Trends Cell Biol 9:356–363.
Lloyd PE, Frankfurt M, Stevens P, Kupfermann I, Weiss KR. 
1987. Biochemical and immunocytological localization of 
the neuropeptides FMRFamide SCPA, SCPB, to neurons 
involved in the regulation of feeding in Aplysia. J Neurosci 
7:1123–1132.
López-Bendito G, Sturgess K, Erdélyi F, Szabó G, Molnár Z, 
Paulsen O. 2004. Preferential origin and layer destina-
tion of GAD65-GFP cortical interneurons. Cereb Cortex 
14:1122–1133.
Okuda T, Haga T. 2003. High-affinity choline transporter. 
Neurochem Res 28:483–488.
Otsuka M, Kravitz EA, Potter DD. 1967. Physiological and 
chemical architecture of a lobster ganglion with particu-
lar reference to γ-aminobutyrate and glutamate. J Neuro-
physiol 30:725–752.
Palay SL. 1956. Synapses in the central nervous system.  
J Biophys Biochem Cytol 2:193–202.
Pereira DB, Schmitz Y, Mészáros J, et al. 2016. Fluorescent 
false neurotransmitter reveals functionally silent dopa-
mine vesicle clusters in the striatum. Nat Neurosci 
19:578–586.
Rubin RP. 2007. A brief history of great discoveries in pharma-
cology: in celebration of the centennial anniversary of the 
founding of the American Society of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics. Pharmacol Rev 59:289–359.
Yamashita A, Singh SK, Kawate T, Jin Y, Gouaux E. 2005. 
Crystal structure of a bacterial homologue of Na+/
Cl−-dependent neurotransmitter transporters. Nature 
437:205–223.
Yernool D, Boudker O, Jin Y, Gouaux E. 2004. Structure of a 
glutamate transporter homologue from Pyrococcus horikoshii. 
Nature 431:811–818.


===== Page 8 =====
Part IV


===== Page 9 =====
Preceding Page
In Plato’s “Allegory of the Cave,” which addresses the origin of knowledge, his early 
insight into the constructive nature of perception offers illuminating metaphors for the 
process. The parable begins with the premise that a group of prisoners has never seen 
the outside world. Their experience is limited to shadows cast upon the wall of the 
cave by objects passing before a fire. The causes of those shadows—even the fact that 
they are shadows—is unknown to the prisoners. Nonetheless, over time, the shadows 
become imbued with meaning in the prisoners’ minds.  Metaphorically, the shadows 
represent sensations, which are fleeting and incoherent. The assignment of meaning 
represents the construction of intelligible percepts. The prisoner turning the corner of 
the wall has been freed to witness the larger world of causes, which he reports back 
to those still imprisoned. In a novel metaphorical take on this ancient story, this return-
ing prisoner represents the field of modern neuroscience, which sheds light on the 
relationship between our shadowy sensations and our rich perceptual experience of the 
world. (Plato’s Cave, 1604. Jan Pietersz Saenredam, after Cornelis Cornelisz van Haarlem. 
National Gallery, Washington D.C.)


