===== Page 1 =====
12    Part I / Overall Perspective
The Central Nervous System Has Seven  
Main Parts
The spinal cord, the most caudal part of the central nerv-
ous system, receives and processes sensory information 
from the skin, joints, and muscles of the limbs and trunk 
and controls movement of the limbs and the trunk. It 
is subdivided into cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral 
regions (Figure 1–3A).
The spinal cord continues rostrally as the brain 
stem, which consists of the medulla oblongata, pons, 
and midbrain. The brain stem receives sensory informa-
tion from the skin and muscles of the head and provides 
the motor control for the head’s musculature. It also con-
veys information from the spinal cord to the brain and 
from the brain to the spinal cord, and regulates levels of 
arousal and awareness through the reticular formation.
The brain stem contains several collections of cell bod-
ies, the cranial nerve nuclei. Some of these nuclei receive 
information from the skin and muscles of the head; oth-
ers control motor output to muscles of the face, neck, and 
eyes. Still others are specialized to process information 
from three of the special senses: hearing, balance, and taste.
The medulla oblongata, directly rostral to the spi-
nal cord, includes several centers responsible for vital 
autonomic functions, such as digestion, breathing, and 
the control of heart rate.
The pons, rostral to the medulla, conveys informa-
tion about movement from the cerebral hemispheres to 
the cerebellum.
The cerebellum, behind the pons, modulates the 
force and range of movement and is involved in the 
learning of motor skills. It is functionally connected to 
the three main organs of the brain stem: the medulla 
oblongata, the pons, and the midbrain.
The midbrain, rostral to the pons, controls many 
sensory and motor functions, including eye movement 
and the coordination of visual and auditory reflexes.
The diencephalon lies rostral to the midbrain and 
contains two structures. The thalamus processes most of 
the information reaching the cerebral cortex from the 
rest of the central nervous system. The hypothalamus 
regulates autonomic, endocrine, and visceral functions.
The cerebrum comprises two cerebral hemispheres, 
each consisting of a heavily wrinkled outer layer (the cer-
ebral cortex) and three deep-lying structures (components 
of the basal ganglia, the hippocampus, and amygdaloid nuclei). 
The basal ganglia, which include the caudate, putamen, 
and globus pallidus, regulate movement execution and 
motor- and habit-learning, two forms of memory that are 
referred to as implicit memory; the hippocampus is criti-
cal for storage of memory of people, places, things, and 
events, a form of memory that is referred to as explicit; 
and the amygdaloid nuclei coordinate the autonomic and 
endocrine responses of emotional states, including mem-
ory of threats, another form of implicit memory.
Each cerebral hemisphere is divided into four dis-
tinct lobes: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal 
(Figure 1–3B). These lobes are associated with distinct 
functions, although the cortical areas are all highly inter-
connected and can participate in a wide range of brain 
functions. The occipital lobe receives visual information 
and is critical for all aspects of vision. Information from 
the occipital lobe is then processed through two main 
pathways. The dorsal stream, connecting the occipital 
lobe to the parietal lobe, is concerned with the location 
and manipulation of objects in visual space. The ventral 
stream, connecting the occipital lobe to the temporal 
lobe, is concerned with object identity, including the rec-
ognition of individual faces. The temporal lobe is also 
important for processing auditory information (and 
also contains the hippocampus and amygdala buried 
beneath its surface). The frontal lobes are strongly inter-
connected with all cortical areas and are important for 
higher cognitive processing and motor planning.
About two-thirds of the cortex lies in the sulci, 
and many gyri are buried by overlying cortical lobes. 
The full extent of the cortex is made visible by separat-
ing the hemispheres to reveal the medial surface of the 
brain and by slicing the brain post mortem, for example in 
an autopsy (Figure 1–4). Much of this information can 
be visualized in the living brain through modern brain 
imaging (Figure 1–5; Chapter 6). These views also afford 
views of the white matter and subcortical gray matter.
Two important regions of cerebral cortex not visible 
on the surface include the cingulate cortex and insular 
cortex. The cingulate cortex lies dorsal to the corpus cal-
losum and is important for regulation of emotion, pain 
perception, and cognition. The insular cortex, which lies 
buried within the overlying frontal, parietal, and tem-
poral lobes, plays an important role in emotion, homeo-
stasis, and taste perception. These internal views also 
afford examination of the corpus callosum, the prominent 
axon fiber tract that connects the two hemispheres.
The various brain regions described above are often 
divided into three broader regions: the hindbrain (com-
prising the medulla oblongata, pons, and cerebellum); 
midbrain (comprising the tectum, substantia nigra, retic-
ular formation, and periaqueductal gray matter); and 
forebrain (comprising the diencephalon and cerebrum). 
Together the midbrain and hindbrain (minus the cer-
ebellum) include the same structures as the brain stem. 
The anatomical organization of the nervous system is 
described in more detail in Chapter 4.
Box 1–2  Anatomical Organization of the Central Nervous System


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    13
Figure 1–3  The divisions of the central nervous system.
A. The central nervous system can be divided into seven 
main regions, proceeding from the most caudal region, the 
spinal cord, to the brain stem (medulla, pons, and midbrain), 
to the diencephalon (containing the thalamus and hypothala-
mus), to the telencephalon or cerebrum (cerebral cortex, 
underlying white matter, subcortical nuclei, and the basal 
ganglia).
B. The four major lobes of the cerebrum are named for the 
parts of the cranium that cover them. This lateral view of the 
brain shows only the left cerebral hemisphere. The central 
sulcus separates the frontal and parietal lobes. The lateral 
sulcus separates the frontal from the temporal lobes. The 
primary motor cortex occupies the gyrus immediately rostral 
to the central sulcus. The primary somatosensory cortex 
occupies the gyrus immediately caudal to the central sulcus.
C. Further divisions of the brain are visible when the hemi-
spheres are separated in this medial view of the right hemi-
sphere. The corpus collosum contains a large bundle of axons 
connecting the two hemispheres. The cingulate cortex is part 
of the cerebral cortex that surrounds the corpus collosum. The 
primary visual cortex occupies the calcarine sulcus.
A
Basal ganglia
Cervical
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
7. Cerebrum
1. Spinal cord
4. Cerebellum
5. Midbrain
3. Pons
2. Medulla
    oblongata
Brain stem
6. Diencephalon
B
C
Central sulcus
Occipital
lobe
Cerebellum
Medulla
Medulla
Spinal cord
Lateral
sulcus
Corpus
callosum
Temporal
lobe
Pons
Frontal
lobe
Cingulate sulcus
Cingulate gyrus
Parietal 
lobe
Parietal
occipital
sulcus
Calcarine
sulcus
Cerebellum
Frontal
lobe
Temporal
lobe
Occipital
lobe
Parietal
lobe
(continued )


===== Page 3 =====
14    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 1–4  Major subcortical and deep cortical regions of 
the cerebral hemispheres are visible in drawings of brain 
slices from postmortem tissue.
Four sequential coronal sections (A–D) were made along the 
rostral-caudal axis indicated on the lateral view of the brain 
(top right, inset). The basal ganglia comprise the caudate 
nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, and sub-
thalamic nucleus (not shown). The thalamus relays sensory 
information from the periphery to the cerebral cortex. The 
amygdala and hippocampus are regions of the cerebral cor-
tex buried within the temporal lobe that are important for 
emotional responses and memory. The ventricles contain 
and produce the cerebrospinal fluid, which bathes the sulci, 
cisterns, and the spinal cord. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys, 
Voogd, and van Huijzen 1988.)
Caudate 
nucleus
Caudate 
nucleus
Putamen
Insular 
cortex
Insular 
cortex
Temporal 
lobe
Frontal lobe
Frontal lobe
A
A B C
D
Frontal
operculum
Temporal
operculum
Ventricle
Hypothalamus
Globus 
pallidus
Amygdala
Ventricle
Thalamus
Hippocampus
Parietal lobe
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Cerebellum
Medulla
Corpus 
callosum
Corpus 
callosum
Corpus 
callosum
Substantia
nigra
Putamen
Frontal lobe
Insular
cortex
Dentate nucleus
Entorhinal 
cortex
Ventricle
B
C
D
Temporal 
lobe
Pons
Temporal 
lobe
Box 1–2  Anatomical Organization of the Central Nervous System (continued)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    15
Figure 1–5  The main cortical and subcortical regions can 
be imaged in the brain of a living individual.
A. This schematic drawing shows, for reference, the major 
surface and deep regions of the brain, including the rostral 
end of the spinal cord.
B. The major brain divisions drawn in part A are evident in a 
magnetic resonance image of a living human brain.
A
Cerebral hemisphere
Corpus callosum
Diencephalon
Pons
Medulla
oblongata
Spinal cord
Midbrain
Cerebellum
B


===== Page 5 =====
16    Part I / Overall Perspective
In each of the hemispheres, the overlying cortex 
is divided into four lobes named for the skull bones 
that overlie them: frontal, parietal, occipital, and tempo-
ral (Figure 1–3B). Each lobe has several characteristic 
deep infoldings, an evolutionary strategy for packing 
a large sheet of cortex into a limited space. The crests 
of these convolutions are called gyri, and the inter-
vening grooves are called sulci or fissures. The more 
prominent gyri and sulci, which are quite similar from 
person to person, bear specific names. For example, 
the central sulcus separates the precentral gyrus, an 
area concerned with motor function, from the postcen-
tral gyrus, an area that deals with sensory function 
(Figure 1–3B). Several prominent gyri are only visible 
on the medial surface between the two hemispheres 
(Figure 1–3C), and others are deep within fissures 
and sulci and therefore only visible when the brain is 
sliced, either in postmortem tissue (Figure 1–4) or vir-
tually, using magnetic resonance imaging (Figure 1–5), 
as explained in Chapter 6.
Each lobe has specialized functions. The frontal 
lobe is largely concerned with short-term memory, 
planning future actions, and control of movement; the 
parietal lobe mediates somatic sensation, forming a 
body image and relating it to extrapersonal space; the 
occipital lobe is concerned with vision; and the tem-
poral lobe processes hearing, the recognition of objects 
and faces, and—through its deep structures, the hip-
pocampus and amygdaloid nuclei—learning, memory, 
and emotion.
Two important features characterize the organi-
zation of the cerebral cortex. First, each hemisphere 
is concerned primarily with sensory and motor pro-
cesses on the contralateral (opposite) side of the body. 
Thus sensory information that reaches the spinal cord 
from the left side of the body crosses to the right side 
of the nervous system on its way to the cerebral cortex. 
Similarly, the motor areas in the right hemisphere exert 
control over the movements of the left half of the body. 
The second feature is that the hemispheres, although 
similar in appearance, are not completely symmetrical 
in structure or function.
The First Strong Evidence for Localization 
of Cognitive Abilities Came From Studies of 
Language Disorders
The first areas of the cerebral cortex identified as 
important for cognition were areas concerned with lan-
guage. These discoveries came from studies of aphasia, 
a language disorder that most often occurs when cer-
tain areas of brain tissue are destroyed by a stroke, the 
occlusion or rupture of a blood vessel supplying a por-
tion of a cerebral hemisphere. Many of the important 
discoveries in the study of aphasia occurred in rapid 
succession during the latter half of the 19th century. 
Taken together, these advances form one of the most 
exciting and important chapters in the neuroscientific 
study of human behavior.
Pierre Paul Broca, a French neurologist, was the 
first to identify specific areas of the brain concerned 
with language. Broca was influenced by Gall’s efforts 
to map higher functions in the brain, but instead of 
correlating behavior with bumps on the skull, he cor-
related clinical evidence of aphasia with brain lesions 
discovered post mortem. In 1861 he wrote, “I had 
thought that if there were ever a phrenological science, 
it would be the phrenology of convolutions (in the 
cortex), and not the phrenology of bumps (on the head).” 
Based on this insight, Broca founded neuropsychology, 
an empirical science of mental processes that he distin-
guished from the phrenology of Gall.
In 1861 Broca described a patient, Leborgne, 
who as a result of a stroke could not speak, although 
he could understand language perfectly well. This 
patient had no motor deficits of the tongue, mouth, 
or vocal cords that would affect his ability to speak. 
In fact, he could utter isolated words, whistle, and 
sing a melody without difficulty. But he could not 
speak grammatically or create complete sentences, 
nor could he express ideas in writing. Postmortem 
examination of this patient’s brain showed a lesion in 
a posterior inferior region of the left frontal lobe, now 
called Broca’s area (Figure 1–6). Broca studied eight 
similar patients, all with lesions in this region, and 
in each case the lesion was located in the left cerebral 
hemisphere. This discovery led Broca to announce 
in 1864: “Nous parlons avec l’hémisphère gauche!” (We 
speak with the left hemisphere!).
Broca’s work stimulated a search for cortical sites 
associated with other specific behaviors—a search 
soon rewarded. In 1870 Gustav Fritsch and Eduard 
Hitzig galvanized the scientific community when 
they showed that characteristic limb movements of 
dogs, such as extending a paw, could be produced 
by electrically stimulating discrete regions of the 
precentral gyrus. These regions were invariably 
located in the contralateral motor cortex. Thus the 
right hand, the one most used for writing and skilled 
movements, is controlled by the left hemisphere, 
the same hemisphere that controls speech. In most 
people, therefore, the left hemisphere is regarded as 
dominant.
The next step was taken in 1876 by Karl Wernicke, 
who at age 26 published a now-classic paper,  


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    17
Motor cortex
(Precentral gyrus)
Somatic sensory
cortex (Postcentral
gyrus)
Occipital
lobe
Temporal lobe
Frontal lobe
Central sulcus
Lateral sulcus
Broca’s
area
Vocalization region
of motor area
Arcuate
fasciculus
Auditory cortex
Wernicke’s
area
Visual
cortex
Visual word
form area
Angular gyrus
Parietal lobe
“The Symptom-Complex of Aphasia: A Psychologi-
cal Study on an Anatomical Basis.” In it he described 
another type of aphasia, a failure of comprehension rather 
than speech: a receptive as opposed to an expressive mal-
function. Whereas Broca’s patients could understand 
language but not speak, Wernicke’s patient could form 
words but could not understand language and produced 
senseless, yet grammatical, sentences. Moreover, the 
locus of this new type of aphasia was different from 
that described by Broca. The lesion occurred in the 
posterior part of the cerebral cortex where the tempo-
ral lobe meets the parietal lobe (Figure 1–6).
Figure 1–6  Language processing engages several regions 
of the left cerebral hemisphere.
Broca’s area controls the production of speech. It lies near the 
region of the motor area that controls the mouth and tongue 
movements that form words. Wernicke’s area processes audi-
tory input for language and is important for understanding 
speech. It lies near the primary auditory cortex and the angular 
gyrus. The French neurologist Jules Dejerine proposed in the 
1890s that a polymodal sensory area in the angular gyrus inte-
grates information from vision and audition to represent  
words, but more recent studies implicate a more ventral occipi-
totemporal cortical area for processing of visual words.  
Wernicke’s area communicates with Broca’s area by a bidirec-
tional pathway, part of which is made up of the arcuate fascicu-
lus. (Adapted, with permission, from Geschwind 1979.)
On the basis of this discovery, and the work of 
Broca, Fritsch, and Hitzig, Wernicke formulated a 
neural model of language that attempted to reconcile 
and extend the predominant theories of brain function  
at that time. Phrenologists and cellular connectionists 
argued that the cerebral cortex was a mosaic of func-
tionally specific areas, whereas the holistic aggregate-field 
school claimed that every mental function involved 
the entire cerebral cortex. Wernicke proposed that only 
the most basic mental functions, those concerned with 
simple perceptual and motor activities, are mediated 
entirely by neurons in discrete local areas of the cortex. 
More complex cognitive functions, he argued, result 
from interconnections between several functional 
sites. By integrating the principle of localized function 
within a connectionist framework, Wernicke empha-
sized the idea that different components of a single 
behavior are likely to be processed in several regions 
of the brain. He was thus the first to advance the idea 
of distributed processing, now a central tenet of neural 
science.
Wernicke postulated that language involves sepa-
rate motor and sensory programs, each governed by 
distinct regions of cortex. He proposed that the motor 
program that governs the mouth movements for 
speech is located in Broca’s area, suitably situated in 
front of the region of the motor area that controls the 
mouth, tongue, palate, and vocal cords (Figure 1–6). 
He next assigned the sensory program that governs 
word perception to the temporal lobe area that he had 
discovered, now called Wernicke’s area. This region is 
surrounded by the auditory cortex and by areas now 
known collectively as association cortex, integrating 
auditory, visual, and somatic sensations. According to 
Wernicke’s model, the communication between these 
two language centers was mediated via a large bundle 
of axons known as the arcuate fasciculus.
Thus Wernicke formulated the first coherent neu-
ral model for language that is still useful today, with 
important modifications and elaborations described in 
Chapter 55. According to this model, the neural pro-
cessing of spoken or written words begins in separate 
sensory areas of the cortex specialized for auditory or 
visual information. This information is then conveyed, 
via intermediate association areas that extract features 
suitable for recognition of spoken or written words, 
to Wernicke’s area, where it is recognized as language 
and associated with meaning.
The power of Wernicke’s model was not only its 
completeness but also its predictive utility. This model 
correctly predicted a third type of aphasia, one that 
results from disconnection. In this type, the recep-
tive and expressive zones for speech are intact but 


===== Page 7 =====
18    Part I / Overall Perspective
the neuronal fibers that connect them (arcuate fas-
ciculus) are destroyed. This conduction aphasia, as it is 
now called, is characterized by frequent, sound-based 
speech errors (phonemic paraphasias), repetition difficul-
ties, and severe limitation in verbal working memory. 
Patients with conduction aphasia understand words 
that they hear and read, and have no motor difficulties 
when they speak. Yet they cannot speak coherently; 
they omit parts of words or substitute incorrect sounds 
and experience great difficulties in verbatim repetition 
of a multisyllabic word, phrase, or sentence that they 
hear or read or recall from memory. Although painfully 
aware of their own errors, their successive attempts at 
self-correction are often unsuccessful.
Inspired in part by Wernicke’s advances and led 
by the anatomist Korbinian Brodmann, a new school 
of cortical localization arose in Germany at the begin-
ning of the 20th century, one that distinguished func-
tional areas of the cortex based on the shapes of cells 
and variations in their layered arrangement. Using 
this cytoarchitectonic method, Brodmann distinguished 
52 anatomically and functionally distinct areas in the 
human cerebral cortex (Figure 1–7).
4
3 1
2
5
7
19
18
18
19
20
37
38
11
10
9
8
6
21
22
42
41
43
44
45
46
40
39
47
17
Figure 1–7  Early in the 20th century, the human cerebral 
cortex was classified into 52 discrete functional areas.  
The areas shown were identified by the anatomist Korbinian  
Brodmann on the basis of distinctive nerve cell structures and 
characteristic arrangements of cell layers. This scheme is still 
widely used today and is continually updated. Several areas 
defined by Brodmann have been found to control specific brain 
functions. For instance, area 4 is the motor cortex, responsible 
for voluntary movement. Areas 1, 2, and 3 constitute the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex, which receives sensory informa-
tion primarily from the skin and joints. Area 17 is the primary 
visual cortex, which receives sensory signals from the eyes and 
relays them to other areas for further processing. Areas 41 and 
42 constitute the primary auditory cortex. The drawing shows 
only areas visible on the outer surface of the cortex.
Even though the biological evidence for function-
ally discrete areas in the cortex was compelling, by the 
early 20th century, holistic views of the brain continued 
to dominate experimental thinking and clinical practice 
until 1950. This surprising state of affairs owed much 
to several prominent neural scientists who advocated 
the holistic view, among them the British neurologist 
Henry Head, the Russian behavioral physiologist Ivan 
Pavlov, and the American psychologist Karl Lashley.
Most influential was Lashley, who was deeply 
skeptical of the cytoarchitectonic approach to func-
tional mapping of the cortex. “The ‘ideal’ architec-
tonic map is nearly worthless,” Lashley wrote. “The 
area subdivisions are in large part anatomically 
meaningless, and misleading as to the presumptive 
functional divisions of the cortex.” His skepticism 
was reinforced by his studies of the effects of various 
brain lesions on the ability of rats to learn to run a 
maze. From these studies Lashley concluded that the 
severity of a learning defect depended on the size of 
the lesion, not on its precise location. Disillusioned, 
Lashley—and after him many other psychologists—
concluded that learning and other higher mental 
functions have no special locus in the brain and con-
sequently cannot be attributed to specific collections 
of neurons.
Based on his observations, Lashley reformulated 
the aggregate-field view by further minimizing the 
role of individual neurons, specific neuronal connec-
tions, and even specific brain regions in the produc-
tion of specific behavior. According to Lashley’s theory 
of mass action, it is the full mass of the brain, not its 
regional components, that is crucial for a function such 
as memory.
Lashley’s experiments with rats have now been 
reinterpreted. A variety of studies have shown that 
the maze-learning used by Lashley is unsuited to the 
search for local cortical functions because it involves so 
many motor and sensory capabilities. Deprived of one 
sensory capability, say vision, a rat can still learn to run 
a maze using touch or smell. Besides, as we shall see 
later in the book, many mental functions are mediated 
by more than one region or neuronal pathway. Thus 
a given function may not be eliminated by a single 
lesion. This is especially germane when considering 
cognitive functions of the brain. For example, knowl-
edge of space is supported by numerous parietal asso-
ciation areas that link vision to a potential shift of the 
gaze, turn of the head, reach of the hand, and so on. In 
principle, any one of these association areas can com-
pensate for damage of another. It takes a large insult 
to the parietal lobe to produce obvious deficits of spa-
tial knowledge (spatial agnosia) (Chapter 59). Such an 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    19
observation would have seemed to support theories of 
mass action, but we now recognize that it is compatible 
with localization of function that incorporates the idea 
of redundancy of function.
Soon the evidence for localization of function 
became overwhelming. Beginning in the late 1930s, 
Edgar Adrian in England and Wade Marshall and 
Philip Bard in the United States discovered that touch-
ing different parts of a cat’s body elicits electrical 
activity in distinct regions of the cerebral cortex. By sys-
tematically probing the body surface, they established 
a precise map of the body surface in specific areas of 
the cerebral cortex described by Brodmann. This result 
showed that functionally distinct areas of cortex could 
be defined unambiguously according to anatomical 
criteria such as cell type and cell layering, connections 
of cells, and—most importantly—behavioral function. 
As we shall see in later chapters, functional speciali-
zation is a key organizing principle in the cerebral 
cortex, extending even to individual columns of cells 
within an area of cortex. Indeed, the brain is divided 
into many more functional regions than Brodmann  
envisaged.
More refined methods made it possible to learn 
even more about the function of different brain regions 
involved in language. In the late 1950s Wilder Penfield, 
and later George Ojemann, reinvestigated the cortical 
areas that are essential for producing language. While 
locally anesthetized during brain surgery for epilepsy, 
awake patients were asked to name objects (or use 
language in other ways) while different areas of the 
exposed cortex were stimulated with small electrodes. 
If an area of the cortex was critical for language, appli-
cation of the electrical stimulus blocked the patient’s 
ability to name objects. In this way Penfield and Ojemann 
were able to confirm the language areas of the cortex 
described by Broca and Wernicke. As we shall learn in 
Chapter 55, the neural networks for language are far 
more extensive and complex than those described by 
Broca and Wernicke.
Initially almost everything known about the ana-
tomical organization of language came from studies 
of patients with brain lesions. Today functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other noninvasive 
methods allow analyses to be conducted on healthy 
people engaged in reading, speaking, and thinking 
(Chapter 6). fMRI not only has confirmed that reading 
and speaking activate different brain areas but also has 
revealed that just thinking about a word’s meaning in 
the absence of sensory inputs activates a still different 
area in the left frontal cortex. Indeed, even within the 
traditional language areas, individual subregions are 
recruited to different degrees, depending on the way 
we think about words, express them, and resolve their 
meaning from the arrangement of other words (ie, syn-
tax). The new imaging tools promise not only to teach 
us which areas are involved but also to expose the 
functional logic of their interconnection.
One of the great surprises emerging from mod-
ern methodologies is that so many areas of cortex are 
activated in language comprehension and produc-
tion. These include the traditional language areas, 
identified by Broca, Wernicke, and Dejerine, in the left 
hemisphere; their homologs in the right hemisphere; 
and newly identified regions. Functional imaging 
tends to elucidate areas that are recruited differen-
tially, whereas lesions from stroke, tumor, or injury 
distinguish brain areas that are essential for one or 
more functions. Thus it appears that Broca’s area, 
once thought to be dedicated to language production, 
is in fact also involved in a variety of linguistic tasks 
including comprehension (Figure 1–6). In some cases, 
functional imaging invites refinement or revision 
of the critical areas identified by lesion studies. For 
example, reading is now thought to recruit special-
ized regions in the ventral occipitotemporal cortex in 
addition to the angular gyrus in the parietal cortex 
(shown in Figure 1–6).
Thus the processing of language in the brain exem-
plifies not only the principle of localized function but 
also the more sophisticated elaboration of this prin-
ciple, that numerous distinct neural structures with 
specialized functions belong to systems. Perhaps this 
is the natural reconciliation of the controversy con-
cerning localized and distributed processes—that is, 
a small number of distinct areas, each identified with 
a small set of functions and contributing through 
their interactions to the phenomenology of percep-
tion, action, and ideation. The brain may carve up a 
task differently than our intuition tells us. Who would 
have guessed that the neural analysis of the movement 
and color of an object would occur in different path-
ways rather than a single pathway mediating a unified 
percept of the object? Similarly, we might expect that 
the neural organization of language may not conform 
neatly to the axioms of a theory of universal grammar, 
yet support the very seamless functionality described 
by linguistic theory.
Studies of patients with brain damage continue to 
afford important insight into how the brain is organ-
ized for language. One of the most impressive results 
comes from the study of deaf people who have lost their 
ability to communicate through the use of a signed lan-
guage (eg, British Sign Language [BSL] or American 
Sign Language [ASL]) after suffering cerebral damage. 
Signed languages use hand movements rather than 


===== Page 9 =====
20    Part I / Overall Perspective
vocalizations and are perceived by sight rather than 
sound, but have the same structural complexity as 
spoken languages. Sign language processing, as with 
spoken language processing, localizes to the left 
hemisphere. Damage to the left hemisphere can have 
quite specific consequences for signing just as for spo-
ken language, affecting sign comprehension (following 
damage in Wernicke’s area), grammar, or fluency (fol-
lowing damage in Broca’s area). These clinical observa-
tions are supported by functional neuroimaging. Not 
surprisingly, production and comprehension of signed 
and spoken languages do not involve identical brain 
areas, but the overlap is truly remarkable (Figure 1–8). 
There is even evidence that processing the constituent 
parts of signs (eg, handshape used) involves some of 
the same brain regions involved when making rhyme 
judgements about speech.
These observations illustrate three points. First, 
language processing occurs primarily in the left hemi-
sphere, independently of pathways that process the 
sensory and motor modalities used in language. Sec-
ond, auditory input is not necessary for the emergence 
and operation of language capabilities in the left hemi-
sphere. Third, spoken language is only one of a family 
of language skills mediated by the left hemisphere.
Figure 1–8  Deaf signing and hearing individuals share 
common language processing areas. Regions of the cortex 
involved in the recognition of a spoken or signed language, 
identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
Yellow highlight shows the areas of the left and right cerebral 
hemispheres (left and right columns, respectively) that were 
activated more when comprehending language than when per-
forming a perceptual task. For the deaf signers (top row), the 
highlighted regions were more active during comprehension 
of British Sign Language than during the detection of a visual 
stimulus superimposed on the same motionless signer. For the 
hearing speakers (bottom row), highlighted regions were more 
active during comprehension of audio-visual speech than dur-
ing the detection of a tone while viewing a motionless (silent) 
speaker. (Adapted, with permission, from MacSweeney et al., 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Oxford University Press.)
Deaf
signers
Hearing
speakers
Investigations of other behaviors have provided 
additional support for the idea that the brain has dis-
tinct cognitive systems. These studies demonstrate 
that complex information processing requires many 
interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, each 
concerned with processing particular aspects of sen-
sory stimuli or motor movement and not others. For 
example, perceptual awareness of an object’s loca-
tion, size, and shape relies on activity in numerous 
parietal association areas that link vision to poten-
tial actions, such as moving the eyes, orienting the 
head, reaching, and shaping the hand to grasp. The 
parietal areas do not initiate these actions but evalu-
ate sensory information as evidence bearing on these 
potentialities. They receive information from the dor-
sal visual stream—sometimes referred to as the where 
pathway, but more aptly termed a how pathway—to 
construct a state of knowing (gnosia) about the loca-
tion and other spatial properties of objects. The ven-
tral visual stream, or what pathway, is also concerned 
with possible actions, but these are associated with 
socializing and foraging. These associations establish 
gnosia about the desirability of objects, faces, foods, 
and potential mates. In this sense, the what pathway 
might be a how pathway too.


