===== Page 1 =====
436    Part IV / Perception
the working surface of the tool as though our fingers 
were there because two groups of touch receptors 
monitor the vibrations and forces produced by those 
distant conditions. When we scan our fingers across a 
surface, we feel its form and texture because another 
group of mechanoreceptors has high spatial and tem-
poral acuity. A blind person uses this capacity to read 
Braille at a hundred words per minute. When we grip 
and manipulate an object, we do so delicately, with 
only as much force as needed, because specific mecha-
noreceptors continually monitor slip and adjust our 
grip appropriately.
We are also able to recognize objects placed in the 
hand from touch alone. When we are handed a base-
ball, we recognize it instantly without having to look 
at it because of its shape, size, weight, density, and 
texture. We do not have to think about the informa-
tion provided by each finger to deduce that the object 
must be a baseball; the information flows to memory 
and instantly matches previously stored representa-
tions of baseballs. Even if we have never previously 
handled a baseball, we perceive it as a single object, 
not as a collection of discrete features. The somatosen-
sory pathways of the brain have the daunting task of 
integrating information from thousands of sensors in 
each hand and transforming it to a form suitable for 
cognition and action.
Sensory information is extracted for the purpose of 
motor control as well as cognition, and different kinds 
of information are extracted for those purposes. We 
can, for example, shift our attention from the baseball’s 
shape to its location in the hand to readjust our grip for 
an effective throw or pitch. This selective attention to 
different aspects of the sensory information is brought 
about by cortical mechanisms.
Active and Passive Touch Have Distinct Goals
Touch is defined as direct contact between two physi-
cal bodies. In neuroscience, touch refers to the special 
sense by which contact with the body is perceived con-
sciously. Touch can be active, as when you move your 
hand or some other part of the body against another 
surface, or passive, as when someone or something 
else touches you. Active touch is fundamentally a top-
down process in which the subject has agency, seeks 
particular information, and controls what occurs. Sub-
jects select relevant salient features of objects to deter-
mine subsequent behaviors. They choose which object 
to grasp and the most efficient hand shape needed to 
acquire it, and decide how to manipulate it to achieve 
particular goals. During active touch, somatosensory 
information depicts the physical properties of objects 
as well as the motor actions of the subject’s hand 
and arm, and their relation to the task goals. Impor-
tantly, active manipulation of objects is based upon 
the concept of touch as a three-dimensional modal-
ity designed to capture the volumetric, topographic, 
and elastic properties of objects, as first proposed by 
Roberta Klatzky and Susan Lederman. These three-
dimensional qualities are best appreciated by active 
manipulation including grasping, rotation, and con-
tour tracing by the hand.
Passive touch engages a bottom-up process in 
which subjects react to external stimuli specified by 
the experimenter or clinician. The experimenter selects 
and controls the location, amplitude, force, timing, 
duration, and spatial spread of stimuli delivered to the 
skin. Subsequent behaviors are guided by instructions 
provided in the paradigm. Tactile stimuli are classified 
into experimenter-selected categories and/or rated 
along an intensive or hedonic scale. Subjects therefore 
need to analyze all of the transmitted somatosensory 
information and select specific features guided in part 
by the task instructions.
Active and passive modes of tactile stimulation 
excite the same population of receptors in the skin and 
evoke similar responses in afferent fibers. They differ 
somewhat in cognitive features that reflect attention 
and behavioral goals during the period of stimulation. 
Passive touch is tested by naming objects or describ-
ing sensations; active touch is used when the hand 
manipulates objects. The sensory and motor compo-
nents of touch are intimately connected anatomically 
in the brain and are important functionally in guiding 
motor behavior.
During active touch, descending fibers from motor 
centers of the cerebral cortex terminate on interneurons 
in the medial dorsal horn that receive tactile informa-
tion from the skin. Similar fibers from cortical motor 
areas terminate in the dorsal column nuclei, providing 
an efference copy (or corollary discharge) of the motor 
commands that generate behavior (Chapter 30). In this 
manner, tactile signals from the hand resulting from 
active hand movements may be distinguished cen-
trally from passively applied stimuli in the neurologi-
cal exam or in psychophysical tests.
The distinction between active and passive touch 
is important clinically when patients have deficits in 
hand use. Motor deficits such as weakness, stiffness, or 
clumsiness may result from sensory loss, which is why 
passive sensory testing is important in the neurologi-
cal examination. Common neurological tests for touch 
include measurements of detection thresholds, vibra-
tion sense, two-point or texture discrimination, and 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    437
Figure 19–1  Four types of mechanoreceptors are responsible 
for the sense of touch in the human hand.  The terminals of 
myelinated sensory nerves innervating the hand are surrounded by 
specialized structures that detect contact on the skin. The recep-
tors differ in morphology, innervation patterns, location in the skin, 
receptive field size, and physiological responses to touch. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Johansson and Vallbo 1983.)
A. The superficial and deep layers of the glabrous (hairless) skin 
of the hand each contain distinct types of mechanoreceptors. 
The superficial layers contain small receptor cells: Meissner 
corpuscles (RA1, rapidly adapting type 1) and Merkel cells (SA1, 
slowly adapting type 1). The sensory nerve fibers that innervate 
these receptors have branching terminals that innervate multiple 
receptors of one type. The deep layers of the skin and subcuta-
neous tissue contain large receptors: Pacinian corpuscles (RA2, 
rapidly adapting type 2) and Ruffini endings (SA2, slowly adapt-
ing type 2). Each of these receptors is innervated by a single 
nerve fiber, and each fiber innervates only one receptor.
B. The receptive field of a mechanoreceptor reflects the loca-
tion and distribution of its terminals in the skin. Touch receptors 
in the superficial layers of the skin have smaller receptive fields 
than those in the deep layers.
C. The nerve fibers innervating each type of mechanoreceptor 
respond differently when activated. The schematic spike trains 
show responses of each type of nerve when its receptor is 
activated by slowly increasing and constant pressure against 
the skin. The rapidly adapting fibers respond to motion at the 
onset and end of a pressure stimulus and adapt rapidly to con-
stant stimulation, whereas the slowly adapting fibers respond 
to both steady pressure and motion and adapt slowly.
the ability to recognize form through touch (stereognosis). 
These tests measure the sensitivity and function of 
various receptors for touch. Deviations from expected 
values may help diagnose sensory deficits or lesions 
that underlie somatosensory dysfunction. The neural 
mechanisms underlying these tests are discussed in 
this chapter. Other common tests of somatosensory 
function—tendon reflexes, pinprick, and thermal 
tests—are discussed in other chapters.
The Hand Has Four Types of Mechanoreceptors
Tactile sensations in the human hand arise from four 
kinds of mechanoreceptors: Meissner corpuscles, Mer-
kel cells, Pacinian corpuscles, and Ruffini endings 
Meissner
corpuscle
(RA1)
Stimulus
Neural
spike train
Receptors
A  
C
B 
Receptive
ﬁeld
Merkel
cells
(SA1)
Pacinian
corpuscle
(RA2)
Rufﬁni
endings
(SA2)
(Figure 19–1). Each receptor responds in a distinctive 
manner depending on its morphology, innervation 
pattern, and depth in the skin. The sense of touch can 
be understood as the combined result of the informa-
tion provided by these four systems acting in concert.
Touch receptors are innervated by slowly adapting 
or rapidly adapting axons. Slowly adapting (SA) fibers 
respond to steady skin indentation with a sustained 
discharge, whereas rapidly adapting (RA) fibers stop 
firing when indentation becomes stationary (Figure 
19–1 and Table 19–1). Sustained mechanical sensations 
from the hand must accordingly arise from the SA 
fibers; the sensation of motion on or across the skin is 
signaled primarily by RA fibers.
Touch receptors in the hand are further subdivided 
into two types based on size and location in the skin. 


===== Page 3 =====
438    Part IV / Perception
Type 1 touch fibers terminate in clusters of small receptor 
organs (Meissner corpuscles or Merkel cells) in the super-
ficial layers of the skin at the margin between the dermis 
and epidermis (Figure 19–2, Box 19–1.). RA1 fibers are the 
most numerous tactile afferents in the hand, reaching a 
density of approximately 150 per cm2 at the fingertip in 
man and monkey; SA1 fibers are also widely distributed 
in the hand, at densities of 70 per cm2 in the fingertips.
Type 2 fibers innervate the skin sparsely and termi-
nate in single large receptors (Pacinian corpuscles and 
Ruffini endings) located in the dermis or in subcutane-
ous tissue. These receptors are larger and less numerous 
than the receptor organs of the type 1 fibers. The large 
size of type 2 receptors allows them to sense mechanical 
displacement of the skin at some distance from the sen-
sory nerve endings. The density of RA2 fibers in human 
fingers is only 21 per cm2; SA2 fibers are the least abun-
dant, providing only 9 fibers per cm2.
A Cell’s Receptive Field Defines Its Zone of  
Tactile Sensitivity
Individual mechanoreceptor fibers convey informa-
tion from a limited area of skin called the receptive field 
(Chapter 18). Tactile receptive fields in the human 
hand were first studied by Åke Vallbo and Roland 
Johansson using microneurography. They inserted 
microelectrodes through the skin into the median or 
ulnar nerves in the human forelimb and recorded the 
responses of individual afferent fibers. They found 
that in humans, as in other primates, there are impor-
tant differences between touch receptors, both in their 
physiological responses and in the structure of their 
receptive fields.
Type 1 fibers have small, highly localized recep-
tive fields with multiple spots of high sensitivity that 
reflect the branching patterns of their axon terminals 
in the skin (Figure 19–5). An RA1 axon typically inner-
vates 10 to 20 Meissner corpuscles, integrating infor-
mation from several adjacent fingerprint ridges. An 
SA1 fiber innervates approximately 20 Merkel cells in 
young adults (Figure 19–4B); the number of Merkel 
cells drops significantly as we age.
In contrast, type 2 fibers innervating the deep lay-
ers of skin are connected to only a single Pacinian cor-
puscle or Ruffini ending. As these receptors are large, 
they collect information from a broader area of skin. 
Their receptive fields typically contain a single  
Table 19–1  Cutaneous Mechanoreceptors in Glabrous Skin
 
Type 1
Type 2
SA1
RA11
SA2
RA22
Receptor
Merkel cell/neurite com-
plex (multiple endings)
Meissner corpuscle 
(multiple endings)
Ruffini ending  
(single ending)
Pacinian corpuscle 
(single ending)
Location
Base of intermediate 
ridge surrounding sweat 
duct
Dermal papillae  
(adjacent to limiting 
ridge)
Skin folds, skin over 
joints, nail bed
Dermis (deep 
tissue)
Axon diameter (μm)
7–11
6–12
6–12
6–12
Conduction velocity (ms)
40–65
35–70
35–70
35–70
Best stimulus
Edges, points
Lateral motion
Skin stretch
Vibration
Response to sustained 
indentation
Sustained with slow 
adaptation (irregular  
firing pattern)
Phasic at stimulus 
onset
Sustained with slow 
adaptation (regular  
firing rate)
Phasic at stimulus 
onset
Frequency range (Hz)
0–100
1–300
 
5–1,000
Best frequency (Hz)
5
50
 
200
Threshold for rapid 
indentation or vibration 
(best) (μm)
8
2
40
0.01
1Also called RA, QA, or FA1.
2Also called PC or FA2.
RA1, rapidly adapting type 1; RA2, rapidly adapting type 2; SA1, slowly adapting type 1; SA2, slowly adapting type 2.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    439
Figure 19–2  Tactile innervation of the glabrous skin in 
humans. A cross section of the glabrous skin shows the 
principal receptors for touch in the human hand. All of  
these receptors are innervated by large-diameter Aβ  
myelinated fibers. The Meissner corpuscles and Merkel  
cells lie in the superficial layers of the skin at the base of the 
epidermis, 0.5 to 1.0 mm below the skin surface. The  
Meissner corpuscles are located in the dermal papillae that 
border the edges of each papillary ridge. The Merkel cells 
form dense bands below the intermediate ridge surrounding 
the sweat gland ducts along the center of the papillary 
ridges. The RA1 and SA1 fibers that innervate  
these receptors branch at their terminals so that each  
fiber innervates several nearby receptor organs. The  
Pacinian and Ruffini corpuscles lie within the dermis  
(2–3 mm thick) and in deeper tissues. The RA2 and SA2  
fibers that innervate these receptors each innervate only one 
receptor organ. (Abbreviations: RA1, rapidly adapting type 1; 
RA2, rapidly adapting type 2; SA1, slowly adapting type 1; 
SA2, slowly adapting type 2.)
Sweat
gland
Merkel disk
receptor
(SA1)
Meissner
corpuscle
(RA1)
Dermis
Rufﬁni
ending
(SA2)
Peripheral
nerve bundle
Epidermis
Bare 
nerve
ending
Pacinian
corpuscle (RA2)
“hot spot” where sensitivity to touch is greatest; this 
point is located directly above the receptor (Figure 19–5).
Receptive fields on the fingertips are the smallest 
on the body, averaging 11 mm2 for SA1 fibers and 
25 mm2 for RA1 fibers. The small fields complement 
the high density of receptors in the fingertips. Recep-
tive fields become progressively larger on the proximal 
phalanges and the palm, consistent with the lower den-
sity of mechanoreceptors in these regions. Importantly, 
the receptive fields of type 1 fibers are significantly 
smaller than most objects that contact the hand, and 
therefore signal the spatial properties of only a limited 
portion of an object. As in the visual system, the spatial 
features of objects are distributed across a population 
of stimulated receptors whose responses are integrated 
in the brain to form a unified percept.
Each RA2 axon terminates without branching in a 
single Pacinian corpuscle, and each Pacinian corpus-
cle receives but a single RA2 axon. Pacinian corpus-
cles are large onion-like structures in which successive 
layers of connective tissue are separated by fluid-filled 
spaces (see Figure 19–8A1). These layers surround the 
unmyelinated RA2 ending and its myelinated axon up 
to one or more nodes of Ranvier. The capsule amplifies 
high-frequency vibration, a role that is important for 
tool use. Estimates of the number of Pacinian corpus-
cles in the human hand range from 2,400 in the young 
to 300 in the elderly.
The SA2 fibers innervate Ruffini endings concen-
trated at the finger and wrist joints, the skin surround-
ing the fingernails, and along the skin folds in the palm. 
The Ruffini endings are elongated fusiform structures 
that enclose collagen fibrils extending from the subcuta-
neous tissue to folds in the skin at the joints, in the palm, 
or at the fingernail borders. The SA2 nerve endings are 
intertwined between the collagen fibers in the capsule, 
as in Golgi tendon organs (Box 32–4), and are excited by 
stimuli that stretch the skin along its long axis.
Two-Point Discrimination Tests Measure  
Tactile Acuity
The ability of humans to resolve spatial details of tex-
tured surfaces depends on which region of the body is 


===== Page 5 =====
440    Part IV / Perception
The histological structure of glabrous skin—the smooth, 
hairless skin of the palm and fingertips—plays a crucial 
role in the hand’s sensitivity to touch. The fingerprints 
are formed by a regular array of parallel ridges in the 
epidermis, the papillary ridges (Figure 19–3). Regularly 
spaced Merkel cells below sweat ducts that emerge 
from the center of each ridge provide  a spatial grid that 
allows us to localize stimuli precisely on our fingertips.
Each ridge is bordered by epidermal folds—the lim-
iting ridges—that are visible as thin lines on the fingers, 
palms, and feet. The limiting ridges increase the stiffness 
and rigidity of the skin, protecting it from damage when 
contacting objects or when walking barefooted. Meiss-
ner corpuscles are typically located in dermal papil-
lae adjacent to the limiting ridges; each dermal papilla 
contains several Meissner corpuscles and is innervated 
by two to five RA1 axons (Figure 19–4A).
Merkel cells, innervated by an SA1 fiber, are densely 
clustered in the center of each papillary ridge, at the base 
of the intermediate ridge surrounding the epidermal 
sweat ducts (Figure 19–4A), placing them in an excellent 
position to detect deformation of the epidermis from 
pressure or lateral stretch. They perform similar tactile 
receptive functions as Merkel cells in the touch domes of 
hairy skin (Chapter 18).
The fingerprints give the glabrous skin a corrugated, 
rough structure that increases friction, allowing us to grasp 
objects without slippage. Frictional forces are augmented 
further when these ridges contact the textured surfaces of 
objects. Smooth surfaces slide easily underneath the fingers 
Box 19–1  Fingerprint Structure Enhances Touch Sensitivity in the Hand
Sweat
duct
Meissner 
corpuscle
Limiting 
ridge
Papillary  
ridge
Limiting 
ridge
Papillary  
ridge
A
B
Figure 19–3  The skin of the human fingertip.
A. Scanning electron micrograph of the fingerprints 
in the human index finger. The glabrous skin of the 
hand is structured as arrays of papillary ridges and 
intervening sulci (limiting ridges) that recur at regular 
intervals. Globules of sweat exude from ducts at 
the center of the papillary ridges, forming a regularly 
spaced grid-like pattern along the center of each 
ridge. The Merkel cells are located in dense clusters 
below the sweat ducts at the base of the epidermis 
along the center of the papillary ridges (see Figure 
19–2). (Adapted, with permission, from Quilliam 
1978.)
B. Histological section of the glabrous skin cut par-
allel to the skin surface. The Meissner corpuscles, 
here immunostained for cholinesterase, form regu-
larly spaced chains along both sides of each papillary 
ridge adjacent to the limiting ridge. Thus, Meissner 
corpuscles and Merkel cells form alternating bands 
of rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) and slowly adapt-
ing type 1 (SA1) touch receptors that span each 
fingerprint ridge. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Bolanowski and Pawson 2003.)
contacted. When a pair of probes is spaced several mil-
limeters apart on the hand, each probe is perceived as a 
distinct point because it produces a separate dimple in 
the skin and stimulates nonoverlapping populations of 
receptors. As the probes are moved closer together, the 
two sensations become blurred because both probes 
are contained within the same receptive fields. The 
spatial interactions between tactile stimuli form the 
basis of neurological tests of two-point discrimination 
and texture recognition.
The threshold for tactile acuity—the separation 
that defines performance midway between chance and 
perfect discrimination—is approximately 1 mm on the 
fingertips of young adults, but declines in the elderly 
to about 2 mm. Tactile acuity is highest on the finger-
tips and the lips, where receptive fields are smallest. 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    441
Figure 19–4  Innervation pattern of Meissner corpuscles 
and Merkel cells in glabrous and hairy skin.
A. A confocal transverse section of a papillary ridge in 
the human fingertip skin shows the innervation pattern 
of mechanoreceptors. Meissner corpuscles are located 
in dermal papillae just below the epidermis (blue) border-
ing the limiting ridge and are innervated by two or more 
rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fibers. The fibers lose their 
myelin sheaths (orange) when entering the receptor cap-
sule, exposing broad terminal bulbs (green) at which sen-
sory transduction occurs. Individual slowly adapting type 1 
(SA1) fibers innervate groups of Merkel cells clustered at 
the base of the intermediate ridge, providing  
localized signals of pressure applied to that ridge. Scale 
bar = 50 μm. (Adapted, with permission, from Nolano  
et al. 2003. Copyright © 2003 American Neurological 
Association.)
B. A higher-magnification micrograph portrays keratin-8 
antibody-labeled Merkel cells (red) innervated by an SA1 
fiber (green) labeled with neurofilament heavy polypeptide 
(NFH+). Each nerve fiber extends multiple branches parallel 
to the surface of the skin that allow it to integrate tactile 
information from multiple receptor cells in a small zone of 
skin. The diameter of each Merkel cell is approximately  
10 μm. (Adapted, with permission, from Snider 1998. 
Copyright © 1998 Springer Nature.)
and thus require greater grip force to maintain stability in 
the hand; the screw caps on bottles are often ridged to make 
them easy to turn. Frictional forces between the limiting 
ridges and objects also amplify our sensations of surface 
features when we palpate objects, generating vibrations 
that allow us to detect small irregularities such as the grain 
of wood and threads of fabrics.
The regular spacing of the papillary ridges—and 
the precise localization of specific receptors within this 
grid—allows us to repeatedly scan surfaces with back-
and-forth hand movements while preserving a constant 
spatial alignment of adjacent surface features. They also 
provide an anatomical grid for referencing the precise 
location of tactile stimuli.
Tactile acuity on proximal parts of the body decreases 
in parallel with the size of receptive fields of SA1 and 
RA1 fibers (Figure 19–6A).
When we grasp or touch an object, we can dis-
criminate features of its surface separated by as little 
as 0.5 mm. Humans are able to distinguish horizon-
tal and vertical orientations of gratings with remark-
ably narrow spacing of the ridges (Figure 19–6B). 
Long edges, such as the ridges of a grating, evoke 
stronger responses from RA1 and SA1 afferents when 
they stimulate multiple sensory endings in the recep-
tive field simultaneously, stressing the importance of 
multisensor receptive fields for tactile information 
processing. Roland Johansson and Andrew Pruszyn-
ski recently found that RA1 and SA1 fibers respond 
more intensely to edges that contact multiple sensory 
Merkel 
cell
SA1 ﬁber
B  Hairy skin
A  Glabrous skin
Meissner
corpuscle
terminals
RA1 ﬁber
Merkel cell 
terminals
SA1 ﬁber


===== Page 7 =====
442    Part IV / Perception
A Slowly adapting
 
mechanoreceptors
Merkel cells (SA1)
Superﬁcial
layers
Meissner corpuscles (RA1)
Rufﬁni endings (SA2)
Pacinian corpuscles (RA2)
Deep
layers
B Rapidly adapting
 
mechanoreceptors
C Receptive ﬁeld
 
sensitivity
Figure 19–5  Receptive fields in the human hand are small-
est at the fingertips. Each colored area on the hands indicates 
the receptive field of an individual sensory nerve fiber. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Johansson and Vallbo 1983.)
A–B. In the superficial layers of skin, the receptive fields of 
type 1 receptors encompass spot-like patches of skin. In the 
deep layers, type 2 receptive fields extend across wide regions 
of skin (light shading), but responses are strongest in the skin 
directly over the receptor (dark spots). The arrows indicate the 
directions of skin stretch that activate slowly adapting type 2 
(SA2) fibers.
C. Pressure sensitivity throughout the receptive field is shown 
as a contour map. The most sensitive regions are indicated 
in deep red and the least sensitive areas in pale pink. The 
receptive field of a rapidly adapting type 1 (RA1) fiber (above) 
has many points of high sensitivity, marking the positions of 
the group of Meissner corpuscles innervated by the fiber. The 
receptive field of a rapidly adapting type 2 (RA2) fiber (below) 
has a single point of maximum sensitivity overlying the Pacinian 
corpuscle. The receptive field contour map of slowly adapting 
type 1 (SA1) fibers is similar to that of RA1 fibers. Likewise, the 
receptive field map of SA2 fibers resembles that of RA2 fibers.
endings, allowing these afferents to distinguish verti-
cal, horizontal, or oblique orientations.
Tactile acuity is slightly greater in women than 
in men and varies between fingers but not between 
hands; the gender difference is related primarily to the 
smaller papillary ridge diameter in women, and the 
resultant higher density of SA1 fibers per cm2 of skin. 
The distal pad of the index finger has the keenest sen-
sitivity; spatial acuity declines progressively from the 
index to the little finger and falls rapidly at locations 
proximal to the distal finger pads. Tactile spatial reso-
lution is 50% poorer at the distal pad of the little finger 
and six to eight times coarser on the palm.
Blind individuals use the fine spatial sensitivity of 
SA1 and RA1 fibers to read Braille. The Braille alphabet 
represents letters as simple dot patterns that are easy 
to distinguish by touch. A blind person reads Braille 
by moving the fingers over the dot patterns. This hand 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    443
Figure 19–6  Tactile acuity in the human hand is 
highest on the fingertip.
A. The two-point threshold measures the mini-
mum distance at which two stimuli are resolved 
as distinct. This distance varies for different body 
regions; it is approximately 2 mm on the fingers, 
but as much as 10 mm on the palm and 40 mm 
on the arm, thigh, and back. The mean two-point 
perceptual thresholds of different body parts, 
indicated by pink lines in the bar graph, match the 
mean receptive field diameters of the correspond-
ing pink zones on the body. The greatest discrimi-
native capacity is afforded in the fingertips, lips, 
and tongue, which have the smallest receptive 
fields. (Adapted, with permission, from Weinstein 
1968. © Charles C. Thomas Publisher, Ltd.)
B. Spatial acuity is measured in psychophysical 
experiments by having a blindfolded subject touch 
a variety of textured surfaces. As shown here, the 
subject is asked to determine whether the surface 
of a wheel is smooth or contains a gap, whether 
the ridges of a grating are oriented across the 
finger or parallel to its long axis, or which letters 
appear on raised type used in letterpress print-
ing. The tactile acuity threshold is defined as the 
groove width, ridge width, or font size that yields 
75% correct performance (detectable midway 
between chance and perfect accuracy). The 
threshold spacing on the human fingertip is  
1.0 mm in each of these tests. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Johnson and Phillips 1981.)
Grating orientation
(ridge width)
 Letter identiﬁcation
(font size)
Spacing (mm)
100
90
80
70
60
50
Percent correct
(gap and grating tasks)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Percent correct
(letter identiﬁcation)
A
B
5
4
3
2
Fingers
Thumb
Palm
Forearm
Upper
arm
Forehead
Cheek
Nose
Upper lip
Breast
Back
Belly
Thigh
Calf
Sole
Hallux
Mean threshold (mm)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Gap detection
(groove width)
Shoulder


===== Page 9 =====
444    Part IV / Perception
movement enhances the sensations produced by the 
dots. Because the Braille dots are spaced approximately 
3 mm apart, a distance greater than the receptive field 
diameter of an SA1 fiber, each dot stimulates a differ-
ent set of SA1 fibers. An SA1 fiber fires a burst of action 
potentials as a dot enters its receptive field and is silent 
once the dot leaves the field (Figure 19–7). Specific 
combinations of SA1 fibers that fire synchronously 
signal the spatial arrangement of the Braille dots. RA1 
fibers also discriminate the dot patterns, enhancing the 
signals provided by SA1 fibers.
Although 
Pacinian 
corpuscles 
(RA2 
fibers) 
respond to scanning Braille dots over the skin, their 
spike trains do not reflect the periodicity of dots in the 
Braille patterns. Instead, they signal the skin vibrations 
evoked by motion of the Braille dots over the skin. Sli-
man Bensmaia and colleagues recently found that 
when fine textures such as fabrics are tested with this 
method, RA2 afferents signal the periodicity of threads 
in the weave by generating their spike trains in phase 
with these surface features. SA1 fibers are less respon-
sive to motion of textiles because the thread size is usu-
ally too small to indent the skin at sufficient amplitude. 
Nevertheless, all three types of tactile afferents contrib-
ute to human percepts of roughness and smoothness.
Slowly Adapting Fibers Detect Object  
Pressure and Form
The most important function of SA1 and SA2 fibers is 
their ability to signal skin deformation and pressure. 
The sensitivity of SA1 receptors to edges, corners, 
points, and curvature provides information about an 
object’s compliance, shape, size, and surface texture. 
We perceive an object as hard or rigid if it indents the 
skin when we touch it, and soft if we deform the object.
Paradoxically, as an object’s size and diameter 
increase, its surface curvature decreases. The responses 
of individual SA1 fibers are weaker and the result-
ing sensations feel less distinct. For example, the tip 
of a pencil pressed 1 mm into the skin feels sharp, 
unpleasant, and highly localized at the contact point, 
whereas a 1-mm indentation by the eraser feels blunt 
and broad. The weakest sensation is evoked by a flat 
surface pressed against the finger pad.
To understand why these objects evoke different 
sensations, we need to consider the physical events 
that occur when the skin is touched. When a pencil tip 
is pressed against the skin, it dimples the surface at the 
contact point and forms a shallow, sloped basin in the 
surrounding region (approximately 4 mm in radius). 
Although the indentation force is concentrated in the 
center, the surrounding region is also perturbed by 
local stretch, called tensile strain. SA1 receptors at 
both the center and the surrounding “hillsides” of skin 
are stimulated, firing spike trains proportional to the 
degree of local stretch.
If a second probe is pressed close to the first one, 
more SA1 fibers are stimulated but the neural response 
of each fiber is reduced because the force needed to 
displace the skin is shared between the two probes. 
Ken Johnson and his colleagues have shown that as 
more probes are added within the receptive field, the 
response intensity at each sensory ending becomes 
progressively weaker because the displacement forces 
on the skin are distributed across the entire contact 
zone. Thus, the skin mechanics result in a case of “less 
is more.” Individual SA1 fibers respond more vigor-
ously to a small object than to a large one because 
the force needed to indent the skin is concentrated at 
a small contact point. In this manner, each SA1 fiber 
integrates the local skin indentation profile within its 
receptive field.
The sensitivity of SA1 receptors to local strain 
on the skin enables them to detect edges, the places 
where an object’s curvature changes abruptly. SA1 fir-
ing rates are many times greater when a finger touches 
an edge than when it touches a flat surface because 
the force applied by an object boundary displaces the 
skin asymmetrically, beyond the edge as well as at the 
edge. This asymmetric distribution of force enhances 
responses from receptive fields located along the edges 
of an object. As edges are often perceived as sharp, we 
tend to grasp objects on flat or gently curved surfaces 
rather than by their edges.
The SA2 fibers that innervate Ruffini endings 
respond more vigorously to stretch of the skin than to 
indentation, because of their anatomical location along 
the palmar folds or at the finger joints. They provide 
information about the shape of large objects grasped 
with the entire hand, the “power grasp” in which an 
object is pressed against the palm.
The SA2 system may play a central role in stere-
ognosis—the recognition of three-dimensional objects 
using touch alone—as well as other perceptual tasks 
in which skin stretch is a major cue. Benoni Edin has 
shown that SA2 innervation of the hairy skin on 
the dorsum of the hand plays a substantial role in the 
perception of hand shape and finger position. The 
SA2 fibers aid the perception of finger joint angle by 
detecting skin stretch over the knuckles, or in the web-
bing between the fingers. The Ruffini endings near 
these joints are aligned such that different groups of 
receptors are stimulated as the fingers move in specific 
directions (Figure 19–5A, bottom panel). In this man-
ner, the SA2 system provides a neural representation 


