===== Page 1 =====
1316    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
A  Depression of synaptic potentials by long-term habituation
Control
Habituated (1 week)
B  Inactivation of synaptic connections by long-term habituation
50 ms
10 mV
5 mV
0
100
80
60
Mean percent of detectable connections
40
20
1 day
Control
1 week
Habituated
3 weeks
Figure 53–3  Long-term habituation of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex in Aplysia. (Adapted, with permission, from Castellucci, 
Carew, and Kandel 1978.)
A. Comparison of action potentials in sensory neurons and the 
postsynaptic potential in motor neurons in an untrained animal 
(control) and one that has been subjected to long-term habitua-
tion. In the habituated animal 1 week after training, no synaptic 
potential occurs in the motor neuron in response to the sen-
sory neuron action potential.
B. After long-term habituation training, the mean percentage of 
sensory neurons making physiologically detectable connections 
with motor neurons is reduced even at 3 weeks.
Sensitization Involves Presynaptic Facilitation of 
Synaptic Transmission
The ability to recognize and respond to danger is nec-
essary for survival. Not only snails and flies, but all 
animals, including humans, must distinguish preda-
tors from prey and hostile environments from safe 
ones. Because the ability to respond to threats is a 
universal requirement of survival, it has been con-
served throughout evolution, allowing studies of 
invertebrates to shed light on neural mechanisms in 
mammals.
At the beginning of the 20th century, both Freud 
and Pavlov appreciated that anticipatory defensive 
responses to danger signals are biologically adaptive, 
a fact that likely accounts for the profound conserva-
tion of this capacity throughout vertebrates and inver-
tebrates. In the laboratory, threat (fear) conditioning 
is typically studied by presenting a neutral stimulus, 
such as a tone, prior to the onset of an aversive stimu-
lus, such as electrical shock. The two stimuli become 
associated such that the tone leads to the elicitation 
of defensive behaviors that protect against the harm-
ful consequences predicted by the tone. Freud called 
this “signal anxiety,” which prepares the individual 
for fight or flight when there is even the suggestion of 
external danger.
When an animal repeatedly encounters a harmless 
stimulus, its responsiveness to the stimulus habituates, 
as seen above. In contrast, when the animal confronts 
a harmful stimulus, it typically learns to respond more 
vigorously to a subsequent presentation of the same 
stimulus. Presentation of a harmful stimulus can even 
cause an animal to mount a defensive response to a 
subsequent harmless stimulus. As a result, defensive 
reflexes for withdrawal and escape become height-
ened. This enhancement of reflex responses is called 
sensitization.
Like habituation, sensitization can be transient or 
long lasting. A single shock to the tail of an Aplysia pro-
duces short-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex that lasts minutes; five or more shocks to the tail 
produce sensitization lasting days to weeks. Tail shock 
is also sufficient to overcome the effects of habituation 
and enhance a habituated gill-withdrawal reflex, a 
process termed dishabituation.
Sensitization and dishabituation result from an 
enhancement in synaptic transmission at several con-
nections in the neural circuit of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex, including the connections made by sensory neu-
rons with motor neurons and interneurons—the same 
synapses depressed by habituation (Figure 53–4A). 
Typically, modifiable synapses can be regulated 
bidirectionally, participate in more than one type of 
learning, and store more than one type of memory. The 
bidirectional synaptic changes that underlie habitu-
ation and sensitization are the result of different cel-
lular mechanisms. In Aplysia, the same synapses that 
are weakened by habituation through a homosynaptic 
process can be strengthened by sensitization through 
a heterosynaptic process that depends on modulatory 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1317
interneurons activated by the harmful stimulus to 
the tail.
At least three groups of modulatory interneurons 
are involved in sensitization. The best studied use 
serotonin as a transmitter (Figure 53–4B). The seroton-
ergic interneurons form synapses on many regions of 
the sensory neurons, including axo-axonic synapses 
on the presynaptic terminals of the sensory cells. After 
a single tail shock, the serotonin released from the 
interneurons binds to a receptor in the sensory neu-
rons that is coupled to a stimulatory G protein that 
increases the activity of adenylyl cyclase. This action 
produces the second messenger cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), which in turn activates the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) (Chapter 14). 
Serotonin also activates a second type of G-protein–
coupled receptor that leads to the hydrolysis of phos-
pholipids and the activation of protein kinase C (PKC).
The protein phosphorylation mediated by PKA 
and PKC enhances the release of transmitter from 
sensory neurons through at least two mechanisms 
(Figure 53–4B). In one action, PKA phosphorylates a 
K+ channel, causing it to close. This broadens the action 
potential and thus enhances the duration of Ca2+ influx 
through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, which in turn 
enhances transmitter release. In a second action, pro-
tein phosphorylation through PKC enhances the func-
tioning of the release machinery directly. Presynaptic 
facilitation in response to release of serotonin by a tail 
shock lasts for a period of many minutes. Repeated 
noxious stimuli can strengthen synaptic activity for 
days (by a mechanism we consider below).
Classical Threat Conditioning Involves Facilitation 
of Synaptic Transmission
Classical conditioning is a more complex form of 
learning. Rather than learning about the properties 
of one stimulus, as in habituation and sensitization, 
the animal learns to associate one type of stimulus 
with another. As described in Chapter 52, an initial 
weak conditioned stimulus (eg, the ringing of a bell) 
becomes highly effective in producing a response 
when paired with a strong unconditioned stimulus (eg, 
presentation of food). In reflexes that can be enhanced 
by both classical conditioning and sensitization, such 
as the defensive withdrawal reflexes of Aplysia, clas-
sical conditioning results in greater and longer-lasting 
enhancement.
Although aversive classical conditioning is tradi-
tionally referred to as fear conditioning, we will use the 
more neutral term threat conditioning to avoid the impli-
cation that animals have subjective states comparable 
to those that humans experience and label as “fear.” 
This distinction is important because humans can 
respond to threats behaviorally and physiologically in 
the absence of any reported feeling of fear. This termi-
nology allows the findings from research on implicit 
learning in all animals, from the simplest worm to 
humans, to be interpreted in an objective manner with-
out invoking empirically unverifiable subjective fear 
states in animals.
For classical conditioning of the Aplysia gill-with-
drawal reflex, a weak touch to the siphon serves as 
the conditioned stimulus while a strong shock to the 
tail serves as the unconditioned stimulus. When the 
gill-withdrawal reflex is classically conditioned, gill 
withdrawal in response to siphon stimulation alone is 
greatly enhanced. This enhancement is even more dra-
matic than the enhancement produced in an unpaired 
pathway by tail shock alone (sensitization). In classical 
conditioning, the timing of the conditioned and uncon-
ditioned stimuli is critical. To be effective, the condi-
tioned stimulus (siphon touch) must precede (and thus 
predict) the unconditioned stimulus (tail shock), often 
within an interval of about 0.5 seconds.
The convergence in individual sensory neurons 
of the signals initiated by the conditioned and uncon-
ditioned stimuli is critical. Alone, a strong shock to the 
tail (unconditioned stimulus) will excite serotonergic 
interneurons that form synapses on presynaptic termi-
nals of the siphon sensory neurons, resulting in pre-
synaptic facilitation (Figure 53–5A). However, when 
the tail shock immediately follows a slight tap on the 
siphon (conditioned stimulus), the serotonin from the 
interneurons produces even greater presynaptic facili-
tation, a process termed activity-dependent facilitation 
(Figure 53–5B).
How does this work? During conditioning, the 
modulatory interneurons activated by tail shock 
release serotonin shortly after the action potential pro-
duced in the siphon sensory neurons by the tap on the 
siphon. The action potential triggers an influx of Ca2+ 
into the presynaptic terminals of the sensory neurons, 
and the Ca2+ binds to calmodulin, which in turn binds 
to the enzyme, adenylyl cyclase. This primes the ade-
nylyl cyclase so that it responds more vigorously to the 
serotonin released following the tail shock. This in turn 
enhances the production of cAMP, which increases the 
amount of presynaptic facilitation. If the order of stim-
uli is reversed so that serotonin release precedes Ca2+ 
influx in the presynaptic sensory terminals, there is no 
potentiation and no classical conditioning.
Thus, the cellular mechanism of classical condition-
ing in the monosynaptic pathway of the withdrawal 
reflex is largely an elaboration of the mechanism of 


===== Page 3 =====
Sensitized
Control
Siphon
Sensory
neuron
Facilitating
interneuron
Motor
neuron
Tail
Gill
Tactile
stimulus
A  Gill sensitization
Sensitizing
stimulus
Sensory
neuron
K+
channel
Facilitating interneuron
B  Presynaptic facilitation involves two molecular pathways
Ca2+
channel
PKC
cAMP-dependent
PKA
cAMP
Diacylglycerol
Gq /11 protein
PLC
PPP
PPP
P
Gs protein
5-HT
receptor
Adenylyl
cyclase
2
2
1
1
1
2
Reserve
transmitter
pool
Releasable
transmitter
pool
Glutamate
receptors
5-HT
Motor neuron 
Siphon sensory
neuron terminal
10 s
1 ms
10 mV
10 mV
5 mV
Initial
Sensitized
50 ms
Sensory
neuron
AP
Sensory
neuron 
AP
Motor
neuron
EPSP
Gill-
withdrawal
reﬂex


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1319
Figure 53–4  (Opposite) Short-term sensitization of the  
gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia.
A. Sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex is produced by 
applying a noxious stimulus to another part of the body, such 
as the tail. A shock to the tail activates tail sensory neurons 
that excite facilitating (modulatory) interneurons, which form 
synapses on the cell body and terminals of the mechanorecep-
tor sensory neurons that innervate the siphon. Through these 
axo-axonic synapses, the modulatory interneurons enhance 
transmitter release from the siphon sensory neurons onto their 
postsynaptic gill motor neurons (presynaptic facilitation), thus 
enhancing gill withdrawal. Presynaptic facilitation results, in 
part, from a prolongation of the sensory neuron action potential 
(AP; bottom traces). (Abbreviation: EPSP, excitatory postsyn-
aptic potential.) (Adapted, with permission, from Pinsker et al. 
1970; Klein and Kandel 1980.)
B. Presynaptic facilitation in the sensory neuron is thought to 
occur by means of two biochemical pathways. The diagram 
shows details of the synaptic complex in the dashed box in  
part A.
Pathway 1: A facilitating interneuron releases serotonin  
(5-HT), which binds to metabotropic receptors in the sensory 
neuron terminal. This action engages a G protein (Gs), which 
in turn increases the activity of adenylyl cyclase. The adenylyl 
cyclase converts adenosine triphosphate to cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), which binds to the regulatory subunit 
of protein kinase A (PKA), thus activating its catalytic subunit. 
The catalytic subunit phosphorylates certain K+ channels, 
thereby closing the channels and decreasing the outward K+ 
current. This prolongs the action potential, thus increasing the 
influx of Ca2+ through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and thereby 
augmenting transmitter release.
Pathway 2: Serotonin binds to a second class of metabo-
tropic receptor that activates the Gq/11 class of G protein that 
enhances the activity of phospholipase C (PLC). The PLC activ-
ity leads to production of diacylglycerol, which activates protein 
kinase C (PKC). The PKC phosphorylates presynaptic proteins, 
resulting in the mobilization of vesicles containing glutamate 
from a reserve pool to a releasable pool at the active zone, thus 
increasing the efficiency of transmitter release.
sensitization, with the added feature that the adenylyl 
cyclase serves as a coincidence detector in the presynap-
tic sensory neuron, recognizing the temporal order of 
the physiological responses to the tail shock (uncon-
ditioned stimulus) and the siphon tap (conditioned 
stimulus).
In addition to the presynaptic component of 
activity-dependent facilitation, a postsynaptic compo-
nent is triggered by Ca2+ influx into the motor neuron 
when it is highly excited by the siphon sensory neu-
rons. The properties of this postsynaptic mechanism 
are similar to those of long-term potentiation of syn-
aptic transmission in the mammalian brain (discussed 
later in this chapter and in Chapters 13 and 54).
Long-Term Storage of Implicit Memory 
Involves Synaptic Changes Mediated by the 
cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway
Cyclic AMP Signaling Has a Role in  
Long-Term Sensitization
In all forms of learning, practice makes perfect. 
Repeated experience converts short-term memory 
into a long-term form. In Aplysia, the form of long-
term memory that has been most intensively studied 
is long-term sensitization. Like the short-term form, 
long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex 
involves changes in the strength of connections at 
several synapses. But in addition, it also recruits the 
growth of new synaptic connections.
Five spaced training sessions (or repeated applica-
tions of serotonin) over approximately 1 hour produce 
long-term sensitization and long-term synaptic facili-
tation lasting 1 or more days. Spaced training over 
several days produces sensitization that persists for 1 
or more weeks. Long-term sensitization, like the short-
term form, requires protein phosphorylation that is 
dependent on increased levels of cAMP (Figure 53–6).
The conversion of short-term memory into long-
term memory, called consolidation, requires synthesis 
of messenger RNAs and proteins in the neurons in the 
circuit. Thus, activation of specific gene expression is 
required for long-term memory. The transition from 
short-term to long-term memory depends on the pro-
longed rise in cAMP that follows repeated applications 
of serotonin. The increase in cAMP leads to prolonged 
activation of PKA, allowing the catalytic subunit of 
the kinase to translocate into the nucleus of the sen-
sory neurons. It also leads indirectly to activation of 
a second protein kinase, the mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK), a kinase commonly associated with 
cellular growth (Chapter 14). Within the nucleus, the 
catalytic subunit of PKA phosphorylates and thereby 
activates the transcription factor CREB-1 (cAMP 
response element binding protein 1), which binds a 
promoter element called CRE (cAMP recognition ele-
ment) (Figures 53–6 and 53–7).
To turn on gene transcription, phosphorylated 
CREB-1 recruits a transcriptional coactivator, CREB-
binding protein (CBP), to the promoter region. CBP 
has two important properties that facilitate transcrip-
tional activation: It recruits RNA polymerase II to the 


===== Page 5 =====
1320    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 53–5  Classical conditioning of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex in Aplysia. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Hawkins et al. 1983.)
A. The siphon is stimulated by a light tap and the tail is 
shocked, but the two stimuli are not paired in time. The tail 
shock excites facilitatory interneurons that form synapses on 
the presynaptic terminals of sensory neurons innervating the 
mantle shelf and siphon. This is the mechanism of sensitization. 
1. The pattern of unpaired stimulation during training. 2. Under 
these conditions, the size of the motor neuron test excita-
tory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) is only weakly facilitated 
by the tail shock. Often, as in this example, the EPSP actually 
decreases slightly despite the tail shock because repeated 
unpaired stimulation of the siphon leads to synaptic depression 
due to habituation.
B. The tail shock is paired in time with stimulation of the 
siphon. 1. The siphon is touched (conditioned stimulus [CS]) 
immediately prior to shocking the tail (unconditioned stimulus 
[US]). As a result, the siphon sensory neurons are primed to 
be more responsive to input from the facilitatory interneu-
rons in the unconditioned pathway. This is the mechanism of 
classical conditioning; it selectively amplifies the response of 
the conditioned pathway. 2. Recordings of test EPSPs in an 
identified motor neuron produced by a siphon sensory neuron 
before training and 1 hour after training. After training with 
paired sensory input, the EPSP in the siphon motor neuron 
is considerably greater than either the EPSP before training 
or the EPSP following unpaired tail shock (shown in part A2). 
This synaptic amplification produces a more vigorous  
gill withdrawal.
Gill
Siphon
Tail
Siphon (CS)
B  Paired pathway
A  Unpaired pathway
Motor
neuron
Gill motor
neuron EPSP
Gill motor
neuron EPSP
Sensory 
neuron
Siphon
sensory 
neuron
5 mV
Tail (US)
20 mV
50 ms
50 ms
Before training
After training
Before training
After training
1  Paired stimulation
2  Cell responses
2  Cell responses
Siphon
sensory 
neuron
20 mV
5 mV
Facilitating 
interneuron
Sensory 
neuron
Siphon
5 min
Tail
5 min
1  Unpaired stimulation


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 53–6  Long-term sensitization involves synaptic facil-
itation and the growth of new synaptic connections.
A. Long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex of  
Aplysia involves long-lasting facilitation of transmitter release  
at the synapses between sensory and motor neurons.
B. Long-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal reflex leads 
to persistent activity of protein kinase A (PKA), resulting in the 
growth of new synaptic connections. Repeated tail shock leads to 
more pronounced elevation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), producing long-term facilitation (lasting 1 or more days) 
that outlasts the increase in cAMP and recruits the synthesis of 
new proteins. This inductive mechanism is initiated by transloca-
tion of PKA to the nucleus (pathway 1), where PKA phosphoryl-
ates the transcriptional activator cAMP response element binding 
protein 1 (CREB-1) (pathway 2). CREB-1 binds cAMP regulatory 
elements (CRE) located in the upstream region of several cAMP-
inducible genes, activating gene transcription (pathway 3). PKA 
also activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), 
which phosphorylates the transcriptional repressor cAMP 
response element binding protein 2 (CREB-2), thus removing its 
repressive action. One gene activated by CREB-1 encodes a ubiq-
uitin hydrolase, a component of a specific ubiquitin proteasome 
that leads to the proteolytic cleavage of the regulatory subunit of 
PKA, resulting in persistent activity of PKA, even after cAMP has 
returned to its resting level (pathway 4). CREB-1 also activates 
the expression of the transcription factor C/EBP, which leads to 
expression of a set of unidentified proteins important for the 
growth of new synaptic connections (pathway 5).
Enhanced
transmitter release
Siphon
Sensory
neuron
Facilitating
interneuron
Motor
neuron
Tail
Gill
A
B
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
5-HT
receptor
cAMP
Facilitating
interneuron
Persistent
activity of PKA
Ubiquitin
hydrolase
Degradation of 
PKA regulatory 
subunit
1
2
4
4
3
5
Sensory
neuron
5-HT
MAPK
Nucleus
C/EBP
P
P
CREB-2
CREB-1
?
Early
Early
Late
CAAT
CRE
CRE
Growth of
new synaptic
connections
mRNA
P P


===== Page 7 =====
1322    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 53–7  Regulation of histone acetylation by 
serotonin, CREB-1, and CBP.
A. Under basal conditions, the activator CREB-1 (here 
in complex with CREB-2) occupies the binding site for 
cAMP recognition element (CRE) within the promoter 
region of its target genes. In the example shown here, 
CREB-1 binds to the CRE within the C/EBP promoter. In 
the basal state, CREB-1 binding is not able to activate 
transcription because the TATA box, the core promoter 
region responsible for recruiting RNA polymerase II  
(Pol II) during transcription initiation, is inaccessible 
because the DNA is tightly bound to histone proteins in 
the nucleosome.
B. Serotonin (5-HT) activates protein kinase A (PKA), 
which phosphorylates CREB-1 and indirectly enhances 
CREB-2 phosphorylation by MAPK, causing CREB-2 
to dissociate from the promoter. This allows CREB-1 
to form a complex at the promoter with CREB binding 
protein (CBP). Activated CBP acetylates specific lysine 
residues of the histones, causing them to bind less 
tightly to DNA. Along with other changes in chromatin 
structure, acetylation facilitates the repositioning of the 
nucleosome that previously blocked access of the Pol II 
complex to the TATA box. This repositioning allows  
Pol II to be recruited to initiate transcription of the  
C/EBP gene. (Abbreviation: TBP, TATA binding protein.)
Initiation of transcription by Pol II
mRNA elongation
Pol II
mRNA
CBP
CRE
P
P
Transcription 
blocked
Transcription 
permissible
DNA
A  Basal state
C/EBP Coding
C/EBP Enhancer
B  5-HT produces modiﬁcations in chromatin structure,
CREB-1 phosphorylation and exclusion of CREB-2
Recruitment of CBP and histone acetylation
Ac
Ac
Ac
5-HT
PKA
P
P
P
P
CRE
C/EBP
TATA
C/EBP
TATA
CRE
C/EBP
TATA
CREB-2
CREB-1
Nucleosome
CBP
TATA
TBP
C/EBP
CBP
CRE
P
P
TBP
C/EBP
Pol II
TATA
CRE
P


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1323
promoter, and it functions as an acetyltransferase, add-
ing acetyl groups to certain lysine residues on its sub-
strate proteins. One of the most important substrates 
of CBP are DNA-binding histone proteins, which are 
components of nucleosomes, the fundamental building 
blocks of chromatin. The histones contain a series of 
positively charged basic residues that strongly interact 
with the negatively charged phosphates of DNA. This 
interaction causes DNA to become tightly wrapped 
around the nucleosomes, much like string is wrapped 
around a spool, thereby preventing necessary tran-
scription factors from accessing their gene targets.
The binding of CBP to CREB-1 leads to histone 
acetylation, which causes a number of important struc-
tural and functional changes at the level of the nucleo-
some. For example, acetylation neutralizes the positive 
charge of lysine residues in the histone tail domains, 
decreasing the affinity of histones for DNA. Also, spe-
cific classes of transcriptional activators can bind to 
acetylated histones and facilitate the repositioning of 
nucleosomes at the promoter region. Together, these 
and other types of chromatin modifications serve 
to regulate the accessibility of chromatin to the tran-
scriptional machinery, and thus enhance the ability of 
a gene to be transcribed. This type of modification of 
DNA structure is termed epigenetic regulation. As we 
will see in Chapter 54, a mutation in the gene encoding 
CBP underlies Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a disorder 
associated with mental retardation.
The turning on of transcription by PKA also 
depends on its ability to indirectly activate the MAPK 
pathway (Chapter 14). MAPK phosphorylates the tran-
scription factor CREB-2, relieving its inhibitory action 
on transcription (Figure 53–6B). The combined effects 
of CREB-1 activation and relief of CREB-2 repression 
induce a cascade of new gene expression important for 
learning and memory (Figure 53–7).
The presence of both a repressor (CREB-2) and an 
activator (CREB-1) of transcription at the first step in 
long-term facilitation suggests that the threshold for 
long-term memory storage can be regulated. Indeed, 
we see in everyday life that the ease with which short-
term memory is transferred into long-term memory 
varies greatly with attention, mood, and social context.
The Role of Noncoding RNAs in the  
Regulation of Transcription
There are other targets of transcription and chromatin 
regulation in memory consolidation and reconsolida-
tion besides messenger RNAs. Of particular interest 
are noncoding RNAs such as microRNAs (miRNAs), 
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), and long noncoding 
RNAs. These are also targeted to specific genetic sites, 
and their expression in turn regulates transcriptional 
and posttranscriptional mechanisms.
Studies in Aplysia show that miRNAs and piRNAs 
are both regulated by neuronal activity and contrib-
ute to long-term facilitation. MicroRNAs are a class of 
conserved noncoding RNAs, 20 to 23 nucleotides in 
length, that contribute to transcriptional and posttran-
scriptional regulation of gene expression through a 
specific set of RNA–protein machinery. In Aplysia, the 
most abundant and conserved brain species of these 
miRNAs are present in sensory neurons, where one of 
them—miRNA-124—normally constrains serotonin-
induced synaptic facilitation by inhibiting the transla-
tion of CREB-1 mRNA, suppressing levels of CREB-1 
protein. Serotonin inhibits the synthesis of miRNA-124, 
thereby leading to the disinhibition of the translation 
of CREB-1 mRNA, enabling the initiation of CREB-1–
mediated transcription. The piRNAs are 28 to 32 nucleo-
tides in length, slightly longer than miRNAs, and bind 
to a protein called Piwi. Individual piRNAs promote 
the methylation of specific DNA sequences, thereby 
silencing the genes, providing another example of epi-
genetic regulation. One piRNA, piRNA-F, increases 
in response to serotonin, which leads to the methyla-
tion of the promoter of CREB-2, reducing CREB-2 gene 
transcription.
Thus, we see here an example of integrative action 
at the transcriptional level. Serotonin regulates both 
piRNA and microRNA in a coordinated fashion: 
Serotonin rapidly decreases levels of miRNA-124 and 
facilitates the activation of CREB-1, which begins the 
process of memory consolidation. After a delay, sero-
tonin also increases levels of piRNA-F, resulting in the 
methylation and silencing of the promoter of the tran-
scription repressor CREB-2. The decrease in CREB-2 
increases the duration of action of CREB-1, thereby 
consolidating a stable form of long-term memory in 
the sensory neuron (Figure 53–8).
Two of the genes expressed in the wake of CREB-1 
activation and the consequential alteration in chroma-
tin structure are important in the early development 
of long-term facilitation. One is a gene for ubiquitin 
carboxyterminal hydrolase, the other a gene for a tran-
scription factor, CAAT box enhancer binding protein 
(C/EBP), a component of a gene cascade necessary for 
synthesizing proteins needed for the growth of new 
synaptic connections (Figures 53–6 and 53–7).
The 
hydrolase 
facilitates 
ubiquitin-mediated 
protein degradation (Chapter 7) and helps enhance 
activation of PKA. PKA is made up of four subunits; 
two regulatory subunits inhibit two catalytic subunits  
(Chapter 14). With long-term training and the 


===== Page 9 =====
1324    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Sensory
neuron
5-HT
Nucleus
Consolidation
initiated
CREB-2
CREB-1
piRNA-F
miRNA-124
?
Long-term
memory
5-HT
receptor
MAPK
Figure 53–8  Small non-coding RNA molecules contribute  
to  the memory consolidation switch. Long-term facilita-
tion of the sensory to motor neuron synapses is consolidated 
through the action of two distinct classes of small noncoding 
RNA molecules. miRNA-124 normally acts to suppress levels 
of the CREB-1 transcription factor by binding to its mRNA 
and inhibiting its translation. Serotonin (5-HT) downregulates 
miRNA-124 levels through a mechanism requiring mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK). This enhances the levels of 
CREB-1, promoting activation of CREB-1–dependent transcrip-
tion of gene products necessary for memory consolidation. 
In a complementary pathway, 5-HT enhances with a delay the 
synthesis of several piRNAs, including piRNA-F, which bind to 
the Piwi protein. The piRNA-F/Piwi complex leads to enhanced 
methylation of the CREB-2 gene, resulting in long-lasting 
transcriptional repression of CREB-2 and decreased levels of 
CREB-2 protein. Because CREB-2 normally inhibits the action 
of CREB-1, the increased levels of piRNA-F in response to 5-HT 
enhance and prolong CREB-1 activity, resulting in more effec-
tive memory consolidation.
induction of the hydrolase, approximately 25% of the 
regulatory subunits are degraded in the sensory neu-
rons. As a result, free catalytic subunits can continue 
to phosphorylate proteins important for the enhance-
ment of transmitter release and the strengthening of 
synaptic connections, including CREB-1, long after 
cAMP has returned to its resting level (Figure 53–6B). 
Formation of a constitutively active enzyme is there-
fore the simplest molecular mechanism for long-term 
memory. With repeated training, a second-messenger 
kinase critical for short-term facilitation can remain 
persistently active for up to 24 hours without requir-
ing a continuous activating signal.
The second and more enduring consequence of 
CREB-1 activation is the activation of the transcription 
factor C/EBP. This transcription factor forms both a 
homodimer with itself and a heterodimer with another 
transcription factor called activating factor. Together, 
these factors act on downstream genes that trigger the 
growth of new synaptic connections that support long-
term memory.
With long-term sensitization, the number of pre-
synaptic terminals in the sensory neurons in the gill-
withdrawal circuit doubles (Figure 53–9). The dendrites 
of the motor neurons also grow to accommodate the 
additional synaptic input. Thus, long-term structural 
changes in both post- and presynaptic cells increase 
the number of synapses. Long-term habituation, in 
contrast, leads to pruning of synaptic connections, as 
described above. Long-term disuse of functional con-
nections between sensory and motor neurons reduces 
the number of terminals of each sensory neuron by 
one-third (Figure 53–9A).
Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific
A typical pyramidal neuron in the mammalian brain 
makes 10,000 presynaptic connections with a wide 
range of target cells. It is therefore generally thought 
that long-term memory storage should be synapse 
specific—that is, only those synapses that actively 
participate in learning should be enhanced. However, 
the finding that long-term facilitation involves gene 
expression—which occurs in the nucleus, far removed 
from a neuron’s synapses—raises some fundamental 
questions regarding information storage.
Is long-term memory storage indeed synapse 
specific, or do the gene products recruited during 
long-term memory storage alter the strength of every 
presynaptic terminal in a neuron? And if long-term 
memory is synapse specific, what are the cellular 
mechanisms that enable the products of gene tran-
scription to selectively strengthen just some synapses 
and not others?
Kelsey Martin and her colleagues addressed these 
questions for long-term facilitation by using a cell culture 
system consisting of an isolated Aplysia sensory neu-
ron with a bifurcated axon that makes separate syn-
aptic contacts with two motor neurons. The sensory 


