===== Page 1 =====
1124    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Pec
FCU
Rostral
LMC
PGC
LMC
Caudal
Hox9
Hox6
Hox10
Hoxc6
Hoxc8
Hox5
Hoxc4
Pea3
Runx1
Scip
FCU
Wild type
Pec
FCU
CMV Hoxc6
Pec
FCU
RNAi Hoxc6
Pec
A
B
Figure 45–13  Hox proteins control the identity of neurons 
in motor columns and pools. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Dasen et al. 2005.)
A. Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins are expressed in motor 
neurons at distinct rostrocaudal levels of the spinal cord and 
direct motor neuron identity and peripheral target connectiv-
ity. Hox6 activities control the identity of cells in the brachial 
lateral motor column (LMC), Hox9 controls the identity of cells 
in the preganglionic column (PGC), and Hox10 controls the 
identity of cells in the lumbar column (LMC). Cross-repressive 
interactions between Hox6, Hox9, and Hox10 proteins refine 
Hox profiles, and Hox activator functions define LMC and PGC 
identities. A more complex Hox transcriptional network controls 
motor pool identity and connectivity. Hox genes determine the 
rostrocaudal position of motor pools within the LMC. Hoxc8 is 
required in caudal LMC neurons to generate the motor pools 
for the pectoralis (Pec) and flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) muscles; 
these neurons express the transcription factors Pea3 and Scip, 
respectively. The patterns of Hox expression in the Pec and 
FCU pools are established through a transcriptional network 
that appears to be driven largely by Hox cross-repressive 
interactions.
B. Changing the Hox code within motor pools changes the  
pattern of muscle connectivity. Alterations in the profile  
of Hox6 expression determine the expression of Pea3 and Scip 
and control the projection of motor axons to the Pec or FCU 
muscles. RNA interference (RNAi) knock-down of Hox6 sup-
presses innervation of the Pec muscle so that motor axons 
innervate the FCU muscle only. Ectopic expression of Hoxc6 
driven by a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter represses  
connectivity with FCU, so that motor axons innervate only the 
Pec muscle.
The spatial distribution of Pax6 and Emx2 helps to 
establish the initial regional pattern of the neocortex. 
In mice lacking Emx2 activity, there is an expansion 
of rostral neocortex—the motor and somatosensory 
areas—at the expense of the more caudal auditory and 
visual areas. Conversely, in mice lacking Pax6 activity, 
visual and auditory areas are expanded at the expense 
of motor and somatosensory areas (Figure 45–15B).
Thus, as in the spinal cord, hindbrain, and mid-
brain, early neocortical patterns are established 
through the interplay between local inductive signals 
and gradients of transcription factor expression. How 
these gradients specify discrete functional areas in the 
neocortex remains unclear. Unlike segmentation in 
the hindbrain, where transcription factors precisely 
specify rhombomeres, transcriptional markers of indi-
vidual neocortical areas have not yet been identified.
Afferent Inputs Also Contribute to Regionalization
In the adult neocortex, different functional areas can 
be distinguished by differences in the layering pattern 
of neurons—the cytoarchitecture of the areas—and by 
their neuronal connections. One striking instance of 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1125
Figure 45–14  The axons of lateral motor 
column neurons are guided into the limb by 
ephrin class tyrosine kinase receptors.  Motor 
neurons in the medial and lateral divisions of the 
lateral motor column (LMC) project axons into 
the ventral and dorsal halves of the limb mesen-
chyme, respectively. The profile of expression of 
LIM class homeodomain proteins regulates this 
dorsoventral projection. The LIM homeodomain 
protein Isl1 expressed by medial LMC neurons 
directs a high level of expression of EphB recep-
tors, such that as the axons of these cells enter 
the limb, they are prevented from projecting 
dorsally by the high level of repellant ephrin B 
ligands expressed by cells of the dorsal limb mes-
enchyme. These axons therefore project into the 
ventral limb mesenchyme. Conversely, the LIM 
homeodomain protein Lhx1 expressed by lateral 
LMC neurons directs a high level of expression of 
EphA receptors, such that as the axons of these 
cells enter the limb, they are prevented from 
projecting ventrally by the high level of repellant 
ephrin A ligands expressed by cells of the ventral 
limb mesenchyme. These axons therefore project 
into the dorsal limb mesenchyme. Eph and ephrin 
signaling is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 47. 
(Abbreviation: MMC, medial motor column.)
Axial
Dorsal
Ventral
MMC
LMC(m)
LMC(l)
Isl1, Isl2, 
Lhx3, Lhx4
Isl1, Isl2
Isl2, Lhx1
Limb bud 
Ephrin B
Ephrin A
Collapse
Ephrin B
Ephrin A
Ephrin B
Ephrin A
EphA
EphB
regional distinctiveness in cell pattern is a grid-like 
array of neurons and glial cells termed “barrels” in the 
primary somatosensory cortex of rodents. Each corti-
cal barrel receives somatosensory information from 
a single whisker on the snout, and the regular array 
of cortical barrels reflects the somatotopic organiza-
tion of afferent information from the body surface, 
culminating in the projection of thalamic efferents to 
specific cortical barrels (Figure 45–16A).
Cortical barrels are evident soon after birth, and 
their development depends on a critical period of 
afferent input from the periphery; their formation is 
disrupted if the whisker field in the skin is eliminated 
during this critical period. Strikingly, if prospective 


===== Page 3 =====
1126    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 45–15  Anteroposterior gradients of expression  
of transcription factors establish discrete functional  
areas along the anteroposterior axis of the developing  
forebrain.  (Adapted from Hamasaki et al. 2004.)
A. (1) FGF8 signals from the anteromedial telencephalon 
establish the rostrocaudal pattern of the cerebral cortex. (2) A 
top-down view of the developing cerebral cortex in the mouse 
shows inverse rostrocaudal gradients of the transcription 
factors Pax6 and Emx2. (3) These two transcription factors 
mutually repress each other’s expression.
B. Different functional areas develop at different rostrocaudal posi-
tions. Motor areas develop in the anterior region (M) and visual 
areas in more posterior regions (V). Genetic elimination of Emx2 
function results in expansion of the motor areas and contraction in 
auditory (A) and visual areas. Conversely, elimination of Pax6 func-
tion results in an expansion of the visual areas and a contraction of 
motor and auditory areas. (Abbreviation: S, somatosensory areas.)
Lateral
Rostral 
Pax6  
Emx2
B
Wild type
Emx2 mutant
Pax6 mutant
M
A
S
V
M
A
S
V
M
A
S
V
M
M
A
A
S
S
V
V
2
FGF8
Anteromedial
telencephalon
1
A
M
V
S
A
3
Caudal
Rostral
Pax6
Emx2
visual cortical tissue is transplanted into the soma-
tosensory cortex around the time of birth, barrels 
form in the transplanted tissue with a pattern that 
closely resembles that of the normal somatosensory 
barrel field (Figure 45–16B). Together, these find-
ings demonstrate that afferent input superimposes 
aspects of neocortical patterning on the basic fea-
tures of the protomap.
The nature of the input to different cortical areas 
influences neural function as well as cytoarchitecture. 
This can be shown by monitoring physiological and 
behavioral responses after rerouting afferent pathways 
of one sensory modality to a region of neocortex that 
normally processes a different modality. In animals 
in which retinal inputs are rerouted into the auditory 
pathway, the primary auditory cortex contains a sys-
tematic representation of visual space rather than of 
sound frequency (Figure 45–17). When these animals 
are trained to discriminate a visual from an auditory 
cue, they perceive a cue as visual when the rewired 
auditory cortex is activated by vision.
Thus, brain pathways and neocortical regions are 
established through genetic programs during early 
development but later depend on afferent inputs for their 
specialized anatomical, physiological, and behavioral 
functions.


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 45–16  Sensory input regu-
lates the organization of “barrels” 
in the developing somatosensory 
cortex in rodents. (Adapted from 
Schlaggar and O’Leary 1991.)
A. The barrel area of the rodent 
somatosensory cortex forms a soma-
totopic representation of the rows of 
whiskers on the animal’s snout. Simi-
lar representations of the whisker 
field are present upstream—in the 
brain stem and in the thalamic nuclei 
that relay somatosensory inputs from 
the face to the cortex.
B. A barrel-like cellular organization is 
induced in developing visual cortex 
tissue that was grafted at an early 
postnatal stage into the somatosen-
sory cortex.
Face
B
Normal development of cortical barrels
A
Maturation
Maturation
Visual
cortex
Barrel development after grafting
Transplant into
somatosensory cortex
Trigeminal
ganglion
Brain stem
Thalamus
Somatosensory cortex
Visually responsive
auditory cortex 
Normal
Rewired
A  Reorganization of thalamic pathways
B  Orientation maps
Normal V1 
 
Rewired A1  
Ablated
Retina
Inferior
colliculus
Visual
cortex (V1)
Auditory
cortex (A1)
LGN
MGN
Cochlea
Retina
Figure 45–17  Rerouting thalamocortical input can recruit 
cortical areas for new sensory functions. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Sharma, Angelucci, and Sur 2000. Copyright © 
2000 Springer Nature.)
A. The visual pathway consists of afferent fibers from the retina 
that innervate the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and superior 
colliculus. Axons from the LGN project to the primary visual cortex 
(V1). The auditory pathway projects from the cochlear nucleus (not 
shown) to the inferior colliculus, and then to the medial geniculate 
nucleus (MGN) and on to the primary auditory cortex (A1).  
Ablating the inferior colliculus in neonatal ferrets causes retinal 
afferents to innervate the MGN. As a consequence, the auditory 
cortex is reprogrammed to process visual information.
B. Visual orientation maps similar to those seen in normal V1 
cortex are observed in rewired A1 auditory cortex of ferrets using 
optical imaging of intrinsic signals. The different colors represent 
different receptor field orientations (see bars at right). The pattern 
of activity in rewired A1 resembles that of normal V1.


===== Page 5 =====
1128    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Highlights
  1.  The early vertebrate embryo consists of three 
layers of cells—ectoderm, mesoderm, and endo-
derm. The entire nervous system arises from the 
ectoderm, and more specifically from a central 
strip of ectoderm called the neural plate.
  2.  Formation of neural plate within the ectoderm 
occurs by a process called induction, in which 
underlying mesodermal cells secrete soluble fac-
tors that induce a neural program of gene expres-
sion in neighboring ectodermal cells. Induction 
involves a “de-repression” mechanism in which 
mesoderm-derived 
soluble 
factors 
prevent  
ectoderm-derived bone morphogenetic proteins 
(BMPs; members of the transforming growth fac-
tor β family) from suppressing the neural fate.
  3.  Following induction, the neural plate invaginates 
from the ectoderm to form a neural tube. The tube 
gives rise to the central nervous system, while 
cells at the border between neural tube and ecto-
derm form neural crest, which migrates through 
the embryo to form the sensory and autonomic 
ganglia of the peripheral nervous system.
  4.  As soon as the neural tube forms, it begins to 
become regionalized. Regionalization along the 
anterior-posterior axis leads to a series of subdi-
visions. The anterior region becomes the brain, 
and the posterior region becomes the spinal 
cord. Divisions of the prospective brain gener-
ate the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain. The 
forebrain divides further to form the telencepha-
lon, from which cortex, hippocampus, and basal 
ganglia arise; and the diencephalon, which gives 
rise to thalamus, hypothalamus, and retina. The 
hindbrain divides to form the pons and cerebel-
lum anteriorly and the medulla posteriorly.
  5.  Anterior-posterior patterning is established 
by gradients of Wnt signaling, which arise 
from selective production of Wnts posteriorly 
and selective production of Wnt inhibitors 
anteriorly.
  6.  Subdivisions along the anteroposterior axis are 
established by groups of cells called organizing 
centers at defined positions within the neural 
tube. The organizing centers secrete factors that 
pattern neighboring regions of the neural tube 
and specify neuronal types within them. For 
example, the isthmic organizer at the boundary 
of the hindbrain and midbrain secretes Wnts and 
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). They act differ-
entially in anterior and posterior regions because 
the earlier patterning events led to expression of 
different transcription factors by cells in these 
regions.
  7.  Still later, further subdivisions form segments 
called prosomeres in the forebrain and rhom-
bomeres in the hindbrain, with differential 
expression of transcription factors leading to 
generation of distinct neural types in each.
  8.  In both the hindbrain and the spinal cord, motor 
neurons acquire distinct properties according to 
their anterior-posterior position, differentiating 
into the groups that innervate distinct muscles. 
Differential expression of transcription factors 
called Hox proteins is particularly important in 
diversification of motor neurons. They act with 
other transcription and soluble factors to divide 
motor neurons into columns and pools, with 
each pool destined to innervate a specific muscle.
  9.  The neural tube is also patterned along the 
dorsoventral axis. Similar to anterior-posterior 
regionalization, patterning results from gradi-
ents of morphogens. The most important are sonic 
hedgehog (Shh), which forms a ventral high–
dorsal low gradient, and BMPs, which form a 
dorsal high–ventral low gradient. Different lev-
els of Shh and BMPs induce different transcrip-
tion factors, which in turn lead to generation of 
different cell types.
10.  Regionalization of the cerebral cortex into motor, 
sensory, and association areas also begins with 
gradients of morphogens that induce differen-
tial expression of transcription factors, leading to 
establishment of a “protomap” of area identity. 
Interactions among areas along with input from 
subcortical regions refine the protomap to form 
definitive cortical areas.
11.  Several general principles explain many aspects 
of early neural development: (a) Inductive inter-
actions lead to subdivision of a uniform set of 
cells into discrete areas. (b) A small set of soluble 
factors such as FGFs, BMPs, and Wnts are used 
multiple times at multiple stages to regionalize 
the nervous system. (c) Varying levels of these 
factors lead to expression of different transcrip-
tion factors, which in turn generate different neu-
ral cell types. (d) Repressive interactions between 
cells expressing different transcription factors 
sharpen boundaries along both anteroposterior 
and dorsoventral axes.
12.  Until recently, studies on early stages of neural 
development have been restricted to experimen-
tal animals. Recent advances now enable neuro-
scientists to recapitulate some of these processes 
using cultured human cells. It should therefore 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1129
soon be possible to learn whether there are criti-
cal early differences between humans and other 
species that contribute to the complexity of the 
human brain and to human brain disorders.
 Joshua R. Sanes  
Thomas M. Jessell 
Selected Reading
Anderson C, Stern CD. 2016. Organizers in development. 
Curr Top Dev Biol 117:435–454.
Catela C, Shin MM, Dasen JS. 2015. Assembly and function 
of spinal circuits for motor control. Annu Rev Cell Dev 
Biol 31:669–698.
Dessaud E, McMahon AP, Briscoe J. 2008. Pattern formation in 
the vertebrate neural tube: a sonic hedgehog morphogen- 
regulated transcriptional network. Development 135: 
2489–2503.
Goulding M. 2009. Circuits controlling vertebrate locomotion: 
moving in a new direction. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:507–518.
Hamburger V. 1988. The Heritage of Experimental Embryology. Hans 
Spemann and the Organizer. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Kiecker C, Lumsden A. 2012. The role of organizers in pattern-
ing the nervous system. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:347–367.
Ozair MZ, Kintner C, Brivanlou AH. 2013. Neural induction 
and early patterning in vertebrates. Wiley Interdiscip Rev 
Dev Biol 2:479–498.
Rakic P. 2002. Evolving concepts of cortical radial and areal 
specification. Prog Brain Res 136:265–280.
Sur M, Rubenstein JL. 2005. Patterning and plasticity of the 
cerebral cortex. Science 310:805–810.
References
Addison M, Wilkinson DG. 2016. Segment identity and cell 
segregation in the vertebrate hindbrain. Curr Top Dev 
Biol 117:581–596.
Bell E, Wingate RJ, Lumsden A. 1999. Homeotic transforma-
tion of rhombomere identity after localized Hoxb1 misex-
pression. Science 284:2168–2171.
Cholfin JA, Rubenstein JL. 2007. Patterning of frontal cor-
tex subdivisions by Fgf17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
104:7652–7657.
Dasen JS. 2017. Master or servant? Emerging roles for motor 
neuron subtypes in the construction and evolution of 
locomotor circuits. Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:25–32.
Dasen JS, Tice BC, Brenner-Morton S, Jessell TM. 2005. A Hox 
regulatory network establishes motor neuron pool iden-
tity and target-muscle connectivity. Cell 123:477–491.
Goulding M, Lanuza G, Sapir T, Narayan S. 2002. The formation 
of sensorimotor circuits. Curr Opin Neurobiol 12:505–515.
Hamasaki T, Leingartner A, Ringstedt T, O’Leary DD. 2004. 
EMX2 regulates sizes and positioning of the primary sen-
sory and motor areas in neocortex by direct specification 
of cortical progenitors. Neuron 43:359–372.
Horng S, Sur M. 2006. Visual activity and cortical rewiring: 
activity-dependent plasticity of cortical networks. Prog 
Brain Res 157:3–11.
Ille F, Atanasoski S, Falkm S, et al. 2007. Wnt/BMP signal 
integration regulates the balance between proliferation 
and differentiation of neuroepithelial cells in the dorsal 
spinal cord. Dev Biol 304:394–408.
Kiecker C, Lumsden A. 2005. Compartments and their 
boundaries in vertebrate brain development. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 6:553–564.
Levine AJ, Brivanlou AH. 2007. Proposal of a model of mam-
malian neural induction. Dev Biol 308:247–256.
Lim Y, Golden JA. 2007. Patterning the developing dienceph-
alon. Brain Res Rev 53:17–26.
Liu A, Niswander LA. 2005. Bone morphogenetic protein 
signalling and vertebrate nervous system development. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 6:945–954.
Lupo G, Harris WA, Lewis KE. 2006. Mechanisms of ven-
tral patterning in the vertebrate nervous system. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 7:103–114.
Mallamaci A, Stoykova A. 2006. Gene networks controlling 
early cerebral cortex arealization. Eur J Neurosci 23:847–856.
Nordstrom U, Maier E, Jessell TM, Edlund T. 2006. An early 
role for WNT signaling in specifying neural patterns of 
Cdx and Hox gene expression and motor neuron subtype 
identity. PLoS Biol 4:1438–1452.
Rash BG, Grove EA. 2006. Area and layer patterning in the 
developing cerebral cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 16:25–34.
Schlaggar BL, O’Leary DDM. 1991. Potential of visual cortex 
to develop an array of functional units unique to soma-
tosensory cortex. Science 252:1556–1560.
Sharma J, Angelucci A, Sur M. 2000. Induction of visual ori-
entation modules in auditory cortex. Nature 404:841–847.
Song MR, Pfaff SL. 2005. Hox genes: the instructors working 
at motor pools. Cell 123:363–365.
Stamataki D, Ulloa F, Tsoni SV, Mynett A, Briscoe J. 2005. A 
gradient of Gli activity mediates graded Sonic Hedgehog 
signaling in the neural tube. Genes Dev 19:626–641.
Struder M, Lumsden A, Ariza-McNaughton L, Bradley A, 
Krumlauf R. 1996. Altered segmental identity and abnor-
mal migration of motor neurons in mice lacking Hoxb-1. 
Nature 384:630–634.
von Melchner L, Pallas SL, Sur M. 2000. Visual behaviour 
mediated by retinal projections directed to the auditory 
pathway. Nature 404:871–876.
Wolpert L, Beddington R, Brockes J, Jessell TM, Lawrence 
PA, Meyerowitz E. 1998. Principles of Development. New 
York: Oxford Univ Press.
Wolpert L, Smith J, Jessell T, Lawrence P, Robertson E,  
Meyerowitz E. 2006. Principles of Development, 3rd ed. 
New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Wurst W, Bally-Cuif L. 2001. Neural plate patterning: 
upstream and downstream of the isthmic organizer. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 2:99–108.


===== Page 7 =====
46
Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells
I
n the preceding chapter, we described how local 
inductive signals pattern the neural tube and estab-
lish the early regional subdivisions of the nervous 
system—the spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain, and 
forebrain. Here, we turn to the issue of how progeni-
tor cells within these regions differentiate into neurons 
and glial cells, the two major cell types of the nervous 
system. The mature brain comprises billions of nerve 
cells and a similar number of glial cells arranged in 
complex patterns, yet its precursor, the neural plate, 
initially contains only a few hundred cells arranged in 
a simple columnar epithelium. From this observation 
alone, it should be apparent that the generation of neu-
ral cells and their delivery to appropriate sites must be 
carefully regulated.
We begin by discussing some of the molecules that 
specify neuronal and glial cell fates. The basic mecha-
nisms of neurogenesis endow cells with common neu-
ronal properties, features that are largely independent 
of the region of the nervous system in which they are 
generated or the specific functions they perform. We 
also describe mechanisms by which developing neu-
rons become specialized, for example by acquiring the 
machinery to synthesize specific neurotransmitters.
We next discuss how neurons are delivered from 
their sites of origin to their final destinations. A com-
mon theme is that neurons are frequently “born”—that 
is, become postmitotic—far from where they end up, 
for example, in the layers of the cerebral cortex or the 
ganglia of the peripheral nervous system. Such dis-
tances necessitate elaborate migratory mechanisms, 
which differ among neuronal types.
After the identity and functional properties 
of the neuron have begun to emerge, additional 
The Proliferation of Neural Progenitor Cells Involves 
Symmetric and Asymmetric Cell Divisions
Radial Glial Cells Serve as Neural Progenitors and  
Structural Scaffolds
The Generation of Neurons and Glial Cells Is Regulated 
by Delta-Notch Signaling and Basic Helix-Loop-Helix 
Transcription Factors
The Layers of the Cerebral Cortex Are Established by 
Sequential Addition of Newborn Neurons
Neurons Migrate Long Distances From Their Site of Origin to 
Their Final Position
Excitatory Cortical Neurons Migrate Radially  
Along Glial Guides
Cortical Interneurons Arise Subcortically and Migrate 
Tangentially to Cortex
Neural Crest Cell Migration in the Peripheral Nervous 
System Does Not Rely on Scaffolding
Structural and Molecular Innovations Underlie the Expansion 
of the Human Cerebral Cortex
Intrinsic Programs and Extrinsic Factors Determine the 
Neurotransmitter Phenotypes of Neurons
Neurotransmitter Choice Is a Core Component of 
Transcriptional Programs of Neuronal Differentiation
Signals From Synaptic Inputs and Targets Can Influence 
the Transmitter Phenotypes of Neurons
The Survival of a Neuron Is Regulated by Neurotrophic 
Signals From the Neuron’s Target
The Neurotrophic Factor Hypothesis Was Confirmed by 
the Discovery of Nerve Growth Factor
Neurotrophins Are the Best-Studied Neurotrophic Factors
Neurotrophic Factors Suppress a Latent Cell  
Death Program
Highlights


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1131
developmental processes determine whether the neu-
ron will live or die. Remarkably, approximately half 
of the neurons generated in the mammalian nervous 
system are lost through programmed cell death. We 
examine the factors that regulate the survival of neu-
rons and the possible benefits of widespread neuronal 
loss. Finally, we describe a core biochemical pathway 
in nerve cells destined for elimination.
The Proliferation of Neural Progenitor  
Cells Involves Symmetric and Asymmetric  
Cell Divisions
Histologists in the late 19th century showed that neu-
ral epithelial cells close to the ventricular lumen of the 
embryonic brain exhibit features of mitosis. We now 
know that the proliferative zones surrounding the ven-
tricles are the major sites for the production of neural 
cells in the central nervous system. Moreover, newborn 
cells in the proliferative zones often become committed 
to neuronal or glial fates before migrating from these 
zones.
At early stages of embryonic development, most 
progenitor cells in the ventricular zone of the neural 
tube proliferate rapidly. Many of these early neural 
progenitors have the properties of stem cells: They 
can generate additional copies of themselves, a pro-
cess called self-renewal, and also give rise to differen-
tiated neurons and glial cells. In a later chapter, we 
will describe the more recent discovery that stem cells 
resembling those of embryos also exist in the adult 
brain and may be harnessed for therapeutic purposes 
(Chapter 50).
As with other types of stem cells, neural progeni-
tor cells undergo stereotyped programs of cell divi-
sion. One mode of cell division is symmetric: Neural 
stem cells divide to produce two stem cells, and in this 
way expand the population of proliferative progenitor 
cells. This mode predominates at the earliest times, as 
the neuroepithelium expands. A second mode is asym-
metric: The progenitor produces one differentiated 
daughter and another daughter that retains its stem 
cell–like properties. This mode retains but does not 
amplify the stem cell population. A third mode leads 
to production of two differentiated daughters. In this 
symmetric mode, the stem cell population is depleted. 
All three modes have been found in the embryonic cer-
ebral cortex in vivo and in cortical cells grown in tissue 
culture (Figure 46–1).
The incidence of symmetric and asymmetric cell 
division is influenced by signals in the local envi-
ronment of the dividing cell, making it possible to 
control the probability of self-renewal or differentia-
tion. Environmental factors can influence the outcome 
of progenitor cell divisions in two fundamental ways. 
They can act in an “instructive” manner, biasing the 
outcome of the division process and causing the stem 
cell to adopt one fate at the expense of others. Or they 
can act in a “selective” manner, permitting the survival 
and maturation of only certain cell progeny.
Radial Glial Cells Serve as Neural Progenitors 
and Structural Scaffolds
Radial glial cells are the earliest morphologically dis-
tinguishable cell type to appear within the primitive 
neural epithelium. Their cell bodies are located in the 
ventricular zone, and their long process extends to the 
pial surface. As the brain thickens, the processes of 
radial glial cells remain attached to the ventricular and 
pial surfaces. After the generation of neurons is com-
plete, many radial glial cells differentiate into astro-
cytes. The elongated shape of the radial glial cell places 
it in a favorable position to serve as a scaffold for the 
migration of neurons that emerge from the ventricular 
zone (Figure 46–2).
The ventricular zone was once thought to con-
tain two major cell types: radial glial cells and a set of 
neuroepithelial progenitors that serve as the primary 
source of neurons. More recently, this classical view 
has changed dramatically. Once symmetric divisions 
of stem cells have expanded the neuroepithelium, 
these cells give rise to radial glial cells. The radial glial 
cells serve as progenitor cells that generate both neu-
rons and astrocytes in addition to their role in neuronal 
migration (Figure 46–2). Labeling of radial glial cells 
with fluorescent dyes or viruses shows that their clonal 
progeny include both neuronal and radial glial cells. 
These findings indicate that radial glial cells are able to 
undergo both asymmetric and self-renewing cell divi-
sion and serve as a major source of postmitotic neu-
rons as well as astrocytes.
The Generation of Neurons and Glial Cells Is 
Regulated by Delta-Notch Signaling and Basic 
Helix-Loop-Helix Transcription Factors
How do radial glial cells make the decision to self-
renew, generate neurons, or give rise to mature 
astrocytes? The answer to this question involves an 
evolutionarily conserved signaling system.
In flies and vertebrates, neural fate is regulated 
by a cell-surface signaling system, comprised of the 


===== Page 9 =====
1132    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Asymmetric
Progenitor cells
Neurons
Oligodendrocytes
Symmetric
A  Strategies of cell division
B
P
N
P
G
P
P
P
P
N
P
N
N
Figure 46–1  Neural progenitor cells have different modes 
of division.
A. Asymmetric and symmetric modes of cell division. A pro-
genitor cell (P) can undergo asymmetric division to generate 
a neuron (N) and a glial cell (G), or a neuron and another pro-
genitor. This mode of division contributes to the generation 
of neurons at early stages of development and of glial cells 
at later stages, typical of many regions of the central nervous 
system. Progenitor cells can also undergo symmetric division 
to generate two additional progenitor cells or two postmitotic 
neurons.
B. Time-lapse cinematography captures the divisions and dif-
ferentiation of isolated cortical progenitor cells in the rodent. 
Lineage diagrams illustrate cells that undergo predominantly 
asymmetric division, giving rise to neurons, or symmetric 
division, giving rise to oligodendrocytes. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Qian et al. 1998. Permission conveyed through 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
transmembrane ligand Delta and its receptor Notch. 
This signaling system was revealed in genetic stud-
ies in Drosophila. Neurons emerge from within a 
larger cluster of ectodermal cells, called a proneural 
region, all of which have the potential to generate 
neurons. Yet within the proneural region, only cer-
tain cells form neurons; the others become epider-
mal support cells.
Delta and Notch are initially expressed at similar 
levels by all proneural cells (Figure 46–3A). With time, 
however, Notch activity is enhanced in one cell and 
suppressed in its neighbor. The cell in which Notch 
activity is highest loses the potential to form a neuron 
and acquires an alternative fate. The binding of Delta 
to Notch results in proteolytic cleavage of the Notch 
cytoplasmic domain, which then enters the nucleus. 


