===== Page 1 =====
468    Part IV / Perception
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical 
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 
1:1–47.
Fitzgerald PJ, Lane JW, Thakur PH, Hsiao SS. 2006. Receptive 
field properties of the macaque second somatosensory 
cortex: representation of orientation on different finger 
pads. J Neurosci 26:6473–6484.
Flanagan JR, Vetter P, Johansson RS, Wolpert DM. 2003. 
Prediction precedes control in motor learning. Curr Biol 
13:146–150.
Fogassi L, Luppino G. 2005. Motor functions of the parietal 
lobe. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:626–631.
Gardner EP. 1988. Somatosensory cortical mechanisms of 
feature detection in tactile and kinesthetic discrimination. 
Can J Physiol Pharmacol 66:439–454.
Gardner EP. 2008. Dorsal and ventral streams in the sense of 
touch. In: JH Kaas, EP Gardner (eds). The Senses: A Com-
prehensive Reference. Vol. 6, Somatosensation, pp. 233–258. 
Oxford: Elsevier.
Gardner EP, Babu KS, Ghosh S, Sherwood A, Chen J. 2007. 
Neurophysiology of prehension: III. Representation of 
object features in posterior parietal cortex of the macaque 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 98:3708–3730.
Hikosaka O, Tanaka M, Sakamoto M, Iwamura Y. 1985. Defi-
cits in manipulative behaviors induced by local injections 
of muscimol in the first somatosensory cortex of the con-
scious monkey. Brain Res 325:375–380.
Hinkley LB, Krubitzer LA, Nagarajan SS, Disbrow EA. 2007. 
Sensorimotor integration in S2, PV, and parietal rostro-
ventral areas of the human Sylvian fissure. J Neurophysiol 
97:1288–1297.
Hyvärinen J, Poranen A. 1978. Movement-sensitive and 
direction and orientation-selective cutaneous receptive 
fields in the hand area of the post-central gyrus in mon-
keys. J Physiol (Lond) 283:523–537.
Iwamura Y, Iriki A, Tanaka M. 1994. Bilateral hand represen-
tation in the postcentral somatosensory cortex. Nature 
369:554–556.
Iwamura Y, Tanaka M, Sakamoto M, Hikosaka O. 1993. Ros-
trocaudal gradients in neuronal receptive field complex-
ity in the finger region of the alert monkey’s postcentral 
gyrus. Exp Brain Res 92:360–368.
Jenmalm P, Birznieks I, Goodwin AW, Johansson RS. 2003. 
Influence of object shape on responses of human tactile 
afferents under conditions characteristic of manipulation. 
Eur J Neurosci 18:164–176.
Johansson RS. 1996. Sensory control of dexterous manipula-
tion in humans. In: AM Wing, P Haggard, JR Flanagan 
(eds). Hand and Brain, pp. 381–414. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Johansson RS, Flanagan JR. 2009. Coding and use of tactile 
signals from the fingertips in object manipulation tasks. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 10:345–359.
Johansson RS, Landström U, Lundström R. 1982. Responses 
of mechanoreceptive afferent units in the glabrous skin of 
the human hand to sinusoidal skin displacements. Brain 
Res 244:17–25.
Johansson RS, Vallbo ÅB. 1983. Tactile sensory coding in 
the glabrous skin of the human hand. Trends Neurosci 
6:27–32.
Johnson KO, Phillips JR. 1981. Tactile spatial resolution: I. 
Two-point discrimination, gap detection, grating resolu-
tion and letter recognition. J Neurophysiol 46:1177–1191.
Jones EG, Powell TPS. 1969. Connexions of the somatic sen-
sory cortex of the rhesus monkey. I. Ipsilateral cortical 
connexions. Brain 92:477–502.
Klatzky RA, Lederman SJ, Metzger VA. 1985. Identifying 
objects by touch: an “expert system.” Percept Psychophys 
37:299–302.
Koch KW, Fuster JM. 1989. Unit activity in monkey parietal 
cortex related to haptic perception and temporary mem-
ory. Exp Brain Res 76:292–306.
LaMotte RH, Mountcastle VB. 1979. Disorders in somethe-
sis following lesions of parietal lobe. J Neurophysiol 
42:400–419.
Lederman SJ, Klatzky RL. 1987. Hand movements: a 
window into haptic object recognition. Cogn Psychol 19: 
342–368.
Lieber JD, Xia X, Weber AI, Bensmaia SJ. 2017. The neural 
code for tactile roughness in the somatosensory nerves.  
J Neurophysiol 118:3107–3117.
Manfredi LR, Saal, HP, Brown KJ, et al. 2014. Natural scenes 
in tactile texture. J Neurophysiol 111:1792–1802.
Mountcastle VB. 1997. The columnar organization of the neo-
cortex. Brain 120:701–722.
Mountcastle VB, LaMotte RH, Carli G. 1972. Detection 
thresholds for stimuli in humans and monkeys: com-
parison with threshold events in mechanoreceptive affer-
ent fibers innervating the monkey hand. J Neurophysiol 
35:122–136.
Mountcastle VB, Lynch JC, Georgopoulos AP, Sakata H, 
Acuna C. 1975. Posterior parietal association cortex of 
the monkey: command functions for operations within 
extrapersonal space. J Neurophysiol 38:871–908.
Muniak MA, Ray S, Hsiao SS, Dammann JF, Bensmaia SJ. 
2007. The neural coding of stimulus intensity: linking the 
population response of mechanoreceptive afferents with 
psychophysical behavior. J Neurosci 27:11687–11699.
Murray EA, Mishkin M. 1984. Relative contributions of SII 
and area 5 to tactile discrimination in monkeys. Behav 
Brain Res 11:67–83.
Nelson RJ, Sur M, Felleman DJ, Kaas JH. 1980. Representa-
tions of the body surface in postcentral parietal cortex of 
Macaca fascicularis. J Comp Neurol 192:611–643.
Nolano M, Provitera V, Crisci C, et al. 2003. Quantification 
of myelinated endings and mechanoreceptors in human 
digital skin. Ann Neurol 54:197–205.
Oberlaender M, de Kock CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2012. Cell type-
specific three-dimensional structure of thalamocortical 
circuits in a column of rat vibrissal cortex. Cereb Cortex 
22:2375–2391.
Pandya DN, Seltzer B. 1982. Intrinsic connections and archi-
tectonics of posterior parietal cortex in the rhesus monkey. 
J Comp Neurol 204:196–210.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    469
Pause M, Kunesch E, Binkofski F, Freund H-J. 1989. Sensori-
motor disturbances in patients with lesions of the parietal 
cortex. Brain 112:1599–1625.
Pei Y-C, Denchev P V, Hsiao SS, Craig JC, Bensmaia SJ. 2009. 
Convergence of submodality-specific input onto neu-
rons in primary somatosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 
102:1843–1853.
Peters RM, Hackeman E, Goldreich D. 2009. Diminutive dig-
its discern delicate details: fingertip size and the sex dif-
ference in tactile spatial acuity. J Neurosci 29:15756–15761.
Phillips JR, Johansson RS, Johnson KO. 1990. Representation 
of braille characters in human nerve fibres. Exp Brain Res 
81:589–592.
Pons TP, Garraghty PE, Mishkin M. 1992. Serial and parallel 
processing of tactual information in somatosensory cortex 
of rhesus monkeys. J Neurophysiol 68:518–527.
Pons TP, Garraghty PE, Ommaya AK, Kaas JH, Taub E, Mishkin 
M. 1991. Massive cortical reorganization after sensory deaf-
ferentation in adult macaques. Science 252:1857–1860.
Pruszynski JA, Johansson RS. 2014. Edge-orientation process-
ing in first-order tactile neurons. Nat Neurosci 17:1404–1409.
Quilliam TA. 1978. The structure of finger print skin. In: G 
Gordon (ed). Active Touch, pp. 1–18. Oxford: Pergamon 
Press.
Robinson CJ, Burton H. 1980. Somatic submodality distribu-
tion within the second somatosensory (SII), 7b, retro-
insular, postauditory and granular insular cortical areas 
of M. fascicularis. J Comp Neurol 192:93–108.
Romo R, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Lemus L, Brody CD. 2002. 
Neuronal correlates of decision-making in secondary 
somatosensory cortex. Nat Neurosci 5:1217–1235.
Saal HP, Bensmaia SJ. 2014. Touch is a team effort: interplay 
of submodalities in cutaneous sensibility. Trends Neurosci 
37:689–697.
Salinas E, Hernandez A, Zainos A, Romo R. 2000. Periodicity 
and firing rate as candidate neural codes for the frequency 
of vibrotactile stimuli. J Neurosci 20:5503–5515.
Snider WD. 1998. How do you feel? Neurotrophins and 
mechanotransduction. Nat Neurosci 1:5–6.
Srinivasan MA, Whitehouse JM, LaMotte RH. 1990. Tactile 
detection of slip: surface microgeometry and peripheral 
neural codes. J Neurophysiol 63:1323–1332.
Sripati AP, Yoshioka T, Denchev P, Hsiao SS, Johnson KO. 
2006. Spatiotemporal receptive fields of peripheral affer-
ents and cortical area 3b and 1 neurons in the primate 
somatosensory system. J Neurosci 26:2101–2114.
Talbot WH, Darian-Smith I, Kornhuber HH, Mountcastle 
VB. 1968. The sense of flutter-vibration: comparison of the 
human capacity with response patterns of mechanore-
ceptive afferents from the monkey hand. J Neurophysiol 
31:301–334.
Vega-Bermudez F, Johnson KO. 1999. Surround suppression 
in the responses of primate SA1 and RA mechanorecep-
tive afferents mapped with a probe array. J Neurophysiol 
81:2711–2719.
Warren S, Hämäläinen HA, Gardner EP. 1986. Objective 
classification of motion- and direction-sensitive neurons 
in primary somatosensory cortex of awake monkeys.  
J Neurophysiol 56:598–622.
Weber AI, Saal HP, Lieber JD, et al. 2013. Spatial and tem-
poral codes mediate the tactile perception of natural tex-
tures. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 110:17107–17112.
Weinstein S. 1968. Intensive and extensive aspects of tactile 
sensitivity as a function of body part, sex, and lateral-
ity. In: DR Kenshalo (ed). The Skin Senses, pp. 195–222. 
Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Westling G, Johansson RS. 1987. Responses in glabrous skin 
mechanoreceptors during precision grip in humans. Exp 
Brain Res 66:128–140.
Wimmer VC, Bruno RM, de Kock CP, Kuner T, Sakmann B. 
2010. Dimensions of a projection column and architecture 
of VPM and POm axons in rat vibrissal cortex. Cereb 
Cortex 20:2265–2276.


===== Page 3 =====
20
Pain
distinctive of all the sensory modalities. As with the 
other somatosensory modalities—touch, pressure, and 
position sense—pain serves an important protective 
function, alerting us to injuries that require evasion or 
treatment. In children born with insensitivity to pain, 
severe injuries often go unnoticed and can lead to per-
manent tissue damage. Yet pain is unlike other soma-
tosensory modalities, or vision, hearing, and smell, in 
that it has an urgent and primitive quality, possessing 
a powerful emotional component.
The perception of pain is subjective and is influ-
enced by many factors. An identical sensory stimulus 
can elicit quite distinct responses in the same indi-
vidual under different conditions. Many wounded 
soldiers, for example, do not feel pain until they have 
been removed from the battlefield; injured athletes are 
often not aware of pain until a game is over. Simply 
put, there are no purely “painful” stimuli, sensory 
stimuli that invariably elicit the perception of pain in 
all individuals. The variability of the perception of 
pain is yet another example of a principle that we have 
encountered in earlier chapters: Pain is not the direct 
expression of a sensory event but rather the product of 
elaborate processing in the brain of a variety of neural 
signals.
When pain is experienced, it can be acute, persis-
tent, or, in extreme cases, chronic. Persistent pain char-
acterizes many clinical conditions and is usually the 
reason that patients seek medical attention. In contrast, 
chronic pain appears to have no useful purpose; it only 
makes patients miserable. Pain’s highly individual and 
subjective nature is one of the factors that make it so 
difficult to define objectively and to treat clinically.
Noxious Insults Activate Thermal, Mechanical, and 
Polymodal Nociceptors
Signals From Nociceptors Are Conveyed to Neurons in the 
Dorsal Horn of the Spinal Cord
Hyperalgesia Has Both Peripheral and Central Origins
Four Major Ascending Pathways Convey Nociceptive 
Information From the Spinal Cord to the Brain
Several Thalamic Nuclei Relay Nociceptive Information to 
the Cerebral Cortex
The Perception of Pain Arises From and Can Be Controlled 
by Cortical Mechanisms
Anterior Cingulate and Insular Cortex Are Associated 
With the Perception of Pain
Pain Perception Is Regulated by a Balance of Activity in 
Nociceptive and Nonnociceptive Afferent Fibers
Electrical Stimulation of the Brain Produces Analgesia
Opioid Peptides Contribute to Endogenous Pain Control
Endogenous Opioid Peptides and Their Receptors Are 
Distributed in Pain-Modulatory Systems
Morphine Controls Pain by Activating Opioid Receptors
Tolerance to and Dependence on Opioids Are Distinct 
Phenomena
Highlights
A
ccording to the international associa-
tion for the Study of Pain, pain is an unpleas-
ant sensation and emotional experience 
associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or 
described in terms of such damage. Pricking, burn-
ing, aching, stinging, and soreness are among the most 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    471
Figure 20–1  Propagation of action potentials in different 
classes of nociceptive fibers.
A. The speed at which action potentials are conducted is a 
function of each fiber’s cross-sectional diameter. Wave peaks in 
the figure are labeled alphabetically in order of latency. The first 
peak and its subdivisions are the summed electrical activity of 
myelinated A fibers. A delayed (slowly conducting) deflection 
represents the summed action potentials of unmyelinated C 
fibers. The compound action potential of the A fibers is shown 
on a faster time-base to depict the summation of the action 
potentials of several fibers. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Perl 2007. Copyright © 2007 Springer Nature.)
B. First and second pain are carried by A delta and C fibers, 
respectively. (Adapted, with permission, from Fields 1987.)
In this chapter, we discuss the neural processes 
that underlie the perception of pain in normal individ-
uals and explain the origins of some of the abnormal 
pain states that are encountered clinically.
Noxious Insults Activate Thermal, Mechanical, 
and Polymodal Nociceptors
Many organs in the periphery, including skin and sub-
cutaneous structures such as joints and muscles, pos-
sess specialized sensory receptors that are activated by 
noxious insults. Unlike the specialized somatosensory 
receptors for light touch and pressure, most of these 
nociceptors are simply the free nerve endings of pri-
mary sensory neurons. There are three main classes of 
B  First and second pain
A  Compound action potential
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time (ms)
Amplitude (mV)
Aα, Aβ
Aδ
C
Aα, Aβ
Aδ
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
Time (ms)
First pain
Second pain
Pain intensity
Time
Thinly myelinated
(Aδ ﬁber)
Unmyelinated
(C ﬁber)
nociceptors—thermal, mechanical, and polymodal—
as well as a more enigmatic fourth class, termed silent 
nociceptors.
Thermal nociceptors are activated by extremes in tem-
perature, typically greater than 45°C (115°F) or less than 
5°C (41°F). They include the peripheral endings of small-
diameter, thinly myelinated Aδ axons that conduct action 
potentials at speeds of 5 to 30 m/s and unmyelinated 
C-fiber axons that conduct at speeds less than 1.0 m/s 
(Figure 20–1A). Mechanical nociceptors are activated opti-
mally by intense pressure applied to the skin; they too 
are the endings of thinly myelinated Aδ axons. Polymodal 
nociceptors can be activated by high-intensity mechani-
cal, chemical, or thermal (both hot and cold) stimuli. This 
class of nociceptors consists predominantly of unmyeli-
nated C fibers (Figure 20–1A).


===== Page 5 =====
472    Part IV / Perception
These three classes of nociceptors are widely 
distributed in skin and deep tissues and are often 
co-activated. When a hammer hits your thumb, you 
initially feel a sharp pain (“first pain”) followed by a 
more prolonged aching and sometimes burning pain 
(“second pain”) (Figure 20–1B). The fast sharp pain is 
transmitted by Aδ fibers that carry information from 
damaged thermal and mechanical nociceptors. The 
slow dull pain is transmitted by C fibers that convey 
signals from polymodal nociceptors.
Silent nociceptors are found in the viscera. This class 
of receptors is not normally activated by noxious stim-
ulation; instead, inflammation and various chemical 
agents dramatically reduce their firing threshold. Their 
activation is thought to contribute to the emergence of 
secondary hyperalgesia and central sensitization, two 
prominent features of chronic pain.
Noxious stimuli depolarize the bare nerve endings 
of afferent axons and generate action potentials that 
are propagated centrally. How is this achieved? The 
membrane of the nociceptor contains receptors that 
convert the thermal, mechanical, or chemical energy of 
noxious stimuli into a depolarizing electrical potential. 
One such protein is a member of a large family of so-
called transient receptor potential (TRP) ion channels. 
This receptor-channel, TRPV1, is expressed selectively 
by nociceptive neurons and mediates the pain- 
producing actions of capsaicin, the active ingredient of 
hot peppers and many other pungent chemicals. The 
TRPV1 channel is also activated by noxious thermal 
stimuli, with a threshold for activation around 45°C, 
the temperature that provokes heat pain. Importantly, 
TRPV1-mediated membrane currents are enhanced 
by a reduction in pH, a characteristic of the chemical 
milieu of inflammation.
Other receptor-channels of the TRP channel fam-
ily are expressed by nociceptors and underlie the per-
ception of a wide range of temperatures, from cold to 
intense heat. Of particular interest is TRPM8, a menthol-
responsive and cold-sensing channel that likely medi-
ates the extreme cold hypersensitivity produced by 
many chemotherapeutic drugs (such as oxaliplatin). 
TRPA1 responds to a variety of irritants, from mustard 
oil to garlic and even air pollutants (Figure 20–2). Very 
recently, a family of mechanical transducers (Piezo1 
and Piezo2) was described (Chapter 18). These chan-
nels may be important contributors to the mechanical 
hypersensitivity that is a prominent feature of many 
chronic pain conditions.
In addition to this constellation of TRP channels, 
sensory neurons express many other receptors and ion 
channels involved in the transduction of peripheral 
stimuli. Nociceptors selectively express many different 
voltage-gated Na2+ channels, which are the target of 
local anesthetics that so effectively block pain. (Think 
of the dentist who can completely eliminate tooth 
pain.) Nociceptors express Na2+ channels that are 
sensitive or resistant to tetrodotoxin (TTX). One type 
of TTX-sensitive channel, Nav1.7, is a key molecular 
mechanism in the perception of pain in humans, as 
revealed in the rare individuals who have a loss-of-
function mutation in the corresponding SCN9A gene. 
These individuals are insensitive to pain but are oth-
erwise healthy and exhibit normal sensory responses 
to touch, temperature, proprioception, tickle, and 
pressure. A second class of mutations in the SCN9A 
gene result in hyperexcitability of nociceptors; indi-
viduals with these mutations exhibit an inherited 
condition called erythromelalgia, in which there is 
intense, ongoing burning pain of the extremities, 
accompanied by profound redness (vasodilation). 
Since Nav1.7, unlike many other voltage-gated Na+ 
channels, is not found in the central nervous system, 
pharmaceutical companies are developing antago-
nists that will hopefully provide a novel approach to 
regulating pain processing without the adverse side 
effects that can occur with systemic administration of 
lidocaine, which blocks all subtypes of voltage-gated 
Na+ channels.
Nociceptors also express an ionotropic puriner-
gic receptor, PTX3, which is activated by adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) released from peripheral cells after 
tissue damage. In addition, they express members of 
the Mas-related G protein–coupled receptor (Mrg) fam-
ily, which are activated by peptide ligands and serve 
to sensitize nociceptors to other chemicals released in 
their local environment (see Figure 20–7). Subsets of 
these unmyelinated afferents also include receptor-
channels that respond to a variety of itch-provoking 
substances, including the pruritogens histamine and 
chloroquine. It follows that these receptors and chan-
nels are attractive targets for the development of drugs 
selective for sensory neurons responsive to pain and 
itch-provoking stimuli.
Uncontrolled activation of nociceptors is asso-
ciated with several pathological conditions. Two 
common pain states that result from alterations in noci-
ceptor activity are allodynia and hyperalgesia. Patients 
with allodynia feel pain in response to stimuli that are 
normally innocuous: a light stroking of sunburned 
skin, the movement of joints in patients with rheuma-
toid arthritis, and even the act of getting out of bed in 
the morning after a vigorous workout. Nevertheless, 
patients with allodynia do not feel pain constantly; in 
the absence of a peripheral stimulus, there is no pain. 
In contrast, patients with hyperalgesia—an exaggerated 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    473
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
TRPV4
TRPA1
TRPV3
TRPV1
TRPM8
TRPV2
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
C
C
C
Receptor temperature range (°C)
0°
10°
20°
30°
40°
50°
60°
TRPM8
TRPV4
TRPV1
TRPV2
B  Thermosensitivity of TRP channels in dorsal root ganglion cells
C  Pathway to TRP channel opening 
PKC
BK
BK receptor
TRPV1
TRPA1
G protein
GTP
Endoplasmic
reticulum
PIP2
IP3
Ca2+
Ca2+
P
P
P
Ca2+
PLC
RNA
28°
36°
44°
51°
A  Thermosensitivity of TRP channels in Xenopus oocytes
Figure 20–2  Transient receptor potential ion channels in 
nociceptive neurons.
A. Recordings from Xenopus oocytes injected with mRNA encod-
ing transient receptor potential (TRP) channels reveal the thermo-
sensitivity of the channels. The temperature (centigrade) at which 
a specific TRP channel is activated is shown by the downward 
deflection of the recording. (Photograph on left reproduced, with 
permission, from Erwin Siegel 1987; traces on the right repro-
duced, with permission, from Tominaga and Caterina 2004.)
B. Temperature response profiles of different TRP channels 
expressed by dorsal root ganglion neurons. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Jordt, McKemy, and Julius 2003; Dhaka, 
Viswanath, and Patapoutian 2006.)
C. Bradykinin (BK) binds to G protein–coupled receptors on 
the surface of primary afferent neurons to activate phos-
pholipase C (PLC), leading to the hydrolysis of membrane 
phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2), the production of 
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), and the release of Ca2+ 
from intracellular stores. Activation of protein kinase C (PKC) 
regulates TRP channel activity. The TRPV1 channel is sensi-
tized, leading to channel opening and Ca2+ influx. (Source: 
Bautista et al. 2006.)


===== Page 7 =====
474    Part IV / Perception
response to noxious stimuli—typically report persis-
tent pain in the absence of sensory stimulation.
Persistent pain can be subdivided into two broad 
classes, nociceptive and neuropathic. Nociceptive pain 
results from the activation of nociceptors in the skin or 
soft tissue in response to tissue injury, and it usually 
occurs with inflammation. Sprains and strains produce 
mild forms of nociceptive pain, whereas arthritis or a 
tumor that invades soft tissue produce a much more 
severe nociceptive pain. Typically, nociceptive pain 
is treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDS; see later discussion) or, when severe, with 
opiates such as morphine.
Neuropathic pain results from direct injury to 
nerves in the peripheral or central nervous system, and 
is often accompanied by a burning or electric sensa-
tion. Neuropathic pains include complex regional pain 
syndrome, which can follow even very minor damage 
to a limb peripheral nerve; post-herpetic neuralgia, the 
severe pain experienced by many patients after a bout 
of shingles; or trigeminal neuralgia, an intense, shoot-
ing pain in the face that results from an as yet unknown 
pathology of the trigeminal nerve. Other neuropathic 
pains include phantom limb pain, which can occur after 
limb amputation (see Figure 20–14). In some instances, 
spontaneous, ongoing, often burning pain can even 
occur without a peripheral stimulus, a phenomenon 
termed anesthesia dolorosa. This syndrome can be trig-
gered following attempts to treat trigeminal neuralgia 
by ablating trigeminal sensory neurons. Neuropathic 
pains do not respond to NSAIDS and are generally 
poorly responsive to opiates. Finally, lesions of the cen-
tral nervous system, for example, in multiple sclerosis, 
after stroke, or after spinal cord injury, can also result 
in central neuropathic pain states. Since loss of inhibi-
tory controls (as occurs in epilepsy) is an important 
contributor to neuropathic pain, the first-line therapy 
for neuropathic pain, not surprisingly, involves anti-
convulsants, notably the gabapentinoids. (The refer-
ence to γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA] was based on a 
structural similarity of gabapentin to GABA. However, 
gabapentin in fact exerts its action by binding to the 
α2δ-subunit of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, ultimately 
decreasing neurotransmitter release.)
Signals From Nociceptors Are Conveyed to 
Neurons in the Dorsal Horn of the Spinal Cord
The sensation of noxious stimuli arises from signals 
in the peripheral axonal branches of nociceptive sen-
sory neurons whose cell bodies are located in dorsal 
root ganglia. The central branches of these neurons 
terminate in the spinal cord in a highly orderly manner. 
Most terminate in the dorsal horn. Primary afferent 
neurons that convey distinct sensory modalities termi-
nate in different laminae (Figure 20–3B) such that there 
is a tight link between the anatomical organization of 
dorsal horn neurons, their receptive properties, and 
their function in sensory processing.
Many neurons in the most superficial lamina of 
the dorsal horn, termed lamina I or the marginal layer, 
respond to noxious stimuli conveyed by Aδ and C 
fibers. Because they respond selectively to noxious 
stimulation, they have been called nociceptive-specific 
neurons. This set of neurons projects to the midbrain 
and thalamus. A second class of lamina I neurons 
receives input from C fibers that are activated selec-
tively by cool stimuli. Other classes of lamina I neu-
rons respond in a graded fashion to both innocuous 
and noxious mechanical stimulation and thus are 
termed wide dynamic range neurons.
Lamina II, the substantia gelatinosa, is a densely 
packed layer that contains many different classes of 
local interneurons, some excitatory and others inhib-
itory. Some of these interneurons respond selectively 
to pain-provoking inputs, whereas others are selec-
tively activated by itch-provoking stimuli. Laminae III  
and IV contain a mixture of local interneurons and 
supraspinal projection neurons. Many of these 
neurons receive input from Aβ afferent fibers that 
respond to innocuous cutaneous stimuli, such as 
deflection of hairs and light pressure. Lamina V 
contains neurons that respond to a wide variety of 
noxious stimuli and project to the brain stem and 
thalamus. These neurons receive direct inputs from 
Aβ and Aδ fibers and, because their dendrites extend 
into lamina II, are also innervated by C-fiber nociceptors 
(Figure 20–3B).
Neurons in lamina V also receive input from noci-
ceptors in visceral tissues. The convergence of somatic 
and visceral nociceptive inputs onto individual lamina 
V neurons provides one explanation for a phenomenon 
called “referred pain,” a condition in which pain from 
injury to a visceral tissue is perceived as originating 
from a region of the body surface. Patients with myo-
cardial infarction, for example, frequently report pain 
from the left arm as well as the chest (Figure 20–4). 
This phenomenon occurs because a single lamina V 
neuron receives sensory input from both regions, and 
thus a signal from this neuron does not inform higher 
brain centers about the source of the input. As a conse-
quence, the brain often incorrectly attributes the pain to 
the skin, possibly because cutaneous inputs predomi-
nate. Another anatomical explanation for instances of 
referred pain is that the axons of nociceptive sensory 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    475
C ﬁber
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
To brain stem
and thalamus
To thalamus
B  Spinal cord inputs
Aδ ﬁbers 
Aδ ﬁber 
Aβ ﬁber
(mechanoreceptor)
C ﬁber
Thermal 
Polymodal
Silent
Mechanical
A  Nociceptor types
Figure 20–3  Nociceptive fibers terminate in different lami-
nae of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
A. There are three main classes of peripheral nociceptor as well 
as the silent nociceptors, which are activated by inflammation 
and various chemical substances.
B. Neurons in lamina I of the dorsal horn receive direct input 
from myelinated (Ac) nociceptive fibers and both direct  
and indirect input from unmyelinated (C) nociceptive  
fibers via interneurons in lamina II. Lamina V neurons receive 
low-threshold input from large-diameter myelinated Aβ 
mechanoreceptive fibers as well as inputs from nociceptive 
Aδ and C fibers. Lamina V neurons send dendrites to lamina 
IV, where they are contacted by the terminals of Aβ primary 
afferents. Axon terminals of lamina II interneurons can make 
contact with dendrites in lamina III that arise from cells in 
lamina V. Aα primary afferents contact motor neurons and 
interneurons in the ventral spinal cord (not shown).  
(Adapted, with permission, from Fields 1987.)
neurons branch in the periphery, innervating both skin 
and visceral targets.
Neurons in lamina VI receive inputs from large-
diameter primary afferent fibers that innervate muscles 
and joints. These neurons are activated by innocuous 
joint movement and do not contribute to the trans-
mission of nociceptive information. Many neurons 
in laminae VII and VIII, the intermediate and ventral 
regions of the spinal cord, do respond to noxious stimuli. 
These neurons typically have complex response prop-
erties because the inputs from nociceptors to these 
neurons are conveyed through many intervening syn-
apses. Neurons in lamina VII often respond to stimu-
lation of either side of the body, whereas most dorsal 
horn neurons receive unilateral input. The activation 
of lamina VII neurons is therefore thought to contrib-
ute to the diffuse quality of many pain conditions.
Nociceptive sensory neurons that activate neu-
rons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord release two 
major classes of neurotransmitters. Glutamate is the 
primary neurotransmitter of all primary sensory neu-
rons, regardless of sensory modality. Neuropeptides 
are released as cotransmitters by many nociceptors 
with unmyelinated axons. These peptides include 
substance P, calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP), 
somatostatin, and galanin (Figure 20–5). Glutamate is 
stored in small, electron-lucent vesicles, whereas pep-
tides are sequestered in large, dense-core vesicles at 
the central terminals of nociceptive sensory neurons 
(Figure 20–6). Separate storage sites permit these two 
classes of neurotransmitters to be selectively released 
under different physiological conditions.
Of the neuropeptide transmitters released by noci-
ceptive sensory neurons, the actions of substance P, a 
member of the neurokinin peptide family, have been 
studied in most detail. Substance P is released from the 
central terminals of nociceptive afferents in response to 
tissue injury or after intense stimulation of peripheral 


===== Page 9 =====
476    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–4  Signals from nociceptors in the viscera can be 
felt as “referred pain” elsewhere in the body.
A. Myocardial infarction and angina can be experienced as deep 
referred pain in the chest and left arm. The source of the pain 
cannot be readily predicted from the site of referred pain.
B. Convergence of visceral and somatic afferent fibers may 
account for referred pain. Nociceptive afferent fibers from 
the viscera and fibers from specific areas of the skin  
converge on the same projection neurons in the dorsal horn. 
The brain has no way of knowing the actual site of the  
noxious stimulus and mistakenly associates a signal from  
a visceral organ with an area of skin. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Fields 1987.)
Skin in
which pain
is perceived
B
A
Intestine:
site of injury
Anterolateral
column axon
nerves. Its interaction with neurokinin receptors on 
dorsal horn neurons elicits slow excitatory postsynap-
tic potentials that prolong the depolarization elicited 
by glutamate. Although the physiological actions of 
glutamate and neuropeptides on dorsal horn neurons 
are different, these transmitters act coordinately to reg-
ulate the firing properties of dorsal horn neurons.
Details of the interaction of neuropeptides with 
their receptors on dorsal horn neurons have suggested 
strategies for chronic pain regulation. Infusion of sub-
stance P coupled to a neurotoxin into the dorsal horn 
of experimental animals results in selective destruction 
of neurons that express neurokinin receptors. Animals 
treated in this way fail to develop the central sensitization 
that is normally associated with peripheral injury. This 
method of neuronal ablation is more selective than 
traditional surgical interventions such as partial spi-
nal cord transection (anterolateral cordotomy) and is 
being considered as a treatment for patients suffering 
from otherwise intractable chronic pain.
Hyperalgesia Has Both Peripheral and  
Central Origins
Up to this point, we have considered the conveyance of 
noxious signals in the normal physiological state. But 
the normal process of sensory signaling can be dra-
matically altered when peripheral tissue is damaged, 
resulting in an increase in pain sensitivity or hyper-
algesia. This condition can be elicited by sensitizing 
peripheral nociceptors through repetitive exposure to 
noxious stimuli (Figure 20–7).
The sensitization is triggered by a complex mix of 
chemicals released from damaged cells that accumulate 
at the site of tissue injury. This cocktail contains pep-
tides and proteins such as bradykinin, substance P, and 
nerve growth factor, as well as molecules such as ATP, 
histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, 
and acetylcholine. Many of these chemical mediators 
are released from distinct cell types, but together they 
act to decrease the threshold of nociceptor activation.


