===== Page 1 =====
716    Part V / Movement
(increasing tension as the rate of stretch increases). 
For small perturbations, these properties tend to act 
to stabilize the length of a muscle and hence stabilize 
the joint on which the muscle acts. For example, if an 
external perturbation extends a joint, the flexor mus-
cles will be stretched, increasing their tension, while 
the extensor muscles will be shortened, reducing their 
tension, and the imbalance in tension will tend to bring 
the joint back toward its original position. A particular 
advantage of such control is that, unlike higher levels 
in the motor hierarchy, such changes in force act with 
minimal delay as they are simply an effect of passive 
physical properties of the muscles.
In addition to the passive properties of muscles, 
sensory inputs can cause motor output directly with-
out the intervention of higher brain centers. Sensori-
motor responses, such as spinal reflexes, control for 
local disturbance or noxious stimuli. Reflexes are ste-
reotyped responses to specific stimuli that are gener-
ated by simple neural circuits in the spinal cord or 
brain stem. For example, a spinal flexor withdrawal 
reflex can remove your hand from a hot stove without 
any descending input from the brain. The advantage 
of such reflexes is that they are fast; the disadvantage 
is they are less flexible than voluntary control systems 
(Chapter 32). Again, there is a hierarchy of reflex cir-
cuits. The fastest is the monosynaptic stretch reflex, 
which drives contraction of a stretched muscle. In 
this reflex circuit, sensory neurons that are activated 
by stretch receptors in the muscle (the muscle spindle) 
directly synapse onto motor neurons that cause the 
same muscle to contract. The time from the stimu-
lus to the response is around 25 ms. This reflex can 
be tested clinically by striking the quadriceps muscle 
tendon just below the patella.
While this monosynaptic stretch reflex is not adapt-
able on short timescales, multisynaptic reflexes, which 
involve higher level structures such as motor cortex, 
can produce responses at around 70 ms. Unlike the 
monosynaptic reflex, multisynaptic reflexes are adapt-
able to changes in behavioral goals because the circuit 
connecting sensory and motor neurons can be modified 
by task-dependent properties. The strength of a reflex 
tends to increase with the tension in a muscle (called 
gain-scaling), and therefore, reflexes can be amplified 
by co-contracting the set of muscles around a joint so as 
to respond to perturbations with a greater force. In fact, 
we use such co-contraction when holding the hand of a 
rebellious child when crossing a road. Such a strategy 
can amplify the reflexes, thereby reducing deviations 
of the arm caused by random external forces.
Finally, voluntary movements are those that 
are under conscious control by the brain. Voluntary 
movements can be generated in the absence of a stim-
ulus or used to compensate for a perturbation. The 
time to generate a voluntary movement in response 
to a physical perturbation depends both on the 
nature of the perturbation (modality and size) as well 
as whether the response can be specified before the 
perturbation occurs. For example, a voluntary correc-
tion to a small physical perturbation can occur with a 
latency of about 110 ms.
Although we have described clear distinctions 
between the different levels of the motor hierarchy, 
from reflexes through to voluntary control, in real-
ity, such distinctions are blurred in a continuum of 
responses spanning different latencies. Increasing 
the response time permits additional neural circuitry 
to be involved in the sensorimotor loop and tends 
to increase the sophistication and adaptability of the 
response, leading to a trade-off between the speed of 
the response and the sophistication of processing as 
one ascends the motor hierarchy.
Motor Signals Are Subject to Feedforward  
and Feedback Control
In this section, we will first illustrate some principles of 
control that are important for dealing with the problem 
of sensory delays, sensory noise, and motor noise. For 
simplicity, we confine our discussion to relatively sim-
ple movements, such as moving the eyes in response 
to head movements or moving the hand from one loca-
tion to another. We consider two broad classes of con-
trol, feedforward and feedback, which differ in their 
reliance on sensory feedback during the movement.
Feedforward Control Is Required for  
Rapid Movements
Some movements are executed without monitoring the 
sensory feedback that arises from the action. In such 
feedforward control situations, the motor command is 
generated without regard to the sensory consequences. 
Such commands are therefore also termed open-loop, 
reflecting the fact that the sensorimotor loop is not 
completed by sensory feedback (Figure 30–2A).
Open-loop control requires some information 
about the body so that the appropriate command can 
be generated. For example, it should include informa-
tion about the dynamics of the motor system. Here, 
“dynamics” refers to the relation between the motor 
command (or the torques or forces) applied and the 
ensuing motion of the body, for example, joint rota-
tions. For perfect open-loop control, one needs to 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    717
Figure 30–2  Feedforward and feedback 
control.
A. A feedforward control motor command 
is based on a desired state. Any errors 
that arise during the movement are not 
monitored. Although we illustrate the ele-
ments of feedforward control for the arm, 
only the initial portion of any arm move-
ment is driven by feedforward signals and 
the movement typically involves feedback 
control.
B. With feedback control, the desired and 
sensed states are compared (at the com-
parator) to generate an error signal, which 
helps shape the motor command. There 
can be considerable delay in the feedback 
of sensory information to the comparator.
A  Feedforward control
B  Feedback control
Desired state
Feedforward
controller
Actuator
(muscle)
Sensed state
Motor 
command
Error
Comparator
Feedforward
controller
Input processing
(ﬁltering, 
ampliﬁcation)
Sensor
(muscle
spindle)
Actuator
(muscle)
+
–
Motor 
command
Desired 
state
Desired 
state
invert the dynamics so as to calculate the motor com-
mand that will generate the desired motion. The neu-
ral mechanism that performs this inversion is called an 
inverse model, a type of internal model (Box 30–1). An 
inverse model coupled to open-loop control can deter-
mine what motor commands are needed to produce 
the particular movements necessary to achieve a goal.
Although not monitoring the consequences of an 
action may seem counterproductive, there are good 
reasons for not doing so. The main reason, as discussed 
earlier, is that there are delays in both sensing and act-
ing. That is, the conversion of a stimulus into neural 
signals by sensory receptors and conveyance of these 
signals to central neurons take time. For example, 
visual inputs can take around 60 ms to be processed 
in the retina and transmitted to the visual cortex. In 
addition to delays in afferent sensory systems, there 
are also delays in central processing, in the transmis-
sion of efferent signals to motor neurons, and in the 
response of muscles. In all, the combined sensorimotor 
loop delay is appreciable, approximately 120 to 150 ms 
for a motor response to a visual stimulus. This delay 
means that movements like saccades, which redi-
rect gaze within 30 ms, cannot use sensory feedback 
to guide movement. Even for slower movements like 
reaching, which takes on the order of 500 ms, sensory 
information cannot be used to guide the initial part of a 
movement, so open-loop control must be used.
Open-loop control also has disadvantages. Any 
movement errors caused by inaccuracies in planning 
or execution will not be corrected, and therefore will 
compound themselves over time or successive move-
ments. The more complex the system under control, 
the more difficult it is to arrive at an accurate inverse 
model through learning.
An example of a purely open-loop control system 
is the control of the eye in response to head rotation. 
The vestibulo-ocular reflex (Chapter 27) uses open-
loop control to fix gaze on an object during head rota-
tion. The vestibular labyrinth senses the head rotation 
and drives appropriate movements of the eyes through 
a three-synapse circuit. The reflex does not require (or 
use) vision during the movement (the eyes maintain 
a stable gaze when the head is rotated in the dark). 
Sensory information from the vestibular system does 
drive the eye movement, but the control is feedfor-
ward (any errors that arise are not corrected during the 
movement). Such precise open-loop control is possible 
because the dynamic properties of the eye are relatively 
simple, the rotation of the head can be directly sensed 
by the vestibular labyrinth, and the eye tends not to be 
substantially perturbed by external events. In contrast, 
it is very difficult to optimize an inverse model for a 
complex musculoskeletal system such as the arm, and 
thus, the control of arm movement requires some form 
of error correction.


===== Page 3 =====
Figure 30–3  Internal sensorimotor models represent 
relationships of the body and external world. The 
inverse model determines the motor commands that will 
produce a behavioral goal, such as raising the arm while 
holding a ball. A descending motor command acts on the 
musculoskeletal system to produce the movement. A 
copy of the motor command is passed to a forward model 
that simulates the interaction of the motor system and the 
world and thus can predict behaviors. If both forward and 
inverse models are accurate, the output of the forward 
model (the predicted behavior) will be the same as the 
input to the inverse model (the desired behavior).
The utility of numerical models in the physical sci-
ences has a long history. Numerical models are abstract 
quantitative representations of complex physical sys-
tems. Some start with equations and parameters that 
represent initial conditions and run forward, either in 
time or space, to generate physical variables at some 
future state. For example, we can construct a model of 
the weather that predicts wind speed and temperature  
2 weeks from now.
Other models start with a state, a set of physical 
variables with specific values, and run in the inverse 
direction to determine what parameters in the system 
account for that state. When we fit a straight line to a 
set of data points, we are constructing an inverse model 
that estimates slope and intercept based on the equa-
tions of the system being linear. An inverse model thus 
may allow us to know how to set the parameters of the 
system to obtain desired outcomes.
Over the past 50 years, the idea that the nervous sys-
tem has similar predictive models of the physical world 
to guide behavior has become a major issue in neuro-
science. Such a model is termed “internal” because it is 
instantiated in neural circuits and is therefore inter-
nal to the central nervous system. The idea originated 
in Kenneth Craik’s notion of internal models for cogni-
tive function. In his 1943 book The Nature of Explanation, 
Craik was perhaps the first to suggest that organisms 
make use of internal representations of the external 
world:
If the organism carries a “small-scale model” of external reality 
and of its own possible actions within its head, it is able to try 
out various alternatives, conclude which is the best of them, 
react to future situations before they arise, use the knowledge 
of past events in dealing with the present and future, and in 
every way to react in a much fuller, safer, and more competent 
manner to the emergencies that face it.
In this view, an internal model allows an organism 
to contemplate the consequences of potential actions 
without actually committing itself to those actions. In 
the context of sensorimotor control, internal models can 
answer two fundamental questions. First, how can we 
generate motor commands that act on our muscles so as 
to control the behavior of our body? Second, how can we 
predict the consequences of our own motor commands?
The central nervous system must exercise both 
control and prediction to achieve skilled motor perfor-
mance. Prediction and control are two sides of the same 
coin, and the two processes map exactly onto forward 
and inverse models (Figure 30–3). Prediction turns 
motor commands into expected sensory consequences, 
whereas control turns desired sensory consequences 
into motor commands.
Box 30–1  Internal Models
Desired
behavior
Forward model
Predicted 
behavior
Actual behavior 
Efference copy
Motor 
command
Inverse model


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    719
Feedback Control Uses Sensory Signals to  
Correct Movements
To correct movement errors as they arise, movement must 
be monitored. Systems that perform error correction are 
known as feedback or closed-loop control because the 
sensorimotor loop is complete (Figure 30–2B).
The simplest form of feedback control is one in 
which the control system generates a fixed response 
when the error exceeds some threshold. Such a sys-
tem is seen in most central heating systems in which 
a thermostat is set to a desired temperature. When the 
house temperature falls below the specified level, the 
heating is turned on until the temperature reaches that 
level. Although such a system is simple and can be 
effective, it has the drawback that the amount of heat 
being put into the house does not relate to the discrep-
ancy between the actual and desired temperature (the 
error). A better system is one in which the control sig-
nal is proportional to the error.
Such proportional control of movement involves 
sensing the error between the actual and desired posi-
tion of, for example, the hand. The size of the correc-
tive motor command is in proportion to the size of the 
error and in a direction to reduce the error. The amount 
by which the corrective motor command is increased 
or decreased per unit of positional error is called the 
gain. By continuously correcting a movement, feed-
back control can be robust both to noise in the sensori-
motor system and to environmental perturbations.
While feedback control can update commands 
in response to deviations that arise during the move-
ment, it is sensitive to feedback delays. Without any 
delay, as the gain of the feedback controller increases, 
the system will track a desired position with increas-
ing fidelity (Figure 30–4). However, as feedback delay 
increases, the control system may start to oscillate and 
eventually become unstable. This is because with a 
delay the system may respond to errors that no longer 
exist and may therefore even correct in the wrong 
direction.
Smooth pursuit eye movement, used to track a 
moving object, is an example of a movement driven 
primarily by feedback. Smooth pursuit uses feedback 
to minimize the velocity error on the retina (the dif-
ference between the gaze and target velocity). We can 
compare the efficiency of feedforward and feedback 
control in minimizing error. Compare how easy it is 
to fixate on your outstretched stationary finger when 
quickly rotating your head back and forth versus try-
ing to track your finger when it is moving it rapidly 
sinusoidally left and right while your head remains 
stationary. Although the relative motion of finger to 
head is the same in both conditions, the former is pre-
cise because it uses the vestibulo-ocular reflex, whereas 
the latter uses feedback (requiring an error in velocity 
to drive the eye movement) and thus is less precise, 
particularly as the frequency of motion increases.
In most motor systems, movement control is 
achieved through a combination of feedforward and 
feedback processes. We will see later that these two 
components arise naturally in a unified model of 
movement production.
Estimation of the Body’s Current State Relies on 
Sensory and Motor Signals
Accurate control of movement requires information 
about our body’s current state, for example, the posi-
tions and velocities of the different segments of the 
body. To grasp an object, we need to know not only the 
location, shape, and surface properties of the object but 
also the current configuration of our arm and fingers 
so as to appropriately shape and position the hand.
Estimating the state of the body is not a trivial 
problem. First, as we have seen, sensory signals are 
delayed due to sensory transduction and conduction 
time. Therefore, signals from our muscles, joints, and 
vision are all out of date by the time they reach the 
central nervous system. Second, the sensory signals 
we receive are often imprecise and corrupted by neu-
ral noise. For example, if you touch the underside of a 
table with the finger of one hand and try to estimate its 
location on the top of the table with your other hand, 
you can be off by a considerable distance. Third, we often 
do not have sensors that directly communicate rele-
vant information. For example, although we have sen-
sors that report muscle length and joint angle, we have 
no sensors within the limb that directly determine the 
location of the hand in space. Therefore, sophisticated 
computation is required to estimate current body 
states as accurately as possible. Several principles have 
emerged as to how the brain estimates state.
First, state estimation relies on internal models of 
sensorimotor transformations. Given the fixed lengths 
of our limb segments, there is a mathematical relation 
between the muscle lengths or joint angles of the arm 
and the location of the hand in space. A neural rep-
resentation of this relation allows the central nervous 
system to estimate hand position if it knows the joint 
angles and segment lengths. Neural circuits that com-
pute such sensorimotor transformations are examples 
of internal models (Box 30–1).
Second, state estimation can be improved by 
combining multiple sensory modalities. For example, 
information about the state of our limbs arrives from 


===== Page 5 =====
720    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–4  The interplay of gain and delay in feedback 
control. Performance of a feedback controller trying to track a 
target moving sinusoidally in one dimension. The sensory feed-
back signal that conveys error in the position arrives after some 
period of time (the delay), and the motor system tries to correct 
for the error by increasing or decreasing the size of its com-
mand relative to the error (the gain).
   The plots show the performance in which there is either 
instantaneous feedback (no delay) of error (left column) or 
feedback with delay of 80 or 100 ms (middle and right col-
umns). When the gain is high and the delay is low, tracking is 
very good. However, when the delay increases, because the 
controller is compensating for errors that existed 80 or  
100 ms earlier, the correction may be inappropriate for the cur-
rent error. The gain can be lowered to maintain stability, but 
as the feedback controller corrects errors only slowly, tracking 
becomes inaccurate.
  At low gain (bottom row), the feedback controller corrects 
errors only slowly and tracking is inaccurate. As the gain 
increases (middle row), the feedback controller corrects 
errors more rapidly and tracking performance improves. At 
high gain (top row), the system corrects rapidly but is prone 
to overcorrect, leading to instability when the time delay in 
feedback is on the order of physiological time delays (top 
right). Because the controller is compensating for errors 
that existed 100 ms earlier, the correction may therefore be 
inappropriate for the current error. This overcorrection leads 
to oscillations and is one mechanism proposed to account 
for some forms of oscillatory tremor seen in neurological 
disease.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
–4
–2
0
2
–4
–2
0
2
–4
–2
0
2
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
High
gain
Medium
gain
Low
gain
Delay = 0 ms
Time (s)
Position
Delay = 80 ms
Increasing delay
Increasing
gain
Delay = 100 ms
Target
Hand
proprioceptive information from muscle spindles, 
the stretch of the skin, and the sight of the arm. These 
modalities have different amounts of variability (or 
noise) associated with them, and just as we average a 
set of experimental data to reduce measurement error, 
these sensory modalities can be combined to reduce 
the overall uncertainty in the state estimate.
The optimal way to combine these sources is for 
higher brain centers to take the uncertainty of each 
modality into account and rely on the more certain 
modalities. For example, the location of the hand can 
be sensed both by proprioception and vision. The sight 
of your hand in front of you tends to be more reliable 
than proprioception for estimating location along the 
azimuth (right–left) but less reliable for depth (forward–
back). Therefore, visual input should be given greater 
weight than proprioceptive input when estimating 
the azimuth location of your hand, and vice versa for 
depth. By measuring the precision of each modality 
when used alone, it is possible to predict the increased 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    721
precision when both are used at the same time. Experi-
ments have shown that this process is often close to 
optimal. Precision can also be improved by combining 
prior knowledge with sensory inputs using the math-
ematics of Bayesian inference (Box 30–2).
Third, the motor command can also provide valu-
able information. If both the current state of the body 
and the descending motor command are known, the 
next state of the body can be estimated. This estimate 
can be derived from an internal model that represents 
the causal relation between actions and their con-
sequences. This is called a forward model because it 
estimates future sensory inputs based on motor out-
puts (Box 30–1). Thus, a forward model can be used to 
anticipate how the motor system’s state will change as 
the result of a motor command. A copy of a descend-
ing motor command is passed into a forward model 
that acts as a neural simulator of the musculoskeletal 
system moving in the environment. This copy of the 
motor command is known as an efference copy (or cor-
ollary discharge). Forward and inverse models can be 
better understood if we place the two in series. If the 
structure and parameter values of each model are cor-
rect, the output of the forward model (the predicted 
behavior) will be the same as the input to the inverse 
model (the desired behavior) (Figure 30–3).
Using the motor command to estimate the state 
of the body is advantageous as, unlike sensory infor-
mation that is delayed, the motor command is avail-
able before it acts on the musculoskeletal system and 
therefore can be used to anticipate changes in the state. 
However, this estimate will tend to drift over time if 
the forward model is not perfectly accurate, and there-
fore, sensory feedback is used to correct the state esti-
mate, albeit with a delay.
It may seem surprising that the motor command is 
used in state estimation. In fact, the first demonstration 
of a forward model used a motor system that relies on 
only the motor command to estimate state, that is, the 
position of the eye within the orbit. The concept of 
motor prediction was first considered by Helmholtz 
when trying to understand how we localize visual 
objects. To calculate the location of an object relative to 
the head, the central nervous system must know both 
the retinal location of the object and the gaze direction 
of the eye. Helmholtz’s ingenious suggestion was that 
the brain, rather than sensing the gaze direction, pre-
dicted it based on a copy of the motor command to the 
eye muscles.
Helmholtz used a simple experiment on himself to 
demonstrate this. If you move your own eye without 
using the eye muscles (cover one eye and gently press 
with your finger on your open eye through the eyelid), 
the retinal locations of visual objects change. Because 
the motor command to the eye muscles is required to 
update the estimate of the eye’s state, the predicted eye 
position is not updated. However, because the retinal 
image has changed, this leads to the false percept that 
the world must have moved. A more dramatic exam-
ple is that if the eye muscles are temporarily para-
lyzed with curare, then trying to move the eyes leads 
to a percept that the world is moving. This is because 
Bayesian inference is a mathematical framework for 
making estimates about the world based on uncertain 
information. The fundamental idea is that probabilities 
(between 0 and 1) can be used to represent the degree of 
belief in different alternatives, such as the belief that the 
chance of your rolling a six with fair dice is 1 in 6.
The beauty of Bayesian inference is that by using 
the rules of probability we can specify how beliefs 
should be formed and updated based on our experience 
and new information from sensory input. For example, 
when playing tennis, we want to estimate where the ball 
will land. Because vision does not provide perfect infor-
mation about the ball’s position and velocity in flight, 
there is uncertainty as to the landing location. However, 
if we know the level of noise in our sensory system, then 
the current sensory input can be used to compute the 
likelihood (ie, probability) of the particular sensory input 
for different potential landing locations.
We can learn additional information from repeated 
experience of the game: The position where the ball 
lands is not equally probable over the court. For exam-
ple, bounce locations are likely to be concentrated near 
the boundary lines where it is most difficult to return the 
ball. This distribution is termed the prior.
The Bayes rule defines how to combine the prior 
and likelihood to make an optimal estimate of the bounce 
location. While the Bayesian approach was originally 
developed in statistics, it now provides a unifying frame-
work to understand how the brain deals with uncertainty 
in the perceptual, motor, and cognitive domains.
Box 30–2  Bayesian Inference


===== Page 7 =====
722    Part V / Movement
the command leads to a state estimate that the eye 
has moved, but with a fixed retinal input (due to the 
paralysis), the only consistent interpretation is that the 
world has moved.
Finally, the best estimate of state is achieved by 
combining sensory modalities with motor commands. 
The drawbacks of using only sensory feedback or only 
motor prediction can be ameliorated by monitoring 
both and using a forward model to estimate the current 
state. A neural apparatus that does this is known as 
an observer model. The major objectives of the observer 
model are to compensate for sensorimotor delays and 
Figure 30–5  An observer model.  The model is being used 
to estimate the finger’s location during movement of the arm. 
A previous estimate of the distribution of possible finger posi-
tions (1, blue cloud) is updated (2, yellow cloud) using an 
efference copy of the motor command and a forward model 
of the dynamics. The updated distribution of finger positions 
is larger than that of the previous estimate. The model then 
uses a forward sensory model to predict the sensory feedback 
that would occur for these new finger positions, and the error 
between the predicted and actual sensory feedback is used to 
correct the estimate of current finger position. This correction 
changes the sensory error into state errors and also deter-
mines the relative reliance on the efference copy and sensory 
feedback.
   The final estimate of current finger position (3, purple 
cloud) has less uncertainty. This estimate will become the 
new previous estimate for subsequent movement as this 
sequence is repeated many times. Delays in sensory feed-
back that must be compensated have been omitted from the 
diagram for clarity.
Forward
dynamic
model
Forward
sensory
model
Gain
Predicted
sensory
feedback
Sensory-based
correction
Motor command
efference copy
Cloud of
uncertainty
Sensory
feedback
2  Predicted current state
3  Final state estimate
1  Previous state estimate
+
+
+
–
to reduce uncertainty in the estimate of current state 
arising from noise in both the sensory and motor sig-
nals (Figure 30–5). Such a model has been supported by 
empirical studies of how the nervous system estimates 
hand position, posture, and head orientation. We will 
see how such models are used to decode neural signals 
in brain–machine interfaces (Chapter 39).
State estimation is not a passive process. Skilled 
performance requires the effective and efficient gather-
ing and processing of sensory information relevant to 
an action. The quality of sensory information depends 
on our actions because what we see, hear, and touch is 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    723
influenced by our movements. For example, the ocular 
motor system controls the eyes’ sensory input by ori-
enting the fovea to points of interest within the visual 
scene. Thus, movement can be used to efficiently gather 
information, a process termed active sensing. Active 
sensing involves two main processes: perception, by 
which we process sensory information and make infer-
ences about the world, and action, by which we choose 
how to sample the world to obtain useful sensory 
information. Eye movements can betray the difference 
between skilled and amateur performers. For example, 
a batsman in the game of cricket will make a predictive 
saccade to the place where he expects a bowled ball to 
hit the ground, wait for it to bounce, and use a pursuit 
eye movement to follow the ball’s trajectory after the 
bounce. A shorter latency for this first saccade distin-
guishes expert from amateur batsmen. Therefore, the 
motor system can also be used to improve our sensing 
of the world so as to gather information that, in turn, 
helps us achieve our motor goals.
Prediction Can Compensate for  
Sensorimotor Delays
As we have seen, delays in feedback can lead to prob-
lems during a movement, as the delayed informa-
tion does not reflect the present state of the body and 
world. Two strategies, intermittency and prediction, 
can compensate for such delays and thus increase 
accuracy of information during movement. With inter-
mittency, movement is momentarily interrupted by 
rest, as in eye saccades and manual tracking. Provided 
the interval of rest is greater than the time delay of the 
sensorimotor loop, intermittency fosters more accurate 
sensory feedback. Prediction is a better strategy and, as 
we have seen, can form a major component of a state 
estimator.
The nervous system uses different modes of con-
trol that depend on prediction and sensory feedback 
to different extents. These modes are nicely illustrated 
by differences in object manipulation under different 
conditions. When an object’s behavior is unpredictable, 
sensory feedback provides the most useful signal for 
estimating load. For example, when flying a kite, we 
need to adjust our grip almost continuously in response 
to unpredictable wind currents. When dealing with 
such unpredictability, grip force needs to be high to pre-
vent slippage because adjustments to grip tend to lag 
behind changes in load force (Figure 30–6A).
However, when handling objects with stable proper-
ties, predictive control mechanisms can be effective. For 
example, when the load is increased by a self-generated 
action, such as moving the arm, the grip force increases 
instantaneously with load force (Figure 30–6B). Sensory 
detection of the load would be too slow to account for 
this rapid increase in grip force.
Such predictive control is essential for the rapid 
movements commonly observed in dexterous behav-
ior. Indeed, this predictive ability can be demonstrated 
easily with the “waiter task.” Hold a weighty book on 
the palm of your hand with an outstretched arm. If 
you then use your other hand to remove the book (like 
a waiter removing objects from a tray), the support-
ing hand remains stationary. This shows our ability to 
anticipate a change in load caused by our own action 
and thus generate an appropriate and exquisitely timed 
change in muscle activity. In contrast, if someone else 
removes the book from your hand, even though you 
are watching the removal, it is close to impossible to 
maintain the hand stationary. We will see how cerebel-
lar lesions affect this ability to predict, leading to a lack 
of such a coordinated response (Chapter 37).
Detecting any discrepancies between predicted 
and actual sensory feedback is also essential in motor 
control. This discrepancy, termed sensory prediction 
error, can drive learning of internal models and also 
be used for control. For example, when we pick up 
an object, we anticipate when the object will lift off 
the surface. The brain is particularly sensitive to the 
occurrence of unexpected events or the nonoccurrence 
of expected events (ie, to sensory prediction errors). 
Thus, if an object is lighter or heavier than expected 
and therefore lifts off too early or cannot be lifted, reac-
tive responses are initiated.
In addition to its use in compensating for delays, 
prediction is a key element in sensory processing. 
Sensory feedback can arise as a consequence of both 
external events and our own movements. In the 
sensory receptors, these two sources are not distin-
guishable, as sensory signals do not carry a label of 
“external stimulus” or “internal stimulus.” Sensitiv-
ity to external events can be amplified by reducing 
the feedback from our own movement. Thus, sub-
tracting predictions of sensory signals that arise from 
our own movements from the total sensory feedback 
enhances the signals that carry information about 
external events. Such a mechanism is responsible 
for the fact that self-tickling is a less intense experi-
ence than tickling by another. When subjects were asked 
to tickle themselves using a robotic interface, but a 
time delay was introduced between the motor com-
mand and the resulting tactile input, the ticklishness 
increased. With such delayed tactile input, the predic-
tions become inaccurate and thus fails to cancel the 
sensory feedback, resulting in the increased tickle 
sensation. Such predictive modulation of sensory 


===== Page 9 =====
724    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–6  Anticipatory control of self-generated 
actions.  (Adapted, with permission, from Blakemore,  
Goodbody, and Wolpert 1998. Copyright © 1998 Society for 
Neuroscience.
A. When a subject is instructed to hold an object to which a 
sinusoidal load force is mechanically applied, the grip force 
of the fingers is high to prevent slippage, and the grip force 
modulation lags behind the changes in load force. This is high-
lighted for a portion of the load force modulation (dark red 
solid line) that  leads to a corresponding grip force (dark red 
dashed line), which is delayed. (Trial duration 4 s).
B. When a subject generates a similar load profile by pulling down 
on the fixed object, the load force can be anticipated, and thus, 
the grip force is lower and also tracks the load force without delay.
Force (N)
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Force (N)
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Grip
force 
Load
force 
Hand
moves
A  Robot controls movement
B  Hand controls movement
Load 
force
Grip force
lags
Grip and load
forces aligned
Grip force
Load 
force
Robot
arm moves
Grip force
signals by motor actions is a fundamental property of 
many sensory systems.
Sensory Processing Can Differ for Action  
and Perception
A growing body of research supports the idea that the 
sensory information used to control actions is pro-
cessed in neural pathways that are distinct from the 
afferent pathways that contribute to perception. It has 
been proposed that visual information flows in two 
streams in the brain (Chapter 25). A dorsal stream that 
projects to the posterior parietal cortex is particularly 
involved in the use of vision for action (Chapter 34), 
while a ventral stream that projects to the inferotem-
poral cortex is involved in conscious visual perception.
This distinction between the uses of vision for action 
and perception is based on a double dissociation seen in 
patient studies. For example, the patient D.F. developed 
visual agnosia after damage to her ventral stream. She 
is unable, for example, to indicate the orientation of a 
slot either verbally or with her hand. However, when 
asked to perform a simple action, such as putting a card 
through the slot, she has no difficulty orienting her 
hand appropriately to put the card through the slot 
(Chapter 59). Conversely, patients with damage to the 
dorsal stream can develop optic ataxia in which percep-
tion is intact but control is affected.
Although the distinction between perception and 
action arose from clinical observations, it can also be 
seen in normal people, as in the size–weight illusion. 
When lifting two objects of different size but equal 
weight, people report that the smaller object feels 
heavier. This illusion, first documented more than  
100 years ago, is both powerful and robust. It does not 
lessen when a person is informed that the objects are of 
equal weight and does not weaken with repeated lifting.
When subjects begin to lift large and small objects 
that weigh the same, they generate larger grip and load 
forces for the larger object because they assume that 
larger objects are heavier. After alternating between 
the two objects, they rapidly learn to scale their finger-
tip forces precisely for the true object weight (Figure 
30–7). This shows that the sensorimotor system recog-
nizes that the two weights are equal. Nevertheless, the 
size–weight illusion persists, suggesting not only that 


