===== Page 1 =====
1444    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–14  The myotonias and periodic paralyses are 
caused by mutations in genes that code for diverse voltage-
gated ion channels in the skeletal muscle membrane. Some 
of these channel disorders are characterized only by myotonia, 
some by periodic paralysis without myotonia, and some by both 
myotonia and paralysis. Some clinical disorders (eg, hypoka-
lemic periodic paralysis) can arise from defects in different 
channels in different individuals.
expressed in skeletal muscle. The resulting mutant Na+ 
channels have inactivation defects. Subtle inactivation 
defects produce myotonia, whereas more pronounced 
defects result in chronic depolarization and loss of 
excitability with paralysis (Figure 57–12A–C). Hypoka-
lemic paralysis is caused by missense mutations in the 
voltage-sensor domains of either Ca2+ channels or Na+ 
channels in skeletal muscle. Disruption of the voltage-
sensor domain allows an influx of ion current through 
an anomalous pathway, separate from the channel pore 
(Figure 57–13). This current “leak” in resting fibers 
produces a susceptibility to depolarization and loss of 
A
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
–110
–100
–90
–80
–70
–60
Vr  (mV)
Extracellular [K+] (mM)
HypoPP
Normal
a b
EK
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
– – –
+ + +
Cation
leak 
Voltage
sensor
+
+++
+
Myotonia
Myotonia
congenita
Cl– channel
CLCN1
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
K+ channel
Kir2.1
Ca2+ channel
CACNL1S
Periodic paralysis
Potassium-
aggravated
myotonia
Paramyotonia
congenita
Hyperkalemic
periodic
paralysis
Hypokalemic
periodic paralysis
Andersen
syndrome
excitability in low extracellular K+. A rare form of peri-
odic paralysis that is characterized by weakness, devel-
opmental defects, and cardiac irritability is caused by 
primary mutations in an inwardly rectifying K+ channel 
important for the resting potential (Figure 57–13).
In myotonia congenita, muscle stiffness is present 
from birth and is nonprogressive. Unlike myotonic 
dystrophy, there is no muscle wasting, permanent 
muscle weakness, or other organ involvement. Con-
genital myotonia is a consequence of mutations in the 
gene coding for the ClC-1 Cl– channel in skeletal mus-
cle membrane (Figure 57–14). The resultant decrease 
Figure 57–13  Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is 
caused by leaky ion channels. 
A. In HypoPP, missense mutations in the voltage-sensor domains 
create leaky Ca2+ or Na+ channels that allow cation influx via an 
anomalous pathway separate from the channel pore.
B. Although this leak is small (~0.5% of the total resting 
membrane conductance), model simulations show that it 
causes an increased susceptibility to depolarization of resting 
potential (Vr), resulting in inexcitability and weakness as the 
external [K+] is lowered. This paradoxical depolarization of Vr 
diverges from the Nernst potential for K+ (EK) because of loss 
of the contribution from the inward rectifier K+ channel in low 
[K+]. Normally, this depolarization occurs only at extremely 
low [K+] (<2 mM) and is not seen in healthy people, but for 
patients with HypoPP, the cation leak shifts the depolarization 
point into the physiological range of [K+]. For this simulation,  
in 3.3 mM [K+] (line b), excitability is preserved for normals 
(Vr = –95.6 mV), whereas HypoPP fibers may be excitable 
(Vr = –89 mV) or refractory and inexcitable (Vr = –67.7 mV). 
Reduction of [K+] to 3.0 mM (line a) results in complete loss 
of excitability for all HypoPP fibers (–66.3 mV) and retained 
excitability for normal fibers (Vr = –97.8 mV). (Adapted, with 
permission, from Cannon 2017.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1445
in Cl– influx leads to membrane depolarization and 
repetitive firing. The disease is inherited as a domi-
nant, semi-dominant, or recessive trait.
Highlights
1.	 Distinct disorders arise from pathology in differ-
ent components of the motor unit. Pure motor 
diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or 
spinal muscular atrophy are caused by loss of 
motor neurons, whereas combined motor and 
sensory features are present in most peripheral 
nerve disorders. These disorders usually spare eye 
movements and the eyelids.
2.	 Pure motor weakness, sometimes highly variable 
in severity over time, is also caused by disorders 
of the neuromuscular junction, which may begin 
early in life (congenital or neonatal myasthenia) 
or in childhood or adulthood (commonly autoim-
mune myasthenia gravis). The latter often involves 
eyelids and facial muscles.
3.	 Many forms of weakness are caused by muta-
tions in genes that are important in skeletal mus-
cle. These disorders usually become evident in 
infancy or childhood, involve the proximal more 
than the distal muscles, and progress relentlessly. 
Some (eg, Duchenne muscular dystrophy) also 
entail degeneration of cardiac muscle.
4.	 Inherited diseases of skeletal muscle with tran-
sient episodes of weakness (periodic paralysis) 
or involuntary after-contractions lasting seconds 
(myotonia) are caused by missense mutations in 
voltage-gated ion channels. During an episode 
of weakness, muscle fibers are depolarized and 
refractory from conducting action potentials. This 
intermittent failure to maintain the resting potential 
may arise from gain-of-function mutations in Na+ 
channels, loss-of-function mutations in K+ chan-
nels, or anomalous leakage currents in Na+ or Ca2+ 
channels. Myotonia is a hyperexcitable state of skel-
etal muscle caused by Cl– channel loss-of-function 
or Na+ channel gain-of-function mutations.
5.	 Studies of the diseases of the peripheral nerv-
ous system show the powerful synergy between 
clinical and basic neuroscience. For most of the 
disorders inherited as Mendelian traits, molecu-
lar genetic analyses have led to the description of 
causative defects in muscle and nerve proteins, 
beginning only with the clinical data in affected 
families and DNA from family members.
6.	 Small animal models of many of these disorders, 
with precisely defined genetic defects, are proving 
invaluable for the analysis of mechanisms of dis-
ease pathogenesis and studies of new treatments. 
Combined with innovation in new biological ther-
apies (gene therapy, gene silencing), these models 
have led to transformative successes in human tri-
als (eg, spinal muscular atrophy).
7.	 In several of these disorders, a new generation of 
molecular therapies (eg, antisense oligonucleo-
tides or viral-mediated gene delivery) that aug-
ment function of the mutant genes is substantially 
improving clinical outcomes.
 Robert H. Brown  
 Stephen C. Cannon  
 Lewis P. Rowland 
Selected Reading
Brown RH, Al-Chalabi A. 2017. Amyotrophic lateral sclero-
sis. N Engl J Med 377:162–172.
Cannon SC. 2015. Channelopathies of skeletal muscle excit-
ability. Compr Physiol 5:761–790.
Engel AG, Shen X-M, Selcen D, et al. 2015. Congenital myas-
thenic syndromes: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treat-
ment. Lancet Neurol 14:420–434.
Fridman V, Reilly MM. 2015. Inherited neuropathies. Semin 
Neurol 35:407–423.
Gilhus NE, Verschuuren JJ. 2015 Myasthenia gravis: sub-
group classification and therapeutic strategies. Lancet 
Neurol 14:1023–1036.
Ranum LP, Day JW. 2004. Pathogenic RNA repeats: an expand-
ing role in genetic disease. Trends Genet 20:506–512.
References
Bromberg MB. 2002. Acute and chronic dysimmune poly-
neuropathies. In: WF Brown, CF Bolton, MJ Aminoff 
(eds). Neuromuscular Function and Disease, p. 1048, Fig. 58–2.  
New York: Elsevier Science.
Bromberg MB, Smith A, Gordon MD. 2002. Toward an effi-
cient method to evaluate peripheral neuropathies. J Clin 
Neuromuscular Dis 3:172–182.
Brown RH Jr, Amato AA. 2002. Inherited peripheral neu-
ropathies: classification, clinical features and review of 
molecular pathophysiology. In: WF Brown, CF Bolton, MJ 
Aminoff (eds). Neuromuscular Function and Disease, p. 624, 
Fig. 35–2. New York: Elsevier Science.
Brown RH, Mendell J. 2005. Muscular dystrophy. In: Harrison’s 
Principles of Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill.


===== Page 3 =====
1446    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Cannon SC. 2010. Voltage-sensor mutations in channelopa-
thies of skeletal muscle. J Physiol (Lond) 588:1887–1895.
Cannon SC. 1996. Ion channel defects and aberrant excitabil-
ity in myotonia and periodic paralysis. Trends Neurosci 
19:3–10.
Cannon SC. 2017. Sodium channelopathies of skeletal mus-
cle.  Handb Exp Pharm 246:309–330.
Cannon SC, Brown RH Jr, Corey DP. 1991. A sodium chan-
nel defect in hyperkalemic periodic paralysis: potassium-
induced failure of inactivation. Neuron 64:619–626.
Cannon SC, Brown RH Jr, Corey DP. 1993. Theoretical recon-
struction of myotonia and paralysis caused by incomplete 
inactivation of sodium channels. Biophys J 66:270–288.
Chamberlain JR, Chamberlain JS. 2017. Progress toward 
molecular therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
Mol Ther 25:1125–1131.
Cull-Candy SG, Miledi R, Trautmann A. 1979. End-plate cur-
rents and acetylcholine noise at normal and myasthenic 
human endplates. J Physiol (Lond) 86:353–380.
Drachman DB. 1983. Myasthenia gravis: immunology of a 
receptor disorder. Trends Neurosci 6:446–451.
Finkel RS, Mercuri E, Darras BT, et al. 2017. Nusinersen ver-
sus sham control in infantile-onset spinal muscular atro-
phy. N Engl J Med 377:1723–1732.
Gilhus NE, Verschuuren JJ. 2015. Myasthenia gravis: sub-
group classification and therapeutic strategies. Lancet 
Neurol 14:1023–1036.
Hoffman EP, Brown RH, Kunkel LM. 1987. Dystrophin: the 
protein product of the Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
locus. Cell 51:919–928.
Hoffman EP, Kunkel LM. 1989. Dystrophin in Duchenne/
Becker muscular dystrophy. Neuron 2:1019–1029.
Lisak RP, Barchi RL. 1982. Myasthenia Gravis. Philadelphia: 
Saunders.
Lupski JR. 1998. Molecular genetics of peripheral neuropa-
thies. In: JB Martin (ed). Molecular Neurology, pp. 239–256. 
New York: Scientific American.
Mendell JR, Al-Zaidy S, Shell R, et al. 2017. Single-dose gene-
replacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy. N Engl 
J Med 377:1713–1722.
Mendell JR, Goemans N, Lowes LP, et al. 2016. Longitudinal 
effect of etiplersen versus historical control on ambulation 
in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Ann Neurol 79:257–271.
Milone M. 2017. Diagnosis and management of immune-
mediated myopathies. Mayo Clin Proc 92:826–837.
Newsom-Davis J, Buckley C, Clover L, et al. 2003. Autoim-
mune disorders of neuronal potassium channels. Ann NY 
Acad Sci 998:202–210.
Patrick J, Lindstrom J. 1973. Autoimmune response to acetyl-
choline receptor. Science 180:871–872.
Rahimov F, Kunkel LM. 2013. Cellular and molecular 
mechanisms underlying muscular dystrophy. J Cell Biol 
201:499–510.
Rosen DR, Siddique T, Patterson D, et al. 1993. Mutations in 
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with 
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362:59–62.
Rowland LP, Hoefer PFA, Aranow H Jr. 1960. Myasthenic syn-
dromes. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 38:548–600.
Taylor JP, Brown RH, Cleveland DW. 2016. Decoding ALS: 
from genes to mechanisms. Nature 539:197–206.


===== Page 4 =====
58
Seizures and Epilepsy
U
ntil quite recently, the function  and 
organization of the human cerebral cortex—
the region of the brain concerned with percep-
tual, motor, and cognitive functions—has eluded both 
clinicians and neuroscientists. In the past, the analy-
sis of brain function relied largely on observations of 
loss of brain functions resulting from brain damage 
and cell loss caused by strokes or trauma. These natu-
ral experiments provided much of the early evidence 
that distinct brain regions serve specific functions, or 
as the famous American neurologist C. Miller Fisher 
said, “We learn about the brain ‘stroke by stroke.’” 
Observation of patients with seizures and epilepsy has 
been equally important in the study of brain function 
because the behavioral consequences of these disorders 
of neural hyperactivity inform clinicians how activation 
affects the brain regions from which they originate.
Temporary disruptions of brain function resulting 
from abnormal, excessive neuronal activity are called 
seizures, whereas the chronic condition of repeated sei-
zures is called epilepsy. For centuries, understanding 
the neurological origins of seizures was confounded by 
the dramatic, and sometimes bizarre, behaviors associ-
ated with seizures. The chronic condition of epilepsy 
was widely associated with possession by evil spirits, 
yet seizures also were thought to be a sign of oracular, 
prescient, or special creative powers.
The Greeks in the time of Hippocrates (circa 400 BC) 
were aware that head injuries to one side of the brain 
could cause seizure activity on the opposite side of the 
body. In those earlier times, the diagnosis of epilepsy 
was probably much broader than the contemporary 
definition. Other causes of episodic unconscious-
ness, such as syncope as well as mass hysteria and 
Classification of Seizures and the Epilepsies Is Important for 
Pathogenesis and Treatment
Seizures Are Temporary Disruptions of Brain Function
Epilepsy Is a Chronic Condition of Recurrent Seizures
The Electroencephalogram Represents the Collective Activity 
of Cortical Neurons
Focal Onset Seizures Originate Within a Small  
Group of Neurons
Neurons in a Seizure Focus Have Abnormal  
Bursting Activity
The Breakdown of Surround Inhibition Leads  
to Synchronization
The Spread of Seizure Activity Involves Normal  
Cortical Circuitry
Generalized Onset Seizures Are Driven by  
Thalamocortical Circuits
Locating the Seizure Focus Is Critical to the Surgical 
Treatment of Epilepsy
Prolonged Seizures Can Cause Brain Damage
Repeated Convulsive Seizures Are a Medical Emergency
Excitotoxicity Underlies Seizure-Related Brain Damage
The Factors Leading to Development of Epilepsy  
Are Poorly Understood
Mutations in Ion Channels Are Among the Genetic 
Causes of Epilepsy
The Genesis of Acquired Epilepsies Is a Maladaptive 
Response to Injury
Highlights


===== Page 5 =====
1448    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
psychogenic seizures, were almost certainly attributed 
to epilepsy. Moreover, historical writings typically 
describe generalized convulsive seizures involving 
both cerebral hemispheres; thus, it is likely that sei-
zures involving a very limited area of the brain were 
misdiagnosed or never diagnosed at all. Even today, it 
can be difficult for physicians to distinguish between 
episodic loss of consciousness and the various types of 
seizures. Nevertheless, as our ability to treat and even 
cure epilepsy continues to improve, these diagnostic 
distinctions take on increasing significance.
The early neurobiological analysis of epilepsy 
began with John Hughlings Jackson’s work in London 
in the 1860s. Jackson realized that seizures need not 
involve loss of consciousness but could be associated 
with localized symptoms such as the jerking of an arm. 
His observation was the first formal recognition of 
what we now call partial (or focal) seizures. Jackson also 
observed patients whose seizures began with focal 
neurological symptoms, then progressed to convul-
sions with loss of consciousness by steadily involving 
adjacent regions in an orderly fashion (the so-called 
Jacksonian march). His observations gave rise to the 
concept of the motor homunculus (the anatomical map 
representing the body organization or “wiring diagram” 
over the cortical surface) long before functional organ-
ization was established using electrophysiological 
techniques (Chapter 4).
Another pioneering development that presaged 
modern therapy was the first surgical treatment for 
epilepsy in 1886 by the British neurosurgeon Victor 
Horsley. Horsley resected cerebral cortex adjacent to a 
depressed skull fracture and cured a patient with focal 
motor seizures. Related medical innovations include 
the first use of phenobarbital as an anticonvulsant in 
1912 by Alfred Hauptmann, the development of elec-
troencephalography by Hans Berger in 1929, and the 
discovery of the anticonvulsant properties of pheny-
toin (Dilantin) by Houston Merritt and Tracey Putnam 
in 1937. The birth of routine surgical treatment for epi-
lepsy dates to the early 1950s, when Wilder Penfield and 
Herbert Jasper in Montreal stimulated the cortex and 
pinpointed the motor and sensory maps before remov-
ing the epileptic focus. As in any chronic disease, the 
physiological features of seizures are not the only 
consideration in the care and management of patients 
with epilepsy. Psychosocial factors are also extremely 
important. The diagnosis of epilepsy has consequences 
that can affect all aspects of everyday life, including 
educational opportunities, driving, and employ-
ment. Although many societal limitations imposed 
on epileptics are appropriate—most would agree 
that patients with epilepsy should not be commercial 
pilots—a diagnosis of epilepsy can result in inappro-
priately negative effects on educational opportunities 
and employment. To improve this situation, phy-
sicians have a duty to educate themselves and the 
public on the underlying science of epilepsy and its  
major comorbidities, including cognitive problems and 
depression.
Classification of Seizures and the Epilepsies Is 
Important for Pathogenesis and Treatment
Not all seizures are the same. Thus, the pathogenesis 
and classification of seizures must take into account 
their clinical characteristics as well as acquired and 
genetic factors in each patient. Seizures and the chronic 
condition of repetitive seizures (epilepsy) are common. 
Based on epidemiological studies in the United States, 
1% to 3% of all individuals living to the age of 80 will 
be diagnosed with epilepsy. The highest incidence 
occurs in young children and the elderly.
In many respects, seizures represent a prototypic 
neurological disease in that the symptoms include both 
“positive” and “negative” sensory or motor manifesta-
tions. Examples of positive signs that can occur during 
a seizure include the perception of flashing lights or the 
jerking of an arm. Negative signs reflect impairments 
of normal brain function such as an impairment of con-
sciousness and cognitive awareness or even transient 
blindness, speech arrest, or paralysis. These examples 
underscore a general feature of seizures: The signs and 
symptoms depend on the location and extent of brain 
regions that are affected. Finally, the manifestations of 
seizures result in part from synchronous activity trig-
gered in surrounding tissue with normal cellular and 
network properties. The latter activity is particularly 
important in the spread of a seizure beyond its original 
boundaries—seizures quite literally hijack the normal 
functions of the brain.
Seizures Are Temporary Disruptions of  
Brain Function
Seizures have been classified clinically into two cat-
egories, focal or generalized, based on their onset 
(Table 58–1). This classification is conceptually sim-
ple, but because several terms have been used over 
the years to refer to the same condition, the binary 
nature may have been obscured. Nonetheless, this 
classification of seizures has proven extremely useful 
to clinicians, and anticonvulsant medications are tar-
geted to one or the other type.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1449
Table 58–1  International Classification of Seizures
Seizures
Focal onset
  Aware versus impaired awareness
  Motor versus nonmotor onset
  Focal to bilateral tonic-clonic
Generalized onset
  Motor
    Tonic-clonic (formerly grand mal)
    Other motor
  Nonmotor (absence)
Unknown onset
  Motor
    Tonic-clonic
    Other motor
  Nonmotor
Unclassified
Source: Commission on Classification and Terminology of the 
International League Against Epilepsy, 2017.
Focal onset (also called partial) seizures originate 
in a small group of neurons (the seizure focus), and 
thus the symptoms depend on the location of the focus 
within the brain. Focal onset seizures can occur either 
without alteration of consciousness (often called sim-
ple partial) or with alteration of consciousness (often 
called complex partial). A typical focal onset seizure 
might begin with jerking in the right hand and pro-
gress to clonic movements (ie, jerks) of the entire right 
arm. If a focal onset seizure progresses further, the 
patient may lose consciousness, fall to the ground, rig-
idly extend all extremities (tonic phase), then have con-
vulsive jerking in all extremities (clonic phase).
A focal onset seizure can be preceded by telltale 
symptoms called auras. Common auras include unpro-
voked and often vivid sensations such as a sense of 
fear, a rising feeling in the abdomen, or even a specific 
odor. The novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky described his 
auras as a “feeling … so strong and sweet that for a few 
seconds of such bliss I would give ten or more years 
of my life, even my whole life perhaps.” The aura is a 
product of electrical activity in the seizure focus and 
thus represents the earliest seizure manifestation. The 
time after a seizure but before the patient returns to his 
or her normal level of neurological function is called 
the post-ictal period.
Generalized onset seizures constitute the second 
main category. They begin without an aura or focal 
onset and involve both hemispheres from the onset. 
Thus, they are sometimes called primary general-
ized seizures to avoid confusion with seizures that 
secondarily generalize following a focal onset. Gener-
alized onset seizures can be further divided into motor 
(convulsive) or nonmotor types depending on whether 
the seizure is associated with tonic-clonic movements.
The prototypic nonmotor generalized onset seizure 
is the typical absence seizure in children (formerly called 
petit mal). These seizures begin abruptly, usually last 
less than 10 seconds, are associated with staring and 
sudden cessation of all motor activity, and result in loss 
of awareness but not loss of posture. Patients appear 
as if in a trance, but the episodes are so brief that their 
occurrence can be missed by a casual observer. Unlike 
a focal onset seizure, there is no aura before the seizure 
or confusion after the seizure (the post-ictal period). 
Patients may exhibit mild motor manifestations such as 
eye blinking, but do not fall or have tonic-clonic move-
ments. Typical absence seizures have very distinctive 
electrical characteristics on the electroencephalogram 
(EEG) known as a spike-and-wave pattern.
Some generalized onset seizures involve only 
abnormal (myoclonic, clonic, or tonic) movements or 
a sudden loss of motor tone (atonia). The most com-
mon motor type of generalized onset seizure is the 
tonic-clonic (formerly called grand mal) seizure. Such 
seizures begin abruptly, often with a grunt or cry, as 
tonic contraction of the diaphragm and thorax forces 
expiration. During the tonic phase, the patient may fall 
to the ground in a rigid posture with clenched jaw, lose 
bladder or bowel control, and become blue (cyanotic). 
The tonic phase typically lasts 30 seconds before evolv-
ing into clonic jerking of the extremities lasting 1 to  
2 minutes. This active phase is followed by a post-ictal 
phase during which the patient is sleepy, disoriented, 
and may complain of headache and muscle soreness.
A generalized onset tonic-clonic seizure can be dif-
ficult to distinguish on purely clinical grounds from 
a focal seizure with a brief aura, which then rapidly 
progresses to a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. This 
distinction is not academic, as it can be vital to pin-
pointing the underlying cause and choosing the proper 
treatment. However, some seizures are simply difficult 
to classify because of undetermined onset.
Epilepsy Is a Chronic Condition of  
Recurrent Seizures
Recurrent seizures constitute the minimal criterion 
for the diagnosis of epilepsy. The oft-quoted clini-
cal rule, “A single seizure does not epilepsy make,” 
emphasizes this point, and even repeated seizures in 
response to a provocation such as alcohol withdrawal 
are not considered epilepsy. Various factors that con-
tribute to a clinical pattern of recurrent seizures—the 


===== Page 7 =====
1450    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
underlying etiology of the seizures, the age of onset, 
or family history—are ignored in the classification scheme 
for seizures in Table 58–1. The classification of the epi-
lepsies evolved primarily based on clinical observa-
tion rather than a precise cellular, molecular, or genetic 
understanding of the disorder. The factors influencing 
seizure type and severity can often be recognized as 
patterns of signs and symptoms, referred to as epilepsy 
syndromes. Such factors include the age of seizure onset, 
whether the seizures are inherited, and certain pat-
terns on the EEG. The recognition of these syndromes 
has played a role in the recent discovery of single gene 
mutations as a cause of seizure disorders.
The primary variables in the classification of the 
epilepsies are whether or not a focal brain abnormality 
can be identified (localization-related versus general-
ized epilepsies) and whether there is an identifiable 
cause (symptomatic) or not (unknown, often called idi-
opathic). The great majority of adult-onset epilepsies 
are classified as symptomatic localization-related epi-
lepsies. This category includes such causes as trauma, 
stroke, tumors, and infections. A large number of indi-
viduals have adult-onset epilepsies without a clearly 
defined cause.
Unfortunately, despite the usefulness of this clas-
sification scheme, many epilepsy syndromes do not fit 
neatly. One expects (and hopes) that this classification 
will be greatly refined as criteria include the underly-
ing etiologies rather than just clinical phenotype.
The Electroencephalogram Represents the 
Collective Activity of Cortical Neurons
Because neurons are excitable cells, it should not be 
surprising that seizures result directly or indirectly 
from a change in the excitability of single neurons or 
groups of neurons. This view dominated early experi-
mental studies of seizures. To study such effects, elec-
trical recordings of brain activity can be made with 
intracellular or extracellular electrodes. Extracellular 
electrodes sense action potentials in nearby neurons 
and can detect the synchronized activity of ensembles 
of cells called field potentials.
At the slow time resolution of extracellular record-
ing (hundreds of milliseconds to seconds), field poten-
tials can appear as single transient changes called 
spikes. These spikes reflect action potentials in many 
neurons and should not be confused with spikes in 
recordings of single neurons, which are individual 
action potentials that last only 1 or 2 ms. The EEG thus 
represents a set of field potentials as recorded by multi-
ple electrodes on the surface of the scalp (Figure 58–1).
Because the electrical activity originates in neurons 
in the underlying brain tissue, the waveform recorded 
by the surface electrode depends on the orientation 
and distance of the electrical source with respect to 
the electrode. The EEG signal is inevitably distorted 
by the filtering and attenuation caused by intervening 
layers of tissue and bone that act in the same way as 
resistors and capacitors in an electric circuit. Thus, the 
amplitude of EEG signals (measured in microvolts) is 
much smaller than the voltage changes in a single neu-
ron (millivolts). High-frequency activity in single cells, 
such as action potentials, is filtered out by the EEG sig-
nal, which primarily reflects slower voltage changes 
across the cell membrane, such as synaptic potentials.
Although the EEG signal is a measure of the 
extracellular current caused by the summated electri-
cal activity of many neurons, not all cells contribute 
equally to the EEG. The surface EEG reflects predomi-
nately the activity of cortical neurons in close proxim-
ity to each of the set of EEG electrodes on the scalp. 
Thus, deep structures such as the base of a cortical 
gyrus, mesial walls of the major lobes, hippocampus, 
thalamus, or brain stem do not contribute directly to 
the surface EEG. The contributions of individual nerve 
cells to the EEG are discussed in Box 58–1.
The surface EEG shows patterns of activity—
characterized by the frequency and amplitude of the 
electrical activity—that correlate with various stages 
of sleep and wakefulness (Chapter 44) and with some 
pathophysiological processes such as seizures. The 
normal human EEG shows activity over the range of  
1 to 30 Hz with amplitudes in the range of 20 to 100 μV. 
The observed frequencies have been divided into sev-
eral groups: alpha (8–13 Hz), beta (13–30 Hz), delta 
(0.5–4 Hz), and theta (4–7 Hz).
Alpha waves of moderate amplitude are typical of 
relaxed wakefulness and are most prominent over pari-
etal and occipital sites. During intense mental activity, 
beta waves of lower amplitude are more prominent in 
frontal areas and over other regions. Alerting relaxed 
subjects by asking them to open their eyes results in so-
called desynchronization of the EEG with a reduction 
in alpha activity and an increase in beta activity (Figure 
58–1B). Theta and delta waves are normal during drows-
iness and early slow-wave sleep; if they are present dur-
ing wakefulness, it is a sign of brain dysfunction.
As neuronal ensembles become synchronized, as 
when a subject relaxes or becomes drowsy, the sum-
mated currents become larger and can be seen as 
abrupt changes from the baseline activity. Such “par-
oxysmal” activity can be normal, eg, the episodes of 
high-amplitude activity (1–2 seconds, 7–15 Hz) that 
occur during sleep (sleep spindles). However, a sharp 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1451
Figure 58–1  The normal electroencephalogram (EEG) in an 
awake human subject.
A. A standard set of placements (or montage) of electrodes on 
the surface of the scalp. The electrical response at each site 
reflects the activity between two of the electrodes.
B. At the beginning of the recording, the EEG shows low-voltage 
activity (~20 μV) over the surface of the scalp. The vertical lines 
are placed at 1-second intervals. During the first 8 seconds,  
the subject was resting quietly with eyes open, and then the 
subject was asked to close his eyes. With the eyes closed, 
larger-amplitude activity (8–10 Hz) develops over the occipital 
region (sites 3, 4, 8, 12, 15, and 16). This is the normal alpha 
rhythm characteristic of the relaxed, wakeful state. Slow large-
amplitude artifacts occur at 3.5 seconds when the eyes blink 
and at 9 seconds when the eyes close.
1
2
10
11
12
L
R
16
15
14
3
4
6
7
8
5
13
9
A  Standard electrode placement
Eyes open
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
5
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
13
1
2
3
4
1
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
9
14
15
16
100 µV
1 s
Eyes closed
B  EEG of awake human


===== Page 9 =====
1452    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–2  The pattern of electrical cur-
rent flow for an excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP) initiated at the apical 
dendrite of a pyramidal neuron in the 
cerebral cortex. Activity is detected by 
three electrodes: an intracellular electrode 
inserted in the apical dendrite (1), an extra-
cellular electrode positioned near the site of 
the EPSP in layer II of the cortex (2), and an 
extracellular electrode near the cell body in 
layer V (3). At the site of the EPSP (current 
sink), positive charge flows across the cell 
membrane (IEPSP) into the cytoplasm, down 
the dendritic cytoplasm, and then completes 
the loop by exiting through the membrane 
near the cell body (current source). The 
potentials recorded by the extracellular elec-
trodes at the sink and at the source have 
opposite polarity; the potentials recorded 
by the intracellular electrode have the same 
polarity regardless of the site. Rm, Ra, and Re 
are the resistances of the membrane, cyto-
plasm, and extracellular space, respectively.
The contribution of the activity of single neurons to 
the electroencephalogram (EEG) can be understood by 
examining a simplified cortical circuit and some basic 
electrical principles. Pyramidal neurons are the major 
projection neurons in the cortex. The apical dendrites 
of these cells, which are oriented perpendicular to the 
cell surface, receive a variety of synaptic inputs. Thus, 
synaptic activity in the pyramidal cells is the principal 
source of EEG activity.
To understand the contribution of a single neuron 
to the EEG, consider the flow of charge produced by an 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) on the apical 
dendrite of a cortical pyramidal neuron (Figure 58–2). 
Ionic current enters the dendrite at the site of generation 
of the EPSP, creating what is commonly called a current 
sink. It then must complete a loop by flowing down the 
dendrite and back out across the membrane at other 
sites, creating a current source.
The voltage signal created by a synaptic current is 
approximately predicted by Ohm’s law (V = IR, where V 
is voltage, I is current, and R is resistance). Because the 
membrane resistance (Rm) is much larger than that of the 
salt solution that constitutes the extracellular medium 
(Re), the voltage recorded across the membrane with an 
Box 58–1  The Contribution of Individual Neurons to the Electroencephalogram
I
Cortical surface
Current
sink
Contralateral
cortical afferent
Thalamocortical
afferent
Current
source
II,III
IV
V
VI
Ra
Re
Rm
IEPSP
+
–
+
–
+
–
1
2
3
+
–
Cortical 
layer


