===== Page 1 =====
1364    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A  Head direction cell
B  Border cells
C  Speed cells
Maximum ﬁring rate [Hz]: 
Maximum speed [cm/s]:
0
5
90
52
0
2
65
30
0
5
11
54
90°
0°
Normalized ﬁring rate
and speed
Moderate
ﬁring 
Powerful
ﬁring 
Rate (Hz) 
180°
Head 
direction
(degrees) 
Figure 54–14  The medial entorhinal cortex contains several 
functional cell types tuned to distinct representations of an 
animal’s navigation.
A. On the left is the trajectory of a rat exploring a 100-cm-wide 
square enclosure (red dots indicate firing locations). A color-
coded firing rate map is also shown (color scale as in previous 
figures). Note that the cell’s firing is scattered across the enclo-
sure. The plot on the right shows the same cell’s firing rate as 
a function of head direction, in polar coordinates. The cell fires 
selectively when the rat faces south, anywhere in the box. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Sargolini et al. 2006.)
B. Firing rate maps for a representative border cell in enclosures 
with different geometric shapes (red = high rate; blue = low rate).  
Top row: The firing field map follows the walls when the enclo-
sure is stretched from a square (left and middle maps) to a 
rectangle (right map). Bottom row: The firing field of the same 
border cell in another environment. Introduction of a discrete 
wall (white pixels, right map) inside the square enclosure 
causes a new border field to appear to the right of the wall. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Solstad et al. 2008.)
C. Speed cells. Traces show normalized firing rate (colored traces) 
and speed (gray) for seven representative entorhinal speed cells 
during 2 minutes of free foraging. Maximum values of firing rate 
and speed are indicated (left and right, respectively). Note high 
correspondence between speed and firing rate in these cells. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Kropff et al. 2015.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1365
Figure 54–15  Place cells form independent maps for differ-
ent environments. Rate maps showing firing patterns of a sin-
gle hippocampal place cell in different square enclosures, each 
located in a different room. The rat was tested in one familiar (F) 
and 11 novel (N) rooms (recordings only shown for four of the 
novel rooms). The top row shows firing rate maps, whereas the 
bottom row shows trajectories of the animal’s movement with 
firing locations in red. The cell was active only in some of the 
rooms (F, N1, N2, N3), where the firing locations were different. 
When the rat was returned to the familiar room at the end of 
the experiment, the cell’s firing field had a similar location to 
the initial recording in the familiar room, indicating that a given 
cell’s spatial firing pattern in the same environment is stable. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Alme et al. 2014.)
Taken together, these discoveries point to a net-
work of functionally dedicated cells in the medial 
entorhinal cortex reminiscent of the feature detectors 
of the sensory cortices. The functional specificity of 
each cell type stems from the cell’s representation of a 
specific feature of behavior. In this sense, the entorhi-
nal cell types differ from cells in most other associa-
tion cortices, which integrate information from many 
sources in ways that are not straightforward to decode.
What are the key differences between space-coding 
cells in the hippocampus and the medial entorhinal 
cortex? A striking property of all entorhinal cell types 
is the rigidity of their firing patterns. Ensembles of co-
localized grid cells maintain the same intrinsic firing 
pattern regardless of context or environment. When a 
pair of grid cells has overlapping grid fields in one envi-
ronment, their grid fields overlap also in other environ-
ments. If their grid fields are opposite, or “out of phase,” 
they will be opposite in other environments as well. A 
similar rigidity is seen in head direction cells and bor-
der cells: Cells with similar orientation in one environ-
ment have similar orientations in other environments. 
Speed cells also maintain their unique tuning to running 
speed across environments. These findings suggest that 
the medial entorhinal cortex, or modules of this cortical 
circuit, may operate like a universal map of space that 
disregards the details of the environment. By doing so, 
the entorhinal map differs strongly from the place-cell 
map of the hippocampus.
F
N1
N2
N5
N3
F
The firing pattern of a hippocampal place cell is very 
sensitive to changes in the environment. The place fields 
of a given place cell in the hippocampus often switch 
to encode a completely different spatial locale when 
an animal’s environment undergoes a major change, a 
process referred to as “remapping.” Sometimes even 
minor changes in sensory or motivational inputs are 
sufficient to elicit remapping. The lack of correlation 
of hippocampal place maps for different environments 
(Figure 54–15) is thought to facilitate storage of discrete 
memories and minimize the risk that one memory will 
be confused with another, a process termed interfer-
ence. For an explicit memory system like the hippocam-
pus, with millions of events to be stored, this may be a 
huge advantage. For accurate and fast representation of 
an animal’s position in space, as occurs in the medial 
entorhinal cortex, it may instead be beneficial to use a 
more stereotyped code that is less sensitive to environ-
mental context or nonspatial sensory stimuli.
Place Cells Are Part of the Substrate for  
Spatial Memory
In addition to representing the animal’s current loca-
tion, place cells are thought to also store the memory 
of a location in position-related firing patterns that 
are evoked in the absence of the sensory inputs that 
originally elicited the firing. For example, as an animal 
sleeps after running repeated laps along a linear maze, 


===== Page 3 =====
1366    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
place cells spontaneously fire in the same order that 
they did in the maze, a phenomenon called “replay.” 
Similarly, past trajectories and experiences may influ-
ence firing rates at particular locations in the environ-
ment. The ability of place cells to represent events and 
locations experienced in the past likely underlies the 
ability of the hippocampus to encode complex memo-
ries of events.
Once the firing pattern of a population of hip-
pocampal neurons is formed for a given environment, 
how is it maintained? Because the place cells are the 
same hippocampal pyramidal neurons that undergo 
experimental LTP, a natural question is whether LTP 
is important. This question was addressed in experi-
ments in mice in which LTP was disrupted.
In mice lacking the NR1 subunit of the NMDA 
receptor, hippocampal pyramidal neurons still fire in 
place fields despite the fact that LTP is blocked. Thus, 
this form of LTP is not required for the transforma-
tion of spatial sensory information into place fields. 
Wild type mouse
Mutant mouse (LTP inhibited)
Session 1
Session 2
Session 3
Session 4
Figure 54–16  Disruption of long-term potentiation (LTP) 
degrades the stability of place field formation in the hip-
pocampus.  Color-coded firing rate maps (see Figure 54–12) 
show place fields recorded in four successive sessions from 
a single hippocampal pyramidal neuron in a wild type mouse 
and from a neuron in a mutant mouse that expresses the per-
sistently active CaMKII (which inhibits the induction of LTP). 
Before each recording session, the animal is taken out of the 
enclosure and sometime later reintroduced into it. In each of the 
four sessions, the place field for the cell in the wild type animal 
is stable; the cell fires whenever the animal is in the upper right 
region of the enclosure. By contrast, the place field for the cell in 
the mutant mouse is unstable across the four sessions. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Rotenberg et al. 1996.)
However, the place fields of the mutant mice are larger 
and fuzzier in outline than those in normal animals. In 
a second experiment with mutant mice, late LTP and 
long-term spatial memory were selectively disrupted 
by expression of a transgene that encodes a protein 
inhibitor of PKA. In these mice, place fields also form, 
but the firing patterns of individual cells are stable 
only for an hour or so (Figure 54–16). Thus, late LTP is 
required for long-term stabilization of place fields but 
not their formation.
To what degree do these maps of an animal’s 
surroundings mediate explicit memory? In humans, 
explicit memory is defined as the conscious recall of 
facts about people, places, and objects. Although con-
sciousness cannot be studied empirically in the mouse, 
selective attention, which is required for conscious 
recall, can be examined.
When mice are presented with different behavio-
ral tasks, the long-term stability of place fields corre-
lates strongly with the degree of attention required to 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1367
perform the task. When a mouse does not attend to the 
space it walks through, place fields form but are unsta-
ble after 3 to 6 hours. Animals with unstable place 
fields are unable to learn a spatial task. However, when 
a mouse is forced to attend to the space, for example, 
when trained to run to a specific location, the place 
fields are stable for days.
How does this attentional mechanism work? 
Studies in primates have shown the importance of 
the prefrontal cortex and the modulatory dopamin-
ergic system during attention. Indeed, the formation 
of stable place fields in mice requires the activation of 
the dopamine D1/D5 type of receptor, which has been 
shown to enhance the formation of late LTP through 
production of cAMP and activation of PKA. These 
results suggest that long-term memory of a place field, 
rather than being a form of implicit memory that is 
stored and recalled without conscious effort, requires 
the animal to attend to its environment, as is the case 
for explicit memory in humans.
Disorders of Autobiographical Memory  
Result From Functional Perturbations  
in the Hippocampus
Our sense of identity is greatly dependent on our store 
of explicit autobiographical memories and our abil-
ity to recognize and navigate through familiar spatial 
environments. Neurological and psychiatric disorders 
that disrupt these abilities often occur as a result of 
changes in neural circuitry and plasticity mechanisms 
within the hippocampus and related regions in the 
temporal lobe.
There is now substantial evidence that the dev-
astating memory loss associated with Alzheimer 
disease is associated with an accumulation of extra-
cellular plaques of the protein fragment β-amyloid 
(Aβ) and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of tau, 
a microtubule associated protein (Chapter 64). How-
ever, even before plaques and tangles are apparent, 
elevated levels of soluble Aβ and tau are thought to 
disrupt a number of cellular processes, particularly 
by reducing the magnitude of both early and late LTP 
at certain synapses. Mouse models of Alzheimer dis-
ease also show alterations in hippocampal place cell 
stability and population-level synchrony, which may 
contribute to memory loss and spatial disorientation. 
Changes in grid-cell function have also been observed 
in electrophysiological recordings in mouse disease 
models and in humans through functional magnetic 
resonance imaging studies. Although a number of pre-
clinical studies have shown that agents that decrease 
levels of Aβ can rescue synaptic function and memory 
in rodents, so far these treatments have been less suc-
cessful in treating patients with Alzheimer disease, 
perhaps because treatment must be initiated at early 
stages prior to irreversible synaptic changes.
Altered hippocampal function may also contrib-
ute to cognitive problems experienced by individuals 
with schizophrenia, including disturbances in working 
memory (Chapter 60). Recent studies using a genetic 
mouse model of schizophrenia report reduced syn-
chrony between the hippocampus and prefrontal cor-
tex associated with working memory. Furthermore, 
the place fields of place cells in the hippocampus CA1 
region may be overly rigid in this mouse, suggest-
ing that the ability of the hippocampus to distinguish 
different contexts may be impaired. Finally, a deficit 
in social memory in these mice has been linked to a 
reduction of parvalbumin-positive inhibitory neurons 
in the CA2 region; a similar loss of inhibitory neurons 
has been observed in postmortem brain tissue from 
individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Thus, studies of the hippocampus and related tem-
poral lobe structures offer the great promise of provid-
ing fundamental insight into how explicit memories 
are stored and recalled and how functional alterations 
in these structures may contribute to neuropsychiatric 
disease. In turn, such insight may aid in the discovery 
of new treatments for these devastating disorders.
Highlights
  1.  Explicit memory has both a short-term compo-
nent, termed working memory, and a long-term 
component. Both forms depend on the prefrontal 
cortex and hippocampus.
  2.  Long-term memory is thought to depend on 
activity-dependent long-term synaptic plasticity 
at synapses within the cortico-hippocampal cir-
cuit. A brief high-frequency train of tetanic stim-
ulation leads to long-term potentiation (LTP) of 
excitatory synaptic transmission at each stage of 
the cortico-hippocampal circuit.
  3.  LTP at many synapses depends on calcium 
influx into the postsynaptic cell mediated by the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) type of gluta-
mate receptor. This receptor acts as a coincidence 
detector: It requires both glutamate release and 
strong postsynaptic depolarization to conduct 
calcium.
  4.  The expression of LTP depends on either the 
insertion of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) type of 


===== Page 5 =====
1368    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
glutamate receptors in the postsynaptic mem-
brane or an increase in presynaptic glutamate 
release, depending on the type of synapse and 
intensity of tetanic stimulation.
  5.  LTP has both early and late phases. Early LTP 
depends on covalent modifications, whereas late 
LTP depends on new protein synthesis, gene tran-
scription, and growth of new synaptic connections.
  6.  Pharmacological and genetic manipulations that 
disrupt LTP often lead to an impairment of long-
term memory, indicating that LTP may provide 
an important cellular mechanism for memory 
storage.
  7.  Memories are stored by cell assemblies. LTP may 
be required for forming event-specific assem-
blies. Recall of memory may reflect reactivation 
of the same assemblies that were active during 
the original event.
  8.  The hippocampus encodes both spatial and 
nonspatial signals. Many hippocampal neu-
rons act as place cells, firing action potentials 
when an animal visits a particular location in 
its environment.
  9.  The entorhinal cortex, the area of the cortex that 
provides most of the input to hippocampus, also 
encodes both nonspatial and spatial information. 
The medial portion of entorhinal cortex contains 
neurons, called grid cells, that fire when an animal 
crosses the vertices of a hexagonal grid-like lat-
tice of spatial locales. Grid cells are organized into 
semi-independent semi-topographically organ-
ized modules with distinct grid frequencies. The 
entorhinal map also contains border cells, object-
vector cells, head direction cells, and speed cells.
10.  Within a grid-cell module, pairs of grid cells 
maintain firing relationships rigidly across envi-
ronments and experiences, suggesting that grid 
cells form a universal map that is expressed simi-
larly in all environments. In contrast, place cells 
in the hippocampus form maps that are plastic 
as they are completely uncorrelated between 
environments.
11.  Neuropsychiatric disorders such as Alzheimer 
disease and schizophrenia have been associated 
with deficits in hippocampal and entorhinal syn-
aptic function, place-cell properties, and learning 
and memory. Treatments aimed at restoring such 
function may yield new therapeutic approaches 
to disease.
12.  Despite 
their 
clear 
differences, 
implicit  
(Chapter 53) and explicit memory storage rely 
on a common logic. Both activity-dependent 
presynaptic facilitation for storing implicit 
memory and associative long-term potentiation 
for storing explicit memory rely on the asso-
ciative properties of specific proteins: Adenylyl 
cyclase activation in implicit memory requires 
neurotransmitter plus intracellular Ca2+, whereas 
NMDA receptor activation in explicit memory 
requires glutamate plus postsynaptic depolari-
zation. Such similarities indicate the fundamen-
tal importance of associative learning rules for 
memory storage.
 Edvard I. Moser 
  May-Britt Moser  
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 
Selected Reading
Basu J, Siegelbaum SA. 2015. The corticohippocampal circuit, 
synaptic plasticity, and memory. Cold Spring Harb Per-
spect Biol 7:a021733.
Bliss TV, Collingridge GL. 2013. Expression of NMDA recep-
tor-dependent LTP in the hippocampus: bridging the 
divide. Mol Brain 6:5.
Frey U, Morris RG. 1991. Synaptic tagging and long-term 
potentiation. Nature 385:533–536.
Hafting T, Fyhn M, Molden S, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2005. 
Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal cortex. 
Nature 436:801–806.
Kessels HW, Malinow R. 2009. Synaptic AMPA receptor plas-
ticity and behavior. Neuron 61:340–350.
Martin SJ, Grimwood PD, Morris RG. 2000. Synaptic plastic-
ity and memory: an evaluation of the hypothesis. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 23:649–711.
Nicoll RA. 2017. A brief history of long-term potentiation. 
Neuron 93:281–290.
Rowland DC, Roudi Y, Moser MB, Moser EI. 2016. Ten years 
of grid cells. Annu Rev Neurosci 39:19–40.
Taube JS. 2007. The head direction signal: origins, and sensory-
motor integration. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:181–207.
Tonegawa S, Pignatelli M, Roy DS, Ryan TJ. 2015. Memory 
engram storage and retrieval. Curr Opin Neurobiol 35: 
101–109.
References
Abel T, Nguyen PV, Barad M, Deuel TAS, Kandel ER, Bourtch-
ouladze R. 1997. Genetic demonstration of a role for PKA 
in the late phase of LTP and in hippocampal based long-
term memory. Cell 88:615–626.
Alme CB, Miao C, Jezek K, Treves A, Moser EI, Moser M-B. 
2014. Place cells in the hippocampus: eleven maps for 
eleven rooms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:18428–18435.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1369
Bliss TVP, Lømo T. 1973. Long-lasting potentiation of synap-
tic transmission in the dentate gyrus of the anesthetized 
rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol 
(Lond) 232:331–356.
Dudek SM, Bear MF. 1992. Homosynaptic long-term depres-
sion in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects of N-methyl-
d-aspartate receptor blockade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
89:4363–4367.
Fyhn M, Hafting T, Treves A, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2007. Hip-
pocampal remapping and grid realignment in entorhinal 
cortex. Nature 446:190–194.
Hebb DO. 1949. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsycho-
logical Theory. New York: Wiley.
Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA. 2014. The hippocampal CA2 region 
is essential for social memory. Nature 508:88–92.
Høydal ØA, Skytøen ER, Andersson SO, Moser MB, Moser 
EI. 2019. Object-vector coding in the medial entorhinal 
cortex. Nature 568:400–404.
Huang Y-Y, Kandel ER. 1994. Recruitment of long-lasting and 
protein kinase A-dependent long-term potentiation in the 
CA1 region of hippocampus requires repeated tetaniza-
tion. Learn Mem 1:74–82.
Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular biology of memory storage: 
a dialog between genes and synapses (Nobel Lecture). 
Biosci Rep 21:565–611.
Kjelstrup KB, Solstad T, Brun VH, et al. 2008. Finite scale 
of spatial representation in the hippocampus. Science 
321:140–143.
Kropff E, Carmichael JE, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2015. Speed 
cells in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature 523:419–424.
Lisman J, Yasuda R, Raghavachari S. 2012. Mechanisms of 
CaMKII action in long-term potentiation. Nat Rev Neurosci 
13:169–182.
Liu X, Ramirez S, Pang PT, et al. 2012. Optogenetic stimu-
lation of a hippocampal engram activates fear memory 
recall. Nature 484:381–385.
Mayford M, Bach ME, Huang Y-Y, Wang L, Hawkins RD, Kandel 
ER. 1996. Control of memory formation through regulated 
expression of a CaMKII transgene. Science 274:1678–1683.
McHugh TJ, Blum KI, Tsien JZ, Tonegawa S, Wilson MA. 
1996. Impaired hippocampal representation of space in 
CA1-specific NMDAR1 knockout mice. Cell 87:1339–1349.
McHugh TJ, Jones MW, Quinn JJ, et al. 2007. Dentate gyrus 
NMDA receptors mediate rapid pattern separation in the 
hippocampal network. Science 317:94–99.
Montgomery JM, Pavlidis P, Madison DV. 2001. Pair recordings 
reveal all-silent synaptic connections and the postsynaptic 
expression of long-term potentiation. Neuron 29:691–701.
Morgan SL, Teyler TJ. 2001. Electrical stimuli patterned after 
the theta-rhythm induce multiple forms of LTP. J Neuro-
physiol 86:1289–1296.
Muller RU, Kubie JL, Ranck JB Jr. 1987. Spatial firing patterns 
of hippocampal complex-spike cells in a fixed environ-
ment. J Neurosci 7:1935–1950.
Nakashiba T, Young JZ, McHugh TJ, Buhl DL, Tonegawa 
S. 2008. Transgenic inhibition of synaptic transmission 
reveals role of CA3 output in hippocampal learning. 
Science 319:1260–1264.
Nakazawa K, Quirk MC, Chitwood RA, et al. 2002. Require-
ment for hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors in associa-
tive memory recall. Science 297:211–218.
Nicholls RE, Alarcon JM, Malleret G, et al. 2008. Transgenic 
mice lacking NMDAR-dependent LTD exhibit deficits in 
behavioral flexibility. Neuron 58:104–117.
O’Keefe J, Dostrovsky J. 1971. The hippocampus as a spa-
tial map: preliminary evidence from unit activity in the 
freely-moving rat. Brain Res 34:171–175.
O’Keefe J, Nadel L. 1978. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ramirez S, Liu X, Lin PA, et al. 2013. Creating a false memory 
in the hippocampus. Science 341:387–391.
Rotenberg A, Mayford M, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER, Muller 
RU. 1996. Mice expressing activated CaMKII lack low fre-
quency LTP and do not form stable place cells in the CA1 
region of the hippocampus. Cell 87:1351–1361.
Rumpel S, LeDoux J, Zador A, Malinow R. 2005. Postsynap-
tic receptor trafficking underlying a form of associative 
learning. Science 308:83–88.
Sacktor TC. 2011. How does PKMζ maintain long-term mem-
ory? Nat Rev Neurosci 12:9–15.
Sargolini F, Fyhn M, Hafting T, et al. 2006. Conjunctive repre-
sentation of position, direction, and velocity in entorhinal 
cortex. Science 312:758–762.
Silva AJ, Stevens CF, Tonegawa S, Wang Y. 1992. Deficient 
hippocampal long-term potentiation in α-calcium-
calmodulin kinase II mutant mice. Science 257:201–206.
Solstad T, Boccara CN, Kropff E, Moser M-B, Moser EI. 2008. 
Representation of geometric borders in the entorhinal cor-
tex. Science 322:1865–1868.
Stensola H, Stensola T, Solstad T, Frøland K, Moser M-B, 
Moser EI. 2012. The entorhinal grid map is discretized. 
Nature 492:72–78.
Tang YP, Shimizu E, Dube GR, et al. 1999. Genetic enhance-
ment of learning and memory in mice. Nature 401:63–69.
Taube JS, Muller RU, Ranck JB Jr. 1990. Head-direction 
cells recorded from the postsubiculum in freely moving 
rats. I. Description and quantitative analysis. J Neurosci 
10:420–435.
Tsien JZ, Huerta PT, Tonegawa S. 1996. The essential role of 
hippocampal CA1 NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic 
plasticity in spatial memory. Cell 87:1327–1338.
Whitlock JR, Heynen AJ, Shuler MG, Bear MF. 2006. Learning 
induces long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. 
Science 313:1093–1097.
Zalutsky RA, Nicoll RA. 1990. Comparison of two forms of 
long-term potentiation in single hippocampal neurons. 
Science 248:1619–1624.


===== Page 7 =====
55
Language
Transcortical Aphasias Result From Damage to Areas 
Near Broca’s and Wernicke’s Areas
Less Common Aphasias Implicate Additional Brain 
Areas Important for Language
Highlights
L
anguage is uniquely human  and arguably 
our greatest skill and our highest achievement. 
Despite its complexity, all typically developing 
children master it by the age of 3. What causes this uni-
versal developmental phenomenon, and why are chil-
dren so much better at acquiring a new language than 
adults? What brain systems are involved in mature 
language processing, and are these systems present at 
birth? How does brain damage produce the various 
disorders of language known as the aphasias?
For centuries, these questions about language and 
the brain have prompted vigorous debate among theo-
rists. In the last decade, however, an explosion of infor-
mation regarding language has taken us beyond the 
nature–nurture debates and beyond the standard view 
that a few specialized brain areas are responsible for 
language. Two factors have brought about this change.
First, functional brain imaging techniques such as 
positron emission tomography (PET), functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalogra-
phy (EEG), and magnetoencephalography (MEG) have 
allowed us to examine activation patterns in the brain 
while a person carries out language tasks—naming objects 
or actions, listening to sounds or words, and detect-
ing grammatical anomalies. The results of these stud-
ies reveal a far more complex picture than the one first 
proposed by Carl Wernicke in 1874. Moreover, structural 
Language Has Many Structural Levels: Phonemes, 
Morphemes, Words, and Sentences
Language Acquisition in Children Follows a Universal Pattern
The “Universalist” Infant Becomes Linguistically 
Specialized by Age 1
The Visual System Is Engaged in Language Production 
and Perception
Prosodic Cues Are Learned as Early as In Utero
Transitional Probabilities Help Distinguish Words in 
Continuous Speech
There Is a Critical Period for Language Learning
The “Parentese” Speaking Style Enhances  
Language Learning
Successful Bilingual Learning Depends on the Age at 
Which the Second Language Is Learned
A New Model for the Neural Basis of Language Has Emerged
Numerous Specialized Cortical Regions Contribute to 
Language Processing
The Neural Architecture for Language Develops Rapidly 
During Infancy
The Left Hemisphere Is Dominant for Language
Prosody Engages Both Right and Left Hemispheres 
Depending on the Information Conveyed
Studies of the Aphasias Have Provided Insights into 
Language Processing
Broca’s Aphasia Results From a Large Lesion in  
the Left Frontal Lobe
Wernicke’s Aphasia Results From Damage to Left 
Posterior Temporal Lobe Structures
Conduction Aphasia Results From Damage to  
a Sector of Posterior Language Areas
Global Aphasia Results From Widespread Damage to 
Several Language Centers


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 55 / Language    1371
brain imaging techniques, such as diffusion tensor 
imaging (DTI), tractography, and quantitative magnetic 
resonance imaging (qMRI), have revealed a network of 
connections that link specialized language areas in the 
brain. These discoveries are taking us beyond previous, 
simpler views of the neural underpinnings of language 
processing and production that assumed involvement of 
only a few specific brain areas and connections.
Second, behavioral and brain studies of language 
acquisition show that infants begin to learn language 
earlier than previously thought, and in ways that had 
not been previously envisioned. Well before children 
produce their first words, they learn the sound pat-
terns underlying the phonetic units, words, and phrase 
structure of the language they hear. Listening to lan-
guage alters the infant brain early in development, and 
early language learning affects the brain for life.
Taken together, these advances are shaping a new 
view of the functional anatomy of language in the brain 
as a complex and dynamic network in the adult brain, 
one in which multiple, spatially distributed brain sys-
tems cooperate functionally via long-distance neural 
fascicles (axon fiber bundles). This mature network 
arises from the considerable brain structure and func-
tion in place at birth and develops in conjunction with 
powerful innate learning mechanisms responsive to lin-
guistic experience. This new view of language encom-
passes not only its development and mature state, but 
also its dissolution when brain damage leads to aphasia.
Humans are not the only species to communicate. 
Passerine birds attract mates with songs, bees code 
the distance and direction to nectar by dancing, and 
monkeys signal a desire for sexual contact or fear at the 
approach of an enemy with coos and grunts. With lan-
guage, we accomplish all of the above and more. We 
use language to provide information and express our 
emotions, to comment on the past and future, and to 
create fiction and poetry. Using sounds that have only 
an arbitrary association with the meanings they con-
vey, we talk about anything and everything. No ani-
mal has a communication system that parallels human 
language either in form or in function. Language is the 
defining characteristic of humans, and living without it 
creates a totally different world, as patients with apha-
sia following a stroke experience so heartbreakingly.
Language Has Many Structural Levels: 
Phonemes, Morphemes, Words, and Sentences
What distinguishes language from other forms of com-
munication? The key feature is a finite set of distinctive 
speech sounds or phonemes that can be combined with 
infinite possibilities. Phonemes are the building blocks 
of units of significance called morphemes. Each lan-
guage has a distinctive set of phonemes and rules for 
combining them into morphemes and words. Words 
can be combined according to the rules of syntax into 
an infinite number of sentences.
Understanding language presents an interesting 
set of puzzles, ones that challenge supercomputers. 
The advent of virtual personal assistants such as Siri 
and Alexa, based on machine-learning algorithms, has 
allowed electronic devices to respond to select kinds of 
human utterances. However, we are still not convers-
ing with computers. Fundamental advances will need 
to be made before humans can expect to have a conver-
sation with a machine that resembles a conversation 
you can have with any 3-year-old. Machine-learning 
solutions do not accomplish their limited responses by 
mimicking human brain systems used for language, 
nor do they learn in the ways that human infants learn. 
Comparing machine-learning approaches (artificial 
intelligence) and human approaches is of theoretical 
and practical interest (Chapter 39) and is a hot topic for 
future research.
Language presents such a complex puzzle because 
it involves many functionally interconnected levels, 
starting at the most basic level with the sounds that 
distinguish words. For example, in English, the sounds 
/r/ and /1/ differentiate the words rock and lock. In 
Japanese, however, this sound change does not dis-
tinguish words because the /r/ and /l/ sounds are 
used interchangeably. Similarly, Spanish speakers dis-
tinguish between the words pano and bano, whereas 
English speakers treat the /p/ and /b/ sounds at the 
beginning of these words as the same sounds. Given 
that many languages use identical sounds but group 
them differently, children must discover how sounds 
are grouped to make meaningful distinctions in their 
language.
Phonetic units are subphonemic. As we have illus-
trated above with /r/ and /l/, these two sounds are 
both phonetic units, but their phonemic status differs 
in English and Japanese. In English, the two are phone-
mically distinct, meaning that they change the mean-
ing of a word. In Japanese, /r/ and /l/ belong to the 
same phonemic category and are not distinct. Phonetic 
units are distinguished by subtle acoustic variations 
caused by the shape of the vocal tract called formant 
frequencies (Figure 55–1). The patterns and timing of 
formant frequencies distinguish words that differ in 
only one phonetic unit, such as the words pat and bat. 
In normal speech, formant changes occur very rapidly, 
on the order of milliseconds. The auditory system has 
to track these rapid changes in order for an individual 


===== Page 9 =====
1372    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Figure 55–1  Formant frequencies. For-
mants are systematic variations in the 
concentration of energy at various sound 
frequencies and represent resonances of 
the vocal tract. They are shown here as a 
function of time in a spectrographic analy-
sis of speech. The formant patterns for 
two simple vowels (/a/ and /ae/) spoken 
in isolation are distinguished by differ-
ences in formant 2 (F2). Formant patterns 
for the sentence “Did you hit it to Tom?” 
spoken slowly and clearly illustrate 
the rapid changes that underlie normal 
speech. (Data from Patricia Kuhl.)
to distinguish semantically different sounds and thus 
understand speech. Whereas in written language, 
spaces are customarily inserted between words, in 
speech, there are no acoustic breaks between words. 
Thus, speech requires a process that can detect words 
on the basis of something other than sounds bracketed 
by silence. Computers have a great deal of trouble rec-
ognizing words in the normal flow of speech.
Phonotactic rules specify how phonemes can be 
combined to form words. Both English and Polish use 
the phonemes /z/ and /b/, for example, but the com-
bination /zb/ is not allowed in English, whereas in 
Polish, it is common (as in the name Zbigniew).
Morphemes are the smallest structural units of a 
language, best illustrated by prefixes and suffixes. In 
English, for example, the prefix un (meaning not) can 
be added to many adjectives to convey the opposite 
meaning (eg, unimportant). Suffixes often signal the 
tense or number of a word. For example, in English, we 
add s or es to indicate more than one of something (pot 
becomes pots, bug becomes bugs, or box becomes boxes). 
To indicate the tense of a regular verb, we add an end-
ing to the word (eg, play can become plays, playing, and 
played). Irregular verbs do not follow the rule (eg, go 
becomes went rather than goed and break becomes broke 
rather than breaked). Every language has a different set 
of rules for altering the tense and number of a word.
Finally, to create language, words have to be 
strung together. Syntax specifies word and phrase 
order for a given language. In English, for example, 
sentences typically conform to a subject-verb-object 
order (eg, He eats cake), whereas in Japanese, it is typi-
cally subject-object-verb (eg, Karewa keeki o tabenzasu, 
literally He cake eats). Languages have systematic dif-
ferences in the order of larger elements (noun phrases 
and verb phrases) of a sentence, and in the order of 
words within phrases, as illustrated by the difference 
between English and French noun phrases. In English, 
adjectives precede the noun (eg, a very intelligent man), 
whereas in French, most follow the noun (eg, un homme 
tres intelligent).
Language Acquisition in Children  
Follows a Universal Pattern
Regardless of culture, all children initially exhibit uni-
versal patterns of speech perception and production 
that do not depend on the specific language children 
hear (Figure 55–2). By the end of the first year, infants 
have learned through exposure to a specific language 
which phonetic units convey meaning in that language 
and to recognize likely words, even though they do 
not yet understand those words. By 12 months of age, 
 Frequency (kHz)
 Frequency (kHz)
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
/a/ in “hot”
/ae/ in “hat”
d i
d
y
ou
h
i t
i
t
t
o
t
o
m
 Time (s)
0
1
2
 Time (s)
 Time (s)
0
0.2
0.4
0
0.2
0.4
F3
F3
F2
F1
F2
F1


