===== Page 1 =====
1500    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
pairs discordant for schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
65:1259–1268.
Cannon TD, Thompson PM, van Erp TG, Toga AW. 2002. 
Cortex mapping reveals regionally specific patterns of 
genetic and disease-specific gray-matter deficits in twins 
discordant for schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
99:3228–3233.
Feinberg I. 1983. Schizophrenia: caused by a fault in pro-
grammed synaptic elimination during adolescence?  
J Psychiatr Res 17:319–324.
Fisher M, Loewy R, Hardy K, Schlosser D, Vinogradov S. 
2013. Cognitive interventions targeting brain plasticity in 
the prodromal and early phases of schizophrenia. Annu 
Rev Clin Psychol 9:435–463.
Fusar-Poli P, Borgwardt S, Bechdolf A, et al. 2013 The psy-
chosis high-risk state: a comprehensive state-of-the-art 
review. JAMA Psychiatry 70:107–120.
Garey LJ, Ong WY, Patel TS, et al. 1998. Reduced dendritic 
spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons 
in schizophrenia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65: 
446–453.
Glantz LA, Lewis DA. 2000. Decreased dendritic spine density 
on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:65–73.
Gottesman II. 1991. Schizophrenia Genesis: The Origins of 
Madness. New York: Freeman.
Gur RE, Cowell PE, Latshaw A, et al. 2000. Reduced dorsal 
and orbital prefrontal gray matter volumes in schizophre-
nia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:761–768.
Kambeitz J, Abi-Dargham A, Kapur S, Howes OD. 2014. 
Alterations in cortical and extrastriatal subcortical dopa-
mine function in schizophrenia: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of imaging studies. Br J Psychiatry 204: 
420–429.
Kane J, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H. 1988. Clozapine 
for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic. A double-blind 
comparison with chlorpromazine. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
45:789–796.
Kety SS, Rosenthal D, Wender PH, Schulsinger F. 1968. The 
types and prevalence of mental illness in the biological 
and adoptive families of adopted schizophrenics. J Psych 
Res 6:345–362.
Lesh TA, Niendam TA, Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. 2011. 
Cognitive control deficits in schizophrenia. Mechanisms 
and meaning. Neuropsychopharmcology 36:316–338.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al. 2005. Effective-
ness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schiz-
ophrenia. N Engl J Med 353:1209–1223.
Lynall M-E, Bassett DS, Kerwin R, et al. 2010. Functional con-
nectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J Neurosci 
30:9477–9487.
McGrath J, Saha S, Welham J, El Saadi O, MacCauley C, 
Chant D. 2004. A systematic review of the incidence of 
schizophrenia: the distribution of rates and the influence 
of sex, urbanicity, migrant status, and methodology. BMC 
Med 2:13.
Mortensen PB, Pedersen CB, Westergaard T, et al. 1999. 
Effects of family history and place and season of birth on 
the risk of schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 340:603–608.
Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, et al. 1999. Progressive 
cortical change during adolescence in childhood-onset 
schizophrenia. A longitudinal magnetic resonance imag-
ing study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 56:649–654.
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genom-
ics Consortium. 2014. Biological insights from 108 
schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511:421–427.
Seeman P, Lee T, Chau-Wong M, Wong K. 1976. Antipsy-
chotic drug doses and neuroleptic/dopamine receptors 
Nature 261:717–9.
Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, et al. 2016. Schizophrenia 
risk from complex variation of complement component 4. 
Nature 530:177–183.
Suddath RL, Christison GW, Torrey EF, Casanova MF, 
Weinberger DR. 1990. Anatomical abnormalities in the 
brains of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. 
N Engl J Med 322:789–794.
Thompson PM, Vidal C, Giedd JN, et al. 2001. Mapping ado-
lescent brain change reveals dynamic wave of accelerated 
gray matter loss in very early-onset schizophrenia. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 98:11650–11655.
Vidal CN, Rapoport JL, Hayashi KM, et al. 2006. Dynami-
cally spreading frontal and cingulate deficits mapped 
in adolescents with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
63:25–34.


===== Page 2 =====
61
Disorders of Mood and Anxiety
Second-Generation Antipsychotic Drugs Are Useful 
Treatments for Bipolar Disorder
Highlights
D
epression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety 
disorders have been well documented in med-
ical writings since ancient times. In the fifth 
century BC, Hippocrates taught that moods depended 
on the balance of four humors—blood, phlegm, yellow 
bile, and black bile. An excess of black bile (melancholia 
is the ancient Greek term for black bile) was believed 
to cause a state dominated by fear and despondency. 
Robert Burton’s Anatomy of Melancholy (1621) was not 
only an important medical text but also viewed litera-
ture and the arts through the lens of melancholia. Such 
texts describe symptoms that remain familiar today; 
they also recognized that symptoms of depression and 
of anxiety often occur together.
In this chapter, we discuss mood and anxiety dis-
orders together, not only because they frequently co-
occur but also because of overlapping genetic and 
environmental risk factors and some shared neural 
structures, including regions of the amygdala, hip-
pocampus, prefrontal cortex, and insular cortex.
Mood Disorders Can Be Divided Into Two 
General Classes: Unipolar Depression and 
Bipolar Disorder
There are no objective medical tests for mood and 
anxiety disorders. Thus, diagnosis depends on obser-
vation of symptoms, behavior, cognition, functional 
Mood Disorders Can Be Divided Into Two General Classes: 
Unipolar Depression and Bipolar Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder Differs Significantly From 
Normal Sadness
Major Depressive Disorder Often Begins Early in Life
A Diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder Requires an  
Episode of Mania
Anxiety Disorders Represent Significant Dysregulation of 
Fear Circuitry
Both Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors Contribute to 
Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Depression and Stress Share Overlapping Neural Mechanisms
Dysfunctions of Human Brain Structures and Circuits 
Involved in Mood and Anxiety Disorders Can Be Identified 
by Neuroimaging
Identification of Abnormally Functioning Neural Circuits 
Helps Explain Symptoms and May Suggest Treatments
A Decrease in Hippocampal Volume Is Associated With 
Mood Disorders
Major Depression and Anxiety Disorders Can  
Be Treated Effectively
Current Antidepressant Drugs Affect Monoaminergic 
Neural Systems
Ketamine Shows Promise as a Rapidly Acting Drug to 
Treat Major Depressive Disorder
Psychotherapy Is Effective in the Treatment of Major 
Depressive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders
Electroconvulsive Therapy Is Highly Effective  
Against Depression
Newer Forms of Neuromodulation Are Being Developed 
to Treat Depression
Bipolar Disorder Can Be Treated With Lithium and 
Several Anticonvulsant Drugs


===== Page 3 =====
1502    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Table 61–1  Symptoms of Mood Disorders
Five or more of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week period and represent a change from 
previous functioning. At least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
1.  Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjective report (eg, feels sad, empty,  
hopeless) or observations made by others (eg, appears tearful).
2.  Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by 
either subjective account or observation made by others).
3.  Significant weight loss when not dieting, or weight gain (eg, a change of >5% of body weight in a month), or decrease or 
increase in appetite nearly every day.
4.  Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5.  Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of  
restlessness or being slowed down).
6.  Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7.  Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely 
self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8.  Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (either by subjective account or as 
observed by others).
9.  Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide 
attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association. 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, 
DC: American Psychiatric Association.
impairments, and natural history (including age of 
onset, course, and outcome). Patterns of familial trans-
mission and response to treatment can also inform 
diagnostic classification. Based on such factors, it is 
possible to distinguish between two major groupings 
of mood disorders: unipolar depression and bipo-
lar disorder. Unipolar depression, when severe and 
pervasive, is classified as major depression or major 
depressive disorder. Major depression is diagnosed 
when people suffer from depressive episodes alone. 
Bipolar disorder is diagnosed when episodes of mania 
also occur.
The lifetime risk of major depressive disorder in 
the United States is approximately 19%. Within any 
1-year period, 8.3% of the population suffers major 
depression. The prevalence of depression differs in dif-
ferent countries and cultures; however, in the absence 
of objective medical tests, such epidemiologic data are 
subject to diagnostic and reporting biases, and thus, 
it is difficult to draw comparative conclusions. The 
World Health Organization reports that depression 
is a leading cause of disability worldwide, and other 
studies find it to be a leading cause of economic loss 
from noncommunicable disease. These dire social and 
economic consequences occur because depression is 
common, often begins early in life, and interferes with 
cognition, energy, and motivation, which are all neces-
sary to learn in school and to work effectively.
Bipolar disorder is less common than unipolar 
depression, with a prevalence of approximately 1% 
worldwide. Its symptoms are relatively constant across 
countries and cultures. The incidence of bipolar disor-
der is equivalent in males and females.
Major Depressive Disorder Differs Significantly 
From Normal Sadness
Several factors distinguish major depression from 
transient periods of sadness that may occur in every-
day life and from the grief that often follows a personal 
loss. These include the life context in which symptoms 
occur, their duration and pervasiveness, and their asso-
ciation with physiological, behavioral, and cognitive 
symptoms (Table 61–1). In healthy people, mood alter-
nates between low and high, with timing and intensity 
phased appropriately with interpersonal interactions 
and life events. Mood states that are contextually inap-
propriate, extreme in amplitude, rigid, or prolonged 
are suggestive of either depression or mania, depend-
ing on their valence.
Depressive episodes, whether associated with uni-
polar or bipolar illness, are characterized by negative 
mood states such as sadness, anxiety, loss of interests, 
or irritability lasting for most of the day, day in and 
day out, and unrelieved by events that were previ-
ously enjoyable. This loss of interest is well expressed 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1503
Table 61–2  Symptoms of a Manic Episode
A.  A distinct period of abnormally and persistently 
elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, and abnormally 
and persistently increased goal-directed activity or 
energy, lasting at least 1 week (or any duration if  
hospitalization is necessary).
B.  During the period of mood disturbance and increased 
energy or activity, three (or more) of the following 
symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have  
persisted and have been present to a significant degree:
1.  Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2.  Decreased need for sleep (eg, feels rested after only  
3 hours of sleep).
3.  More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4.  Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts 
are racing.
5.  Distractibility (ie, attention too easily drawn to  
unimportant or irrelevant external stimuli).
6.  Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at 
work or school, or sexually) or psychomotor agita-
tion (ie, purposeless non–goal-directed activity).
7.  Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities that 
have a high potential for painful consequences  
(eg, engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual 
indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association. 
2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
by Hamlet’s complaint, “How weary, stale, flat, and 
unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world!” 
When depression is severe, individuals may suffer 
intense mental anguish and a pervasive inability to 
experience pleasure, a condition known as anhedonia.
Physiologic symptoms of depression include sleep 
disturbance, most often insomnia with early morning 
awakening, but occasionally excessive sleeping; loss 
of appetite and weight loss but occasionally exces-
sive eating; decreased interest in sexual activity; and 
decreased energy. Some severely affected individuals 
exhibit slowed motor movements, described as psy-
chomotor retardation, whereas others may be agitated, 
exhibiting such symptoms as pacing. Cognitive symp-
toms are evident in both the content of thoughts (hope-
lessness, thoughts of worthlessness and guilt, suicidal 
thoughts and urges) and in cognitive processes (diffi-
culty concentrating, slow thinking, and poor memory).
In the most severe cases of depression, psychotic 
symptoms may occur, including delusions (unshaka-
ble false beliefs that cannot be explained by a person’s 
culture) and hallucinations. When psychotic symp-
toms occur in depression, they typically reflect the 
person’s thoughts of being undeserving, worthless, or 
bad. A severely depressed person might, for example, 
believe that he is emitting a potent odor because he is 
rotting from the inside.
The most severe outcome of depression is suicide, 
which represents a significant cause of death world-
wide; the World Health Organization estimates that 
there are 800,000 deaths by suicide annually. More than 
90% of suicides are associated with mental illness, with 
depression being the leading risk factor, especially 
when accompanied by substance use disorders.
Major Depressive Disorder Often Begins  
Early in Life
Major depressive disorder often begins early in life, 
but first episodes do occur across the life span. Those 
who have had a first episode in childhood or adoles-
cence often have a family history of the disorder and 
have a high likelihood of recurrence. Once a second 
episode has occurred, a pattern of repeated relapse and 
remission often sets in. Some people do not recover 
completely from acute episodes and have chronic, 
albeit milder, depression, which can be punctuated by 
acute exacerbations. Chronic depression, even when 
symptoms are less severe than those of an acute epi-
sode, can prove extremely disabling because of long-
term erosion of a person’s ability to function in life 
roles. Major depressive disorder in childhood occurs 
equally in males and females. After puberty, however, 
it occurs more commonly in females; the ratio of 
females to males is approximately 2:1 across countries 
and cultures.
A Diagnosis of Bipolar Disorder Requires  
an Episode of Mania
Bipolar disorder is named for its chief symptom, swings 
of mood between mania and depression; indeed, the 
influential 19th-century psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin 
called this condition the manic-depressive insanity. By 
convention, a diagnosis of bipolar disorder requires at 
least one episode of mania. Mania is typically associ-
ated with recurrent episodes of depression, whereas 
mania without depression is distinctly uncommon.
Manic episodes are typically characterized by 
elevated mood, although some individuals are pre-
dominantly irritable. During manic episodes, indi-
viduals have markedly increased energy, a decreased 
need for sleep, and occasionally a decreased desire 
for food (Table 61–2). People with mania are typically 
impulsive and engage excessively in reward-directed 


===== Page 5 =====
1504    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
behaviors, often with poor judgment characterized by 
extreme optimism. For example, a person may go on  
spending sprees well beyond his or her means or 
on uncharacteristic binges of drug and alcohol use 
or sexual behavior. Self-esteem is typically inflated, 
often to delusional levels. For example, an individual 
might falsely believe himself to have extensive influ-
ence on events or to be a significant religious figure. 
In antiquity, mania was described as “a state of raving 
madness with exalted mood.” However, such elevated 
mood may be brittle, with sudden intrusions of anger, 
irritability, and aggression.
Mania, like depression, affects cognitive processes, 
often impairing attention and verbal memory. During 
a manic episode, a person’s speech is often rapid, pro-
fuse, and difficult to interrupt. The person may jump 
quickly from idea to idea, making comprehension of 
speech difficult. Psychotic symptoms commonly occur 
during manic episodes and are generally consistent 
with the person’s mood. For example, people with 
mania may have delusions of possessing special pow-
ers or of being objects of adulation.
The depressive episodes that occur in bipolar 
disorder are symptomatically indistinguishable from 
those in unipolar depression, but are often more diffi-
cult to treat. For example, they are often less responsive 
to antidepressant medications. Longitudinal stud-
ies have found that the most common affective state 
of bipolar patients between severe acute episodes of 
mania or depression is not healthy mood (euthymia), 
as was often taught in older textbooks, but a state of 
chronic depression.
Historically, the concept of bipolar disorder 
described patients who experienced full manic epi-
sodes, which often included psychotic symptoms and 
necessitated hospitalization (Table 61–2). In recent  
decades, diagnostic classifications have added type 2 
bipolar disorder in which mild manias (also called 
hypomanias) alternate with depressive episodes. The 
manic episodes of type 2 bipolar disorder are, by defi-
nition, not accompanied by psychosis or severe enough 
to require hospitalization. Whether this represents 
a variant of classic (type 1) bipolar disorder or some 
other pathophysiology is not yet known, although 
genetic dissection of mood disorders may offer some 
clarification in the near future.
Bipolar disorder generally begins in young adult-
hood, but the onset may occur earlier or as late as the 
fifth decade of life. Many manic episodes often lack 
an obvious precipitant; however, sleep deprivation 
can initiate a manic episode in some individuals with 
bipolar disorder. For such individuals, travel across 
time zones or shift work represents a risk. The rate 
of cycling among mania, depression, and periods of 
normal mood varies widely among bipolar patients. 
Individuals with short, rapid cycles tend to be less 
responsive to mood-stabilizing drugs.
Anxiety Disorders Represent Significant 
Dysregulation of Fear Circuitry
Anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric 
disorders worldwide. In the United States, 28.5% of the 
population suffers from one or more anxiety disorders 
over the course of their lifetimes. Some anxiety disor-
ders are mild, such as the simple phobias that involve 
rarely encountered stimuli; others, such as panic disor-
der or posttraumatic stress disorder, are often highly 
debilitating based on the severity of symptoms, inter-
ference with functioning, and chronicity.
Anxiety and fear are related emotional states; both 
are critical to surviving dangers that might be encoun-
tered throughout life. The major distinction is that fear 
is a response to threats that are present and clearly 
signify danger, whereas anxiety is a state of readiness 
for threats that are less specific either in proximity or 
timing. The neural circuits of fear and anxiety strongly 
overlap, as do their physiological, behavioral, cogni-
tive, and affective aspects.
Fear is normally a transient adaptive response to 
danger that, like pain, serves as a survival mechanism. 
Like pain, fear is alerting and aversive and motivates 
more or less immediate behavioral responses. Thus, 
fear interrupts ongoing behaviors, supplanting them 
with such responses as avoidance or defensive aggres-
sion. To prepare the body to cope physiologically, fear 
circuitry activates the sympathetic nervous system and 
causes release of stress hormones. This “fight or flight” 
response facilitates blood flow to skeletal muscle, 
increases metabolic activity, and elevates pain thresh-
olds. Like reward and other survival-relevant emo-
tional responses, fear strongly facilitates the encoding 
and consolidation of both implicit and explicit memo-
ries that prepare an organism to respond rapidly and 
effectively to future predictive cues. (Fear circuitry is 
described in Chapter 42.)
Many cognitive and physiological components of 
anxiety are similar to fear, but typically exhibit lower 
intensity and a more protracted time course. Anxiety 
is adaptive when proportionate to the probability and 
likely severity of a threat, leading to appropriate levels 
of arousal, vigilance, and physiological preparedness. 
Given the dangerous, indeed potentially lethal, conse-
quences of ignoring even ambiguous threat cues, fail-
ure to mount appropriate anxiety responses can prove 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1505
highly maladaptive. However, excessive contextually 
inappropriate and prolonged vigilance, tension, and 
physiological activation can be the basis of distressing 
and disabling anxiety disorders or anxiety symptoms 
that may accompany depression. Risk factors for anxi-
ety disorders include a person’s genetic background, 
developmental experience, and lessons learned not 
only from direct experience but also taught by families, 
peers, schools, and other institutions.
Cues that elicit anxiety may be environmental or 
interoceptive (ie, arising from within the body, such 
as abdominal discomfort or heart palpitations). Social 
cues and social situations can be a major source of 
anxiety. In humans, anxiety states can also be initiated 
by trains of thought that elicit memories or imagina-
tion of danger. Anxiety can also arise from stimuli that 
are processed unconsciously because of their brevity 
or ambiguity, and the resulting emotion might then be 
experienced as arising spontaneously. In contrast to 
fear, which is initiated and terminated by the presence 
or termination of clear stimuli denoting threat, anxiety 
has a more variable time course. Anxiety states may be 
prolonged if the potential for danger or harm is long-
lasting or if there is no clear safety signal.
Anxiety disorders and the anxiety that may accom-
pany major depression are associated with diverse 
symptoms. Affected individuals may develop exces-
sive preoccupation with possible threats and atten-
tional biases toward cues interpreted as threatening. 
Such cognitive states are often associated with persis-
tent worry, tension, and vigilance. Common physiolog-
ical symptoms include hyperarousal, as evidenced by 
a low threshold for being startled, difficulty sleeping, 
and sympathetic nervous system activation, including 
a rapid, pounding heartbeat. Individuals with anxiety 
may become exquisitely aware of their heartbeat or 
breathing, which can become a source of preoccupa-
tion and worry in their own right. Sympathetic nerv-
ous system activation may reach extreme levels of 
intensity during a panic attack, one of the most severe 
manifestations of anxiety.
In anxiety disorders, cognitive, physiological, and 
behavioral responses that would be adaptive in the 
face of a serious threat may be maladaptively acti-
vated by innocuous stimuli, may be inappropriately 
intense for the situation, and may have a protracted 
time course in which safety signals fail to terminate 
the symptoms. Affected individuals may avoid places, 
people, or experiences that, although objectively safe, 
have become associated with perceptions of threats or 
the experience of anxiety. When severe, such avoid-
ance can impair the ability of affected individuals to 
function in different capacities or roles.
Because there are no biomarkers or objective medi-
cal tests for particular constellations of anxiety symp-
toms, current psychiatric classifications such as the 
fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-5) classify anxiety disorders 
based on clinical histories, such as the nature, inten-
sity, and time course of symptoms, the role of external 
cues in triggering episodes, and associated symptoms. 
The DSM-5 divides pathological anxiety syndromes 
into several distinct disorders: panic disorder, post-
traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disor-
der, social anxiety disorder (previously called social 
phobia), and simple phobias. For heuristic purposes, 
these disorders are discussed below, but current evi-
dence from long-term clinical observation and from 
family, twin, and epidemiological studies does not 
support dividing anxiety symptoms into discrete non-
overlapping categories. Rather, the evidence suggests 
that pathological anxiety symptoms and symptoms of 
depression might be better conceptualized as a con-
tinuum or spectrum in which individuals experience 
varying symptoms that cross current DSM boundaries.
Consistent with the concept of a symptom spec-
trum, anxiety disorders and depression do not often 
occur together across generations in families as distinct 
DSM-5 categories; instead, diverse patterns of anxi-
ety and depressive symptoms are typically observed 
among affected family members. Twin studies that 
compare concordance for traits in monozygotic and 
dizygotic twin pairs find significant shared genetic risk 
across multiple anxiety disorders and major depres-
sion. In addition, epidemiological studies find that 
individuals diagnosed with one categorical DSM-5 
anxiety disorder, during, for example, teen years, have 
a high probability of developing new anxiety or depres-
sive symptoms over the next decade that could result 
in the person being diagnosed with multiple disorders 
based on DSM-5 classifications. The high frequency at 
which putatively distinct DSM-5 anxiety disorders and 
depression co-occur and the results of family and twin 
studies suggest significant sharing of etiologic factors 
and pathogenic mechanisms among anxiety disorders 
and major depression. Nevertheless, individual dis-
orders that are listed in DSM-5 are briefly described 
below.
Panic attacks are a severe manifestation of anxiety. 
They are characterized by discrete periods (that can 
last for many minutes) of intense foreboding, a sense 
of doom, fear of losing control over oneself, or fear 
of death. They are associated with prominent bodily 
symptoms such as heart palpitations, inability to catch 
one’s breath, sweating, paresthesias, and dizziness 
(Table 61–3).


===== Page 7 =====
1506    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Panic attacks often give rise to anxiety about future 
episodes such that the contexts in which attacks have 
occurred can become phobic stimuli that trigger sub-
sequent attacks (fear conditioning). As a result, some 
severely affected individuals restrict their activities to 
avoid situations or places in which panic attacks have 
occurred or from which they fear they might not be 
able to escape should they experience an attack. The 
most severely affected may develop generalized pho-
bic avoidance, leading them to become housebound, 
a state described as agoraphobia. Current diagnostic 
classification systems such as the DSM-5 define panic 
disorder based on the number and frequency of attacks 
and whether or not a phobic trigger can be identified. 
Such detailed criteria lack a strong empirical basis, but 
it is certainly the case that individuals who have recur-
rent panic attacks along with other anxiety symptoms 
are not only highly distressed but may also be signifi-
cantly disabled.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) follows an 
experience of severe danger or injury. Under different 
names and descriptions, including shell shock, a term 
coined during World War I, PTSD has long been rec-
ognized as a result of combat. More recently, civilian 
traumas such as assault, rape, or automobile crashes 
have been recognized as potential causes of PTSD. 
The current approach to PTSD was formalized by the 
American Psychiatric Association based on the experi-
ence of Vietnam War veterans.
Table 61–3  Symptoms of a Panic Attack
A discrete period of intense fear or discomfort in which 
four (or more) of the following symptoms develop 
abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes.
  1.  Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate
  2.  Sweating
  3.  Trembling or shaking
  4.  Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering
  5.  Feeling of choking
  6.  Chest pain or discomfort
  7.  Nausea or abdominal distress
  8.  Feeling dizzy, unsteady, lightheaded, or faint
  9.  Chills or heat sensations
10.  Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations)
11.  Derealization (feelings or unreality) or depersonaliza-
tion (being detached from oneself)
12.  Fear of losing control or “going crazy”
13.  Fear of dying
Source: Adapted from the American Psychiatric Association. 
2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
PTSD is initiated by a traumatic experience. Its 
cardinal symptoms include intrusive reexperiencing of 
the traumatic episode, typically initiated by cues such 
as sounds, images, or other reminders of the trauma. 
For example, a person who has been assaulted might 
respond potently to an unexpected touch from behind. 
Such episodes are often characterized by activation 
of the sympathetic nervous system and, when severe, 
may be characterized by “fight or flight” responses. 
The reexperiencing of a traumatic event may also 
occur in the form of nightmares. Other symptoms of 
PTSD include emotional numbness that may interfere 
with relationships and social interactions, insomnia, 
chronic hyperarousal including excessive vigilance, 
sympathetic nervous system activation, and an exag-
gerated startle response to an innocuous stimulus such 
as a touch or sound.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is diagnosed 
when a person suffers chronic worry and vigilance not 
warranted by circumstances. The worry is accompa-
nied by physiological symptoms such as heightened 
sympathetic nervous system activation and motor ten-
sion. GAD commonly co-occurs with major depressive 
disorder.
Social anxiety disorder is characterized by a persis-
tent fear of social situations, especially situations in 
which one is exposed to the scrutiny of others. The 
affected person has an intense fear of acting in a way 
that will prove humiliating. Stage fright is a form of 
social anxiety that is limited to circumstances of perfor-
mance, such as public speaking. Social anxiety disorder 
can lead to avoidance of verbal classroom participation 
or communicating with others at work and can there-
fore prove disabling as well as distressing.
Simple phobias consist of intense and inappropri-
ately excessive fear of specific stimuli, such as eleva-
tors, flying, heights, or spiders.
Both Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors 
Contribute to Mood and Anxiety Disorders
Bipolar disorder, major depression, and anxiety dis-
orders all run in families. Twin studies that compare 
the rate of concordance of monozygotic and dizygotic 
twin pairs demonstrate significant heritabilities among 
these disorders, where heritability represents the per-
centage of the variation in a phenotype explained 
by genetic variation. Among mood and anxiety dis-
orders, bipolar disorder has the highest heritability 
(70%–80%); major depression and anxiety disorders 
exhibit lower but still significant heritabilities (approx-
imately 35%), with greater roles for developmental 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1507
and environmental risk factors. Although there is an 
important role for genes in the pathogenesis of mood 
and anxiety disorders, all of them exhibit non-Mendelian 
patterns of transmission across generations, including 
frequent co-occurrence of major depression and anxi-
ety disorders. Such patterns reflect the complexity of 
genetic and nongenetic risk factors.
Molecular genetic studies aimed at discovering 
the precise DNA sequence variants (alleles) that pre-
dispose to mood and anxiety disorders have been ini-
tiated. Such studies are challenging because the risk 
architecture of these, and indeed all, common psy-
chiatric disorders is highly polygenic, meaning that 
population risk appears to involve many thousands of 
common and rare alleles linked to or contained within 
many hundreds of genes. Unlike some neurologic dis-
orders such as Huntington disease, there is no “depres-
sion gene” or “anxiety gene.” Disease-associated 
alleles confer small additive effects on the risk of an 
illness. The risk for any given individual results from 
genetic loading (comprised of diverse combinations 
of disease-associated alleles) acting in concert with 
developmental and environmental factors. This poly-
genic architecture explains non-Mendelian patterns of 
transmission and the diverse combinations of depres-
sive and anxiety symptoms observed within families 
and across populations.
The lack of objective diagnostic tests for mood and 
anxiety disorders means that any study cohort is likely 
to have some proportion of diagnostic misclassification. 
As a result, the search for common disease-associated 
variants by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
and rare disease-associated variants by DNA sequenc-
ing requires significant statistical power conferred by 
very large cohorts and by meta-analyses conducted 
across multiple cohorts. Early results of GWAS have 
been reported for major depression and bipolar dis-
order; in both cases, several significant genome-wide 
loci have been found to date, but not yet enough to 
identify molecular pathways of pathogenesis with any 
certainty. Whole-exome sequencing (ie, DNA sequenc-
ing of all genomic regions that encode proteins) and 
whole-genome sequencing are being conducted for 
bipolar disorder.
The highly polygenic risk architecture of mood 
and anxiety disorders means that there is no diagnostic 
value in testing for one or a few risk gene variants that 
might be associated with these disorders. Rather, poly-
genic risk scores (PRS), based on the sum of all genetic 
risk variants for a trait, are emerging as useful tools 
to stratify individuals in epidemiological and clinical 
studies by severity of genetic risk. A discrepant PRS 
within a clinical cohort, eg, showing low depression 
risk in a study of people with major depression, would 
suggest misclassification. It is important to emphasize 
that the polygenic nature of risk for mood and anxiety 
disorders and the significant contribution of environ-
mental risk factors mean that, like any genetic test, the 
PRS provides only a probability.
As more is learned, the PRS can be combined with 
other measures to yield a more predictive risk score, 
just as modern cardiac risk models increasingly include 
genetic measures, smoking history, lipid levels, and 
blood pressure. For mood and anxiety disorders, one 
type of measure that shows early promise is identifica-
tion of intrinsic patterns of neural connectivity derived 
from resting-state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI; imaging conducted when subjects are 
not engaged in task performance). Differing patterns 
of connectivity could potentially distinguish among 
different forms of disorder.
Epidemiological evidence has identified signifi-
cant developmental risk factors for major depression 
and anxiety disorders. The best documented is a his-
tory of physical or sexual abuse early in life, serious 
child neglect, or other early, severe stressors. Investiga-
tions of such early stressors have focused on possible 
roles for altered reactivity of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Studies of early stress 
in animal models suggest that epigenetic regulation 
of gene expression may have a role in altering devel-
opmental trajectories. Such results cannot be readily 
followed up in humans because of lack of access to 
human brain tissue and thus remain hypothetical.
Other risk factors for depression and anxiety disor-
ders include alcohol and other substance use disorders 
and the presence of other psychiatric disorders, such as 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, learning disor-
ders, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. There is also 
evidence that alcoholism and other substance abuse 
disorders may be initiated by misguided attempts at 
self-medication of depression or anxiety, in turn wors-
ening the underlying condition.
Environmental factors that may trigger new epi-
sodes of depression or anxiety include life transitions 
such as marriage, a new job, or retirement. Serious ill-
ness, whether acute or chronic, is also associated with 
the onset of major depression and anxiety. Some neu-
rological disorders are associated with an elevated 
risk of depression, including Parkinson disease, Alz-
heimer disease, multiple sclerosis, and stroke. Some 
prescribed medications, such as interferons, also fre-
quently trigger depression. When major depression 
accompanies a chronic illness such as type 2 diabetes 
or cardiovascular disease, the overall medical out-
comes are worse, as a result of both the physiological 


===== Page 9 =====
1508    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 61–1  The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Neu-
rons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus synthe-
size and release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), the key 
regulatory peptide in the hormonal cascade activated by stress. 
The CRH neurons have a circadian pattern of secretion, and the 
stimulatory effects of stress on CRH synthesis and secretion 
are superimposed on this basal circadian pattern. Excitatory  
fibers from the amygdala convey information about stressful 
stimuli that activates CRH neurons; inhibitory fibers descend 
from the hippocampus onto the paraventricular nucleus. CRH 
enters the hypophyseal portal system and stimulates the 
corticotropic cells in the anterior pituitary that synthesize and 
release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The released 
ACTH enters the systemic circulation and stimulates the adre-
nal cortex to release glucocorticoids. In humans, the major 
glucocorticoid is cortisol; in rodents, it is corticosterone. Both 
cortisol and synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone 
act at the level of the pituitary and hypothalamus to inhibit 
further release of ACTH and CRH, respectively. The feedback 
inhibition by glucocorticoids is attenuated in major depression 
and the depressed phase of bipolar disorder. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Nestler et al. 2015.)
effects of depression, such as increased release of stress 
hormones (see below) and decreased motivation to 
engage in rehabilitative regimens.
Depression and Stress Share Overlapping 
Neural Mechanisms
Depression and responses to stress exhibit complex 
but significant interactions. As already noted, severe 
childhood adversity is a developmental risk factor for 
depression; moreover, depressive episodes may be ini-
tiated by a stressful experience. Conversely, the expe-
rience of depression is itself stressful because of the 
suffering it causes and its negative effects on function-
ing. Symptomatically, depression shares several physi-
ological features with chronic stress, including changes 
in appetite, sleep, and energy. Both major depression 
and chronic stress are associated with persistent acti-
vation of the HPA axis (Figure 61–1).
Many but not all individuals with major depres-
sion and many in the depressed phase of bipolar dis-
order exhibit excess synthesis and secretion of the 
glucocorticoid stress hormone cortisol and the fac-
tors that regulate it, corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). In a 
healthy state, a transient increase in cortisol secretion, 
as occurs in response to acute stress, shifts the body to 
a catabolic state (making glucose available to confront 
the stressor or threat), increases subjective energy lev-
els, sharpens cognition, and may increase confidence. 
However, a chronic increase in glucocorticoids may 
contribute to depression-like symptoms. For example, 
many people with Cushing disease (in which pituitary 
tumors secrete excess ACTH, leading to excess cortisol) 
experience symptoms of depression.
Feedback mechanisms within the HPA axis nor-
mally permit cortisol (or exogenously administered 
glucocorticoids) to inhibit CRH and ACTH secretion 
and therefore to suppress additional cortisol synthesis 
and secretion. In approximately half of people with 
major depression, this feedback system is impaired; 
their HPA axis becomes resistant to suppression even 
by potent synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexa-
methasone. Although readily measurable disturbances 
of the HPA axis have not proven sensitive or specific 
enough to be used as a diagnostic test for depression, 
the observed abnormalities suggest strongly that a 
pathologically activated stress response is often an 
important component of depression.
The relationship of stress with depression has 
led to the development of several chronic stress para-
digms in rodent models of depression. The reliance on 
Pituitary
Glucocorticoids
ACTH
CRH
Adrenal 
cortex
–
–
Regulation 
of brain and 
peripheral 
function
Hippocampus
Amygdala
+
_
Paraventricular
nucleus
Hypothalamus
Glucocorticoids
Dexamethasone
Attenuated 
in depression


