===== Page 1 =====
1388    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
stroke, head injury, herpes encephalitis, and degenera-
tive processes such as Alzheimer disease, but also from 
functional imaging studies of typical individuals and 
from electrical stimulation of these same areas of tem-
poral cortex during surgery.
Areas of frontal cortex in the mesial surface of the 
left hemisphere, which include the supplementary 
motor area and the anterior cingulate region, play an 
important role in the initiation and continuation of 
speech. Damage in these areas impairs the initiation of 
movement (akinesia) and causes mutism, a complete 
absence of speech. In aphasic patients, the complete 
absence of speech is a rarity and is only seen during 
the very early stages of the condition. Patients with 
akinesia and mutism fail to communicate by words, 
gestures, or facial expression because the drive to com-
municate is impaired, not because the neural machin-
ery of expression is damaged as in aphasia.
Damage to the left subcortical gray nuclei impairs 
grammatical processing in both speech and compre-
hension. The basal ganglia are closely interconnected 
with the frontal and parietal cortex and may have a 
role in assembling morphemes into words and words 
into sentences, just as they serve to assemble the com-
ponents of a complex movement into a smooth action.
Highlights
1.	 Language exists at many levels, each of which has 
to be mastered during childhood—the elemental 
phonetic units (vowels and consonants) used to 
change the meaning of a word, the words them-
selves, word endings (morphemes) that change 
tense and pluralization, and the grammatical rules 
that allow words to be strung together to create 
sentences with meaning. By the age of 3, young 
children, regardless of the language(s) they are 
learning, have mastered all levels and can carry on 
a conversation with an adult. No artificially intel-
ligent machine can yet duplicate this feat.
2.	 The learning strategies used by children to mas-
ter language under 1 year of age are surprising.  
Language learning proceeds as infants (1) exploit 
the statistical properties of speech (distribu-
tional frequency patterns of sounds to detect rel-
evant phonetic units and transitional probabilities 
between adjacent syllables to detect likely words), 
and (2) exploit the social context in which lan-
guage occurs by following the eye movements of 
adults as they refer to objects and actions to learn 
word–object and word–action correspondences. 
At early ages, natural language learning requires a 
social context and social interaction. Infants’ strat-
egies are not well described by Skinnerian operant 
conditioning or by Chomsky’s innate representa-
tion and selection based on experience. Instead, 
powerful implicit learning mechanisms that oper-
ate in social contexts vault infants forward from 
the very earliest months of life.
3.	 Infants’ speech production and speech percep-
tion skills are “universal” at birth. In speech per-
ception, infants discriminate all sounds used to 
distinguish words across all languages until the 
age of 6 months. By 12 months, discrimination 
for native-language sounds has dramatically 
increased, whereas discrimination of foreign-
language sounds decreases. Production is ini-
tially universal as well and becomes language 
specific by the end of the first year. By the age of 
3, infants know 1,000 words. Mastery of gram-
matical structure in complex sentences continues 
until the age of 10. Future work will advance the 
field by linking the detailed behavioral mile-
stones that now exist to functional and structural 
brain measures to show how the brain’s network 
for language is shaped as a function of language 
experience.
4.	 A new “dual-stream” model of language has 
emerged based on advances in functional neural 
imaging and structural brain imaging over the 
past decade. The new model bears similarities to 
the dual-stream model for the visual system. The 
dual-stream model for language goes beyond the 
classic Wernicke-Geschwind model by showing 
that numerous brain regions and the neural path-
ways that connect them support sound-to-meaning 
(ventral) and sound-to-articulation (dorsal) path-
ways. Refinement in the model will continue as 
additional studies show relationships between 
behavioral and brain measures. Future studies will 
integrate structural and functional brain measures, 
genetic measures, and behavioral assessments of 
language processing and of learning, including 
second language learning in adulthood.
5.	 Studies on the infant brain reveal a remarkably 
well-developed set of brain structures and path-
ways by 3 to 6 months of age. Structural DTI 
reveals a fully formed ventral pathway at birth 
and a dorsal pathway that links auditory areas to 
premotor, but not Broca’s, area at birth. EEG and 
MEG brain imaging studies mirror the transition 
in phonetic perception between 6 and 12 months 
of age, a “critical period” for sound learning. MEG 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 55 / Language    1389
brain scans at this period reveal the co-activation 
of auditory and motor centers when infants hear 
speech and show changes in both sensory and 
motor brain areas as a function of experience. The 
data indicate that dorsal pathways are sufficiently 
well formed in the first year to support sensory-to-
motor connections and imitation learning during 
this period.
6.	 Hemispheric specialization generally increases 
with age and language experience, with initial 
representation of the areas and pathways repre-
sented bilaterally and dominance emerging with 
language experience. There are differences in the 
degree of lateralization, however, for various lev-
els of language. The dorsal stream, which medi-
ates auditory-motor representations of speech, 
is more left lateralized than the ventral stream, 
which mediates auditory-conceptual representa-
tions of words.
7.	 The classical aphasias—Broca’s, Wernicke’s, and 
conduction aphasia—are well described within 
the context of the dual-stream model of language. 
Broca’s aphasia, with its emphasis on the inabil-
ity to produce speech but relatively good speech 
understanding, is seen as a dorsal stream deficit, 
whereas Wernicke’s aphasia, with its emphasis on 
speech comprehension deficits, is seen as a ventral 
stream deficit. Conduction aphasia, like Broca’s, is 
viewed as caused by a dorsal stream deficit, with 
damage that encompasses auditory and motor 
regions. Future research on aphasia will benefit 
from additional studies of functional and struc-
tural damage that can be combined with detailed 
behavioral protocols.
8.	 Future studies will allow detailed comparisons 
between human and nonhuman brains to reveal 
the structures and pathways that are uniquely 
human and subserve language. Future work will 
also focus on the degree to which language struc-
tures in humans are selectively activated by speech 
as opposed to other complex auditory sounds and 
whether adult-level selectivity is present early in 
development.
9.	 Human language represents a unique aspect of 
human cognitive achievement. Understanding 
the brain systems that allow this cognitive feat 
in nearly all children, and especially the discov-
ery of biomarkers that identify children who are 
at risk for developmental disorders of language, 
will advance brain science and be beneficial for 
society. Behavioral studies now allow us to con-
nect the dots with regard to how early language 
experience is linked to advanced language devel-
opment by the time children enter school. This 
may lead to language interventions that improve 
outcomes for all children.
 Patricia K. Kuhl 
Selected Reading
Brauer J, Anwander A, Perani D, Friederici AD. 2013. Dorsal 
and ventral pathways in language development. Brain 
Lang 127:289–295.
Buchsbaum BR, Baldo J, Okada K, et al. 2011. Conduction 
aphasia, sensory-motor integration, and phonological 
short-term memory—an aggregate analysis of lesion and 
fMRI data. Brain Lang 119:119–128.
Chomsky N. 1959. A review of B. F. Skinner’s “Verbal Behavior.” 
Language 35:26–58.
Damasio H, Tranel D, Grabowski TJ, Adolphs R,  
Damasio AR. 2004. Neural systems behind word and con-
cept retrieval. Cognition 92:179–229.
Doupe A, Kuhl PK. 1999. Birdsong and human speech: 
common themes and mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 
22:567–631.
Gopnik A, Meltzoff AN, Kuhl PK. 2001. The Scientist in the 
Crib: What Early Learning Tells Us About the Mind. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Hickok G, Poeppel D. 2007. The cortical organization of 
speech processing. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:393–402.
Iverson P, Kuhl PK, Akahane-Yamada R, et al. 2003. A per-
ceptual interference account of acquisition difficulties for 
non-native phonemes. Cognition 87:B47–B57.
Kuhl PK. 2004. Early language acquisition: cracking the 
speech code. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:831–843.
Kuhl PK, Rivera-Gaxiola M. 2008. Neural substrates of lan-
guage acquisition. Annu Rev Neurosci 31:511–534.
Kuhl PK, Tsao F-M, Liu H-M. 2003. Foreign-language experi-
ence in infancy: effects of short-term exposure and social 
interaction on phonetic learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
100:9096–9101.
Kuhl PK, Williams KA, Lacerda F, Stevens KN, Lindblom B. 
1992. Linguistic experience alters phonetic perception in 
infants by 6 months of age. Science 255:606–608.
Perani D, Saccuman MC, Scifo P, et al. 2011. Neural lan-
guage networks at birth. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
108:16056–16061.
Pinker S. 1994. The Language Instinct. New York: William 
Morrow.
Skeide MA, Friederici AD. 2016. The ontogeny of the cortical 
language network. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:323–332.


===== Page 3 =====
1390    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
References
Berwick RC, Friederici AD, Chomsky N, Bolhuis JJ. 2013. 
Evolution, brain, and the nature of language. Trends Cogn 
Sci 17:89–98.
Broca P. 1861. Remarques sur le siege de la faculte du langage 
articule, suivies d’une observation d’aphemie (perte de la 
parole). Bull Societe Anatomique de Paris 6:330–357.
Buchsbaum BR, Baldo J, Okada K, et al. 2011. Conduction 
aphasia, sensory-motor integration, and phonological 
short-term memory: an aggregate analysis of lesion and 
fMRI data. Brain Lang 119:119–128.
Burns TC, Yoshida KA, Hill K, Werker JF. 2007. The develop-
ment of phonetic representation in bilingual and mono-
lingual infants. App Psycholing 28:455–474.
Damasio AR, Damasio H. 1992. Brain and language. Sci Am 
267:88–109.
Damasio AR, Tranel D. 1993. Nouns and verbs are retrieved 
with differently distributed neural systems. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 90:4957–4960.
Dronkers NF, Baldo JV. 2009. Language: aphasia. In: LR 
Squire (ed). Encyclopedia of Neuroscience (Vol. 5), pp. 343–348. 
Oxford: Academic Press.
Dubois J, Hertz-Pannier L, Dehaene-Lambertz G, Cointepas 
Y, Le Bihan D. 2006. Assessment of the early organiza-
tion and maturation of infants’ cerebral white matter 
fiber bundles: a feasibility study using quantitative dif-
fusion tensor imaging and tractography. Neuroimage 30: 
1121–1132.
Eimas PD, Siqueland ER, Jusczyk P, Vigorito J. 1971. Speech 
perception in infants. Science 171:303–306.
Fedorenko E, Duncan J, Kanwisher N. 2012. Language-selective 
and domain-general regions lie side by side within Broca’s 
area. Curr Biol 22:2059–2062.
Ferjan Ramirez N, Ramirez RR, Clarke M, Taulu S, Kuhl PK. 
2017. Speech discrimination in 11-month-old bilingual 
and monolingual infants: a magnetoencephalography 
study. Dev Sci 20:e12427.
Flege JE. 1995. Second language speech learning: theory, 
findings, and problems. In: W Strange (ed). Speech 
Perception and Linguistic Experience, pp. 233–277. Timonium, 
MD: York Press.
Flege JE, Yeni-Komshian GH, Liu S. 1999. Age constraints on 
second-language acquisition. J Mem Lang 41:78–104.
Friederici AD. 2009. Pathways to language: fiber tracts in the 
human brain. Trends Cog Sci 13:175–181.
Garcia-Sierra A, Ramirez-Esparza N, Kuhl PK. 2016. Rela-
tionships between quantity of language input and brain 
responses in bilingual and monolingual infants. Int J 
Psychophysiol 110:1–17.
Geschwind N. 1970. The organization of language and the 
brain. Science 170:940–944.
Golfinopoulos E, Tourville JA, Guenther FH. 2010. The 
integration of large-scale neural network modeling and 
functional brain imaging in speech motor control. Neuro-
image 52:862–874.
Hickok G, Okada K, Serences JT. 2009. Area Spt in the human 
planum temporale supports sensory-motor integration 
for speech processing. J Neurophysiol 101:2725–2732.
Johnson J, Newport E. 1989. Critical period effects in second 
language learning: the influence of maturational state on 
the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognit 
Psychol 21:60–99.
Knudsen EI. 2004. Sensitive periods in the development of 
the brain and behavior. J Cogn Neurosci 16:1412–1425.
Kuhl PK. 2000. A new view of language acquisition. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11850–11857.
Kuhl PK, Andruski J, Christovich I, et al. 1997. Cross-language 
analysis of phonetic units in language addressed to 
infants. Science 277:684–686.
Lenneberg E. 1967. Biological Foundations of Language. New 
York: Wiley.
Lesser RP, Arroyo S, Hart J, Gordon B. 1994. Use of sub-
dural electrodes for the study of language functions. In: 
A Kertesz (ed). Localization and Neuro-Imaging in Neuropsy-
chology, pp. 57–72. San Diego: Academic Press.
Liu H-M, Kuhl PK, Tsao F-M. 2003. An association between 
mothers’ speech clarity and infants’ speech discrimina-
tion skills. Dev Sci 6:Fl–F10.
Mamiya PC, Richards TL, Coe BP, Eichler EE, Kuhl PK. 2016. 
Brain white matter structure and COMT gene are linked 
to second-language learning in adults. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 113:7249–7254.
Mills DL, Coffey-Corina SA, Neville HJ. 1993. Language 
acquisition and cerebral specialization in 20-month-old 
infants. J Cogn Neurosci 5:317–334.
Miyawaki K, Jenkins JJ, Strange W, Liberman AM, Verbrugge 
R, Fujimura O. 1975. An effect of linguistic experience: 
the discrimination of /r/ and /l/ by native speakers 
of Japanese and English. Percept Psychophys 18:331–340.
Neville HJ, Coffey SA, Lawson D, Fischer A, Emmorey K, 
Bellugi U. 1997. Neural systems mediating American Sign 
Language: effects of sensory experience and age of acqui-
sition. Brain Lang 57:285–308.
Newport EL, Aslin RN. 2004. Learning at a distance I. 
Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies. Cogn 
Psychol 48:127–162.
Peterson SE, Fox PT, Posner MI, Mintun M, Raichle ME. 1988. 
Positron emission tomographic studies of the cortical 
anatomy of single-word processing. Nature 331:585–589.
Petitto LA, Holowka S, Sergio LE, Levy B, Ostry DJ. 2004. 
Baby hands that move to the rhythm of language: hear-
ing babies acquiring sign language babble silently on the 
hands. Cognition 93:43–73.
Poeppel D. 2014. The neuroanatomic and neurophysiological 
infrastructure for speech and language. Curr Opin Neuro-
biol 28:142–149.
Price CJ. 2012. A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of 
PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken language 
and reading. Neuroimage 62:816–847.
Pulvermüller F, Fadiga L. 2010. Active perception: sensori-
motor circuits as a cortical basis for language. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 11:351–360.
Raizada RD, Richards TL, Meltzoff A, Kuhl PK. 2008. Socio-
economic status predicts hemispheric specialisation of the 
left inferior frontal gyrus in young children. Neuroimage 
40:1392–1401.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 55 / Language    1391
Ramirez-Esparza N, Garcia-Sierra A, Kuhl PK. 2014. Look 
who’s talking: speech style and social context in language 
input are linked to concurrent and future speech develop-
ment. Dev Sci 17:880–891.
Rauschecker JP. 2011. An expanded role for the dorsal audi-
tory pathway in sensorimotor control and integration. 
Hear Res 271:16–25.
Saffran JR, Aslin RN, Newport EL. 1996. Statistical learning 
by 8-month old infants. Science 274:1926–1928.
Saur D, Kreher BW, Schnell S, et al. 2008. Ventral and dor-
sal pathways for language. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
105:18035–18040.
Silva-Pereyra J, Rivera-Gaxiola M, Kuhl PK. 2005. An event 
related brain potential study of sentence comprehension 
in preschoolers: semantic and morphosyntactic process-
ing. Cogn Brain Res 23:247–258.
Skinner BF. 1957. Verbal Behavior. Acton, MA: Copley 
Publishing Group.
Tsao F-M, Liu H-M, Kuhl PK. 2004. Speech perception 
in infancy predicts language development in the sec-
ond year of life: a longitudinal study. Child Dev 75: 
1067–1084.
Weikum WM, Oberlander TF, Hensch TK, Werker JF. 2012. 
Prenatal exposure to antidepressants and depressed 
maternal mood alter trajectory of infant speech percep-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:17221–17227.
Weisleder A, Fernald A. 2013. Talking to children matters: 
early language experience strengthens processing and 
builds vocabulary. Psychol Sci 24:2143–2152.
Wernicke C. 1874. Der Aphasische Symptomenkomplex: Eine 
Psychologische Studie auf Anatomischer Basis. Breslau: Cohn 
und Weigert.
Xu Y, Gandour J, Talavage T, et al. 2006. Activation of the left 
planum temporale in pitch processing is shaped by lan-
guage experience. Hum Brain Mapp 27:173–183.
Yeni-Komshian GH, Flege JE, Liu S. 2000. Pronunciation pro-
ficiency in the first and second languages of Korean–
English bilinguals. Biling Lang Cogn 3:131–149.
Zatorre RJ, Gandour JT. 2008. Neural specializations for 
speech and pitch: moving beyond the dichotomies. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 363:1087–1104.
Zhao TC, Kuhl PK. 2016. Musical intervention enhances 
infants’ neural processing of temporal structure in music 
and speech. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:5212–5217.


===== Page 5 =====
56
Decision-Making and Consciousness
motor output through the higher-order cognitive pro-
cess of decision-making. In doing so, we are afforded 
a glimpse of the building blocks of higher thought and 
consciousness.
Outside neuroscience, the term cognitive typically 
connotes some distinction from reflexes and dedicated 
routines, and yet as we shall see, neuroscience recog-
nizes the rudiments of cognition in simple behaviors 
that display two types of flexibility—contingency and 
freedom from immediacy. Contingency means that a 
stimulus does not command or initiate an action in the 
way it does for a reflex. A stimulus might motivate a 
particular behavior, but the action may be delayed, 
pending additional information, or it may never occur. 
This freedom from immediacy of action means there 
are operations that transpire over time scales that are 
not immediately beholden to changes in the environ-
ment or the real-time demands of control of the body.
Both types of flexibility—contingency and time—
are on display when we make decisions. Of course, 
not all decisions invoke cognition. Many behavioral 
routines—swimming, walking, feeding, and grooming—
have branch points that may be called decisions, but 
they proceed in an orderly manner without much flex-
ibility or control of tempo. They are governed mainly 
by the time steps of nervous transmission and are 
dedicated for the most part to particular input–output 
relationships. The point of drawing these distinctions 
is not to establish sharp boundaries around decision-
making, but to help us focus on aspects of decisions 
that make them a model for cognition.
For present purposes, we will use the following 
definition: A decision is a commitment to a proposi-
tion, action, or plan based on evidence (sensory input), 
Perceptual Discriminations Require a Decision Rule
A Simple Decision Rule Is the Application of a Threshold 
to a Representation of the Evidence
Perceptual Decisions Involving Deliberation  
Mimic Aspects of Real-Life Decisions Involving 
Cognitive Faculties
Neurons in Sensory Areas of the Cortex Supply the Noisy 
Samples of Evidence to Decision-Making
Accumulation of Evidence to a Threshold Explains the Speed 
Versus Accuracy Trade-Off
Neurons in the Parietal and Prefrontal Association Cortex 
Represent a Decision Variable
Perceptual Decision-Making Is a Model for Reasoning From 
Samples of Evidence
Decisions About Preference Use Evidence About Value
Decision-Making Offers a Framework for Understanding 
Thought Processes, States of Knowing, and  
States of Awareness
Consciousness Can be Understood Through the Lens of 
Decision Making
Highlights
I
n the earlier chapters, we have seen how sensory 
input is transformed into neural activity that is 
then processed by the brain to give rise to immedi-
ate percepts and how those percepts can be stored as 
short- and long-term memories (Chapters 52–54). We 
have also examined in detail how movement is con-
trolled by the spinal cord and brain. Here, we begin 
to consider one of the most challenging aspects of 
neuroscience: the transformation of sensory input to 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1393
prior knowledge (memory), and expected outcomes. 
The commitment is provisional. It does not necessitate 
behavior, and it can be modified. We can change our 
mind. The critical component is that some considera-
tion of evidence leads to a change in the state of the 
organism that we liken to a provisional implementa-
tion of an action, strategy, or new mental process.
Such propositions can be represented as a plan 
of action: I decide to turn to the right, to leave safe 
shelter, to look for water, to choose a path least likely 
to encounter a predator, to approach a stranger, or 
to seek information in a book. The concept of a plan 
emphasizes freedom from immediacy. Moreover, not 
all plans come to fruition. Not all thought leads to 
action, but it is useful to conceive of thought as a type 
of plan of action. This view invites us to consider know-
ing as the result of directed—mostly nonconscious—
interrogation, rather than an emergent property of 
neural representations.
Decision-making has been studied in simple organ-
isms, notably worms, flies, bees, and leeches, as well as 
in mammals from mice to primates. Simpler organisms 
are appealing because they have smaller nervous sys-
tems, but they lack the behavioral repertory required 
to study decisions that entail forms of cognition. The 
hope is that the biological insights from these species 
will inform our understanding of the processes char-
acterized in mammals, especially primates. This is a 
laudable goal because, to paraphrase Plato, decision-
making offers our best shot at carving cognitive func-
tion at its joints—to identify the common principles 
that support its normal function and to elucidate their 
mechanisms so they may be repaired in disease.
In this chapter, we focus primarily on perceptual 
decisions made by primates in contrived settings. The 
principles extend naturally to reasoning from evidence 
and to value-based decisions concerning preference. In 
the last part of the chapter, we derive insights about 
broader aspects of cognition. Viewed through the 
lens of decision-making, brain states associated with 
knowing and being consciously aware may be closer 
to a neurobiological explanation than is commonly 
thought.
Perceptual Discriminations Require  
a Decision Rule
Until recently, decision-making was studied primarily 
by economists and political scientists. However, psy-
chologists and neuroscientists working in the field of 
perception have been long concerned with decisions. 
Indeed, the simplest type of decision involves the 
detection of a weak stimulus, such as a dim light or a 
faint sound, odor, or touch. The decision a subject must 
make is whether or not the stimulus is present—yes 
or no. In the laboratory, there is no uncertainty about 
where and when the stimulus is likely to be present. 
Such experiments were therefore used to infer the fun-
damental sensitivities of a sensory system from behav-
ior, a subfield of psychology known as psychophysics. 
Detection experiments played a role in inferring signal-
to-noise properties of sensory neurons that transduce 
light touch, faint sounds, and dim lights. In the last 
case, such experiments provided evidence that the 
visual system is capable of detecting the dimmest of 
light, a single photon, subject to background noise of 
photoreceptors. In other words, it is as efficient as pos-
sible, given the laws of physics.
The psychophysical investigation of perception 
began with Ernst Weber and Gustav Fechner in the 
19th century. They were interested in measuring the 
smallest detectable difference in intensity between 
two sensory stimuli. Such measurements can reveal 
fundamental principles of sensory processing with-
out ever recording from a neuron. It turns out they 
also lay the foundation for the neuroscience of decision-
making, because every yes/no answer is a choice 
based on the sensory evidence.
In Chapter 17, we learned how psychophysicists 
conceptualize the detection problem (Box 17–1). On 
any one trial, the state of the world is either stimulus 
present or stimulus absent. The decision is based on 
a sample of noisy evidence. If the stimulus is present, 
the evidence is a random sample drawn from the prob-
ability distribution of signal + noise. If the stimulus 
is absent, the evidence is a sample from the noise-
only distribution (Figure 56–1A). The brain does not 
directly perceive a stimulus but receives a neural rep-
resentation of the sample. As a result, some of the noise 
arises from the neural activity involved in forming this 
representation. It is the job of the brain to decide from 
which distribution the sample came, using informa-
tion encoded in neural firing rates. However, the brain 
does not have access to the distributions, just the one 
sample involved in each given decision. It is the sepa-
ration of these distributions—the degree that they do 
not overlap—that determines the discriminability of a 
stimulus from noise. The decision rule is to say “yes” if 
the evidence exceeds some criterion or threshold.
A Simple Decision Rule Is the Application of a 
Threshold to a Representation of the Evidence
The criterion instantiates the decision-maker’s policy 
or strategy. If the criterion is lax—that is, the threshold 


===== Page 7 =====
1394    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–1  The framework of signal detection theory  
formalizes the relationship between evidence and deci-
sions. In panels A through C, we consider simple yes–no 
decisions in which a decision-maker receives just one 
measurement.
A. The height of the curves represents the probability of 
observing a measurement on the x-axis (be it number of spikes 
per second, radioactive counts, or blood pressure) under two 
conditions: signal present or absent. In both cases, the meas-
urement is variable, giving rise to the spread of possible values 
associated with the two conditions. If the signal is present, the 
decision-maker receives a random sample from the Signal + 
noise probability distribution (red). If the signal is absent, the 
decision-maker receives a sample from the Noise only prob-
ability distribution (blue). The decision arises by comparing the 
measure to a criterion, or threshold, and answering yes or no, 
signal is present or absent, if the value is greater or less than 
the criterion.
B. The criterion is an expression of policy, as illustrated in medi-
cal decision-making. Suppose the measure is derived from 
calcifications detected in a screening mammogram—a score 
combining number, density, and shape. The criterion 1 (left line) 
for interpreting the test as a positive or negative (breast cancer 
or not) is liberal. It leads to many false positives (83%), but very 
few women with cancer receive a negative result. Criterion 
2 (right line) is conservative. It would miss many cases of 
cancer, but it would rarely render a positive result to a healthy 
person. That would make sense if a positive decision were 
rationale for a dangerous (or painful) procedure.
C. The receiver operating characteristic shows the combination 
of proportions of “yes” decisions that are correct (hit rate) and 
incorrect (false alarm rate) for all possible criteria. The liberal 
and conservative criteria are shown by the black and gray  
symbols, respectively.
D. The framework also applies to decisions between two alter-
natives. Here, the decision is whether a vibration applied to the 
index finger has a higher frequency than a vibration applied a 
few seconds before. The same depiction of overlapping distri-
butions might conform to neural responses from some part of 
the brain that represents a sensory stimulus. For example, a 
neuron in the somatosensory cortex might respond over many 
individual trials with a higher average spike rate to vibratory 
stimulation of the finger at 23 Hz than stimulation at 20 Hz. 
However, the distributions overlap so that on any given presen-
tation we cannot say with 100% certainty whether the vibration 
was at 20 Hz or 23 Hz based on the neuron’s response.
A
Measured quantity
False alarm rate
Criterion 2
Criterion 1
B
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Calcium density score
D
C
Firing rate
Healthy
Cancer
20 Hz
ﬂutter
23 Hz
ﬂutter
Noise
only
Signal
+ noise
Hit rate


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1395
is low—the decision-maker will rarely fail to detect the 
stimulus, but they will often respond “yes” on the tri-
als when there was no stimulus because the background 
noise exceeds the threshold. This type of error is called 
a false alarm. If the criterion is more conservative—that 
is, the threshold is high—the decision-maker will rarely 
say “yes” when the stimulus is absent but will often say 
“no” when the stimulus is present. This type of error is 
called a miss. The appropriate criterion depends on the 
relative cost of the two types of errors and also on the 
design of the experiment. For example, if the stimulus 
is present on 90% of trials, then a lax criterion might be 
warranted since false alarms will be rare.
The policy ought to be influenced by a value or 
cost associated with making correct and incorrect deci-
sions. For example, in medical diagnosis, it is often the 
case that a disease affects only a small fraction of the 
population, but a diagnostic test does not discrimi-
nate perfectly between people with and without the 
disease. We can illustrate this using the distribution of 
mammogram calcification scores. The scores are larger 
in women with breast cancer than in healthy women, 
but the range of values overlaps to an extent, implying 
that the test is not perfect (Figure 56–1B).
In this situation, a lax criterion might seem prob-
lematic because it would produce a large number of 
false alarms: patients who are healthy but told they 
might have a disease based on the test. However, it 
may well be the case that a miss is life threatening, 
whereas a false alarm leads to a stressful week as the 
patient awaits a more decisive test. In this situation, 
it is actually sensible to apply a lax criterion even if it 
leads to many false alarms. Alternatively, a false alarm 
may trigger a painful or risky procedure, in which case 
a more stringent criterion would be more appropriate. 
The medical analogy allows us to appreciate the strate-
gic roles of the criterion setting. We praise and criticize 
decision-makers based on their policy, not on the noisy 
imperfections of the measurements.
The important point is that the criterion represents 
a decision rule, which instantiates knowledge about 
the problem and an attitude about the positive value 
associated with making correct choices (hits and cor-
rect rejections) and the negative value of making errors 
(misses and false alarms). Note that the application of 
different criteria does not change the fundamental char-
acteristic of the evidence samples that is responsible for 
the accuracy of decisions. This is reflected by the over-
lap between the blue and red distributions, which does 
not change if a decision-maker adjusts her criterion. 
The curve in Figure 56–1C, termed the receiver oper-
ating characteristic (ROC), shows how changing the 
criterion affects the accuracy of the decision whether a 
stimulus (or cancer) is present or absent for all possible 
criteria. Each point on the curve is an ordered pair of the 
probability of a correct “yes” response (hits) versus an 
erroneous “yes” response (false alarms) associated with 
a given criterion (threshold). The ROC tells us some-
thing about the reliability of the measurement (ie, the 
separation between the two distributions) regardless 
of how the decision-maker uses it. The criterion tells us 
something about the decision-maker’s policy. It bears on 
why two decision-makers receiving the same evidence 
might reach different decisions. Indeed, it is the policy, 
not the noise, that the decision-maker controls and for 
which she may be praised or criticized, that is, held 
responsible. We will think about this topic again when 
we discuss the trade-off between speed and accuracy.
The challenge for neuroscience is to relate the terms 
signal, noise, and criterion to neural representations of 
sensory information and operations upon those repre-
sentations that result in a choice. We will develop these 
connections in subsequent sections. Here, we wish 
to seed an important insight about the term noise as 
it pertains to the neural representations of evidence. 
Decision-makers do not make the same decision even 
when confronting repetitions of identical facts or 
sensory stimuli. Some variability at some stage must 
creep into the process. The distinction between signal 
and noise need not devolve into scholastic arguments 
about chance and determinism. Any source of vari-
ance in the representation of the evidence is effectively 
noise if it is responsible for errors. If the brain did not 
distinguish such variability from the signal and thus 
made a mistake, we would be justified in construing 
this variability as unaccounted by the decision-maker.
Perceptual Decisions Involving Deliberation  
Mimic Aspects of Real-Life Decisions Involving 
Cognitive Faculties
The neural bases for more cognitive decisions have 
been examined by extending simple perceptual deci-
sions in three ways: first, by moving beyond detection 
to a choice between two or more competing alterna-
tives; second, by requiring the decision process to take 
time by involving consideration of many samples of 
evidence; and third, by considering decisions about 
matters involving values and preferences.
Vernon Mountcastle was the first to study per-
ceptual decisions as a choice between two alterna-
tive interpretations of a sensory stimulus. He trained 
monkeys to make a categorical decision about the 
frequency of a fluttering pressure applied lightly to a 
fingertip (Figure 56–2). Since the vibratory flutter has 
an intensity that is easily detected, the decision is not 


===== Page 9 =====
1396    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–2  The discrimination of flutter-vibration fre-
quency was the first perceptual decision studied in the cen-
tral nervous system. A 20-Hz vibratory stimulus is applied to 
the finger on the right hand; following a delay period of several 
seconds, a second vibratory stimulus is applied. The monkey 
indicates whether the second vibration (f2) was at a higher or 
lower frequency than that of the first stimulus (f1) by pushing 
the left or right button with the other hand. The plots show that 
the proportion of trials in which the monkey decided that the 
comparison stimulus was greater than the reference depended 
on the magnitude and sign of the difference. With larger differ-
ences, the monkey almost always chose correctly, but when 
the difference was small, the choices were often incorrect. 
(Adapted from Romo and Salinas 2001.)
about whether the stimulus is present or absent but 
whether the vibration rate is fast or slow. On every trial 
of the experiment, the monkey experienced a reference 
frequency, f1, equal to 20 cycles per second (Hz). The 
pressure cycles are too fast to count; they feel more like 
a buzzing. The reference was then turned off, and after 
a few seconds, a second test stimulus, f2, was applied. 
The frequency of f2 was chosen from a range of values 
from 10 to 30 Hz. The monkey was rewarded for indi-
cating whether the test frequency was higher or lower 
than the f1 reference.
We can represent the process conceptually using the 
same type of signal and noise distributions we drew for 
the detection problem (Figure 56–1D). Here, the “noise-
only” distribution represents a quantity that is sampled 
in association with the 20-Hz reference, whereas the red 
distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in 
association with a test stimulus with a flutter frequency 
10
15
20
25
30
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency of comparison stimulus (Hz)
Base (f1)
Comparison (f2)
Percent
of choices
f2 > f1
500 ms
500 ms
f1=20 Hz
Stimulator
Push buttons
Push
button
greater than 20 Hz. Mountcastle favored the idea that the 
brain obtained two samples of evidence—one accompa-
nying the 20-Hz reference and the second from the test. 
The decision, higher or lower, could arise by evaluating 
the inequality—greater than or less than—or, equiva-
lently, by subtracting the two samples and answering 
based on the sign of the difference. This was a terrific 
insight, but the neural recordings were out of step with 
the theory. Mountcastle’s neural recordings explained 
the monkey’s ability to detect vibratory stimulation as 
a function of intensity and frequency (Chapter 17)—a 
yes/no decision—but they were unable to explain the 
mechanism for the comparison between the two alter-
natives, whether f2 is greater or less than f1.
Two key elements were missing. First, to evaluate f2 
versus f1, the brain needs a representation of frequency. 
Mountcastle found neurons in the somatosensory cortex 
and thalamus with firing rates that were phase-locked 
to frequencies of the flutter, and they could measure the 
reliability of this frequency locking, but they did not 
find neurons that were tuned to particular frequencies 
less than or greater than 20 Hz. Second, both represen-
tations need to be available at the same time in order 
to compare them. However, the neural responses to f1 
lasted only as long as the flutter vibration. Mountcas-
tle failed to observe neural responses that conveyed the 
representation of the reference frequency through the 
delay period up to the time that the test stimulus was 
presented. It was therefore impossible to study the neu-
ral operations corresponding to the decision process, 
which seemed to require some trace of the reference 
stimulus during analysis of the test.
These obstacles were overcome using a simpler 
task design and a different sensory modality. Inspired 
by Mountcastle, William Newsome trained monkeys 
to decide whether a field of dynamic random dots had 
a tendency to move in one direction or its opposite (eg, 
left or right). The random dot motion stimulus is con-
structed such that at one easy extreme all dots share the 
same direction of motion, say to the right. At the other 
easy extreme, all dots move to the left, and in between, 
the direction can be difficult to discern because many 
dots contribute only noise (Figure 56–3A).
Unlike the flutter vibration task, where a decision 
is rendered difficult by making the comparison fre-
quencies more similar, the two directions of motion 
remain fixed and opposite for all levels of difficulty. 
The two directions were rendered less distinct by 
degrading the signal-to-noise ratio of the random dots. 
Each random dot appears only briefly, and then either 
reappears at a random location or at a displacement to 
support a consistent direction and speed. The probabil-
ity of the latter (displacement) determines the motion 


