===== Page 1 =====
836    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–11  Premotor cortex neurons in the monkey 
choose particular voluntary behaviors based on decisional 
rules. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wallis and Miller 2003.)
A. A monkey must make a decision about whether to release 
a lever or keep holding it based on two prior decisions: a per-
ceptual choice, whether a test image is the same as or differ-
ent from a sample image presented earlier, and a behavioral 
choice, whether the current rule is to release the lever when 
the test image is the same as the sample (match rule) or when 
it is different (nonmatch rule). The monkey is informed of the 
behavioral rule that applies in each trial by a rule cue, such as an 
auditory tone or juice drops, which is presented for 100 ms at 
the same time as the onset of the sample image at the start of 
the trial.
B. A neuron in the dorsal premotor cortex has a higher discharge 
rate whenever the nonmatch rule is in effect during the delay 
between the presentation of the first and second images. The 
responses to two different sample images (upper and lower 
plots) were recorded from the same cell, indicating that the rule-
dependent activity is not altered by changing the images. Nor, 
as shown by the pairs of curves associated with each rule, does 
activity depend on the type of rule cue (auditory tone or juice 
drops). (Tone cue trials: orange and blue curves; juice cue trials: 
red and black curves). Other dorsal premotor cortex cells (not 
shown) respond preferentially to the match rule over the non-
match rule. The differential activity of the neuron up to presenta-
tion of the test image reflects the rule that will guide the animal’s 
motor response to the test image, not the physical properties of 
the visual stimuli or the motor response.
A  Delayed match-to-sample task
B  Premotor neurons show rule-dependent activity
+
Match 
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Match
rule 
Nonmatch
rule
Sample image
Delay 
Test image 1
Delay
Test image 2
40
20
0
40
20
0
Firing rate (Hz)
0
800
2300
Response time (ms)
+
+
+
+
+
Nonmatch 
(hold)
Nonmatch 
(release)
Nonmatch 
(release)
Match 
(hold)
 Match
(release)
Match
(release)
Match
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Match
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Rule for 
release
Sample image A
Sample image B
Delay 
Rule 
cue
Test 
image 1
Sample 
image
presented; (4) compare f2 to the memory trace of f1; 
(5) decide whether the frequency of f2 is higher or 
lower than that of f1; and finally, (6) use that decision 
to choose the appropriate movement of the other hand. 
Everything prior to the last step would appear to fall 
entirely within the domain of sensory discriminative 
processing.
While the monkeys performed the task, neurons 
in the primary (S-I) and secondary (S-II) somatosen-
sory cortices encoded the frequencies of the stimuli 
while they were presented. During the interval 
between f1 and f2, there was no sustained activity in 
S-I representing the memorized f1 and only a tran-
sient representation in S-II, which vanished before f2 
was presented.
Strikingly, however, the activity of many neurons 
in the prefrontal cortex, SMC, and PMv scaled with 
the frequencies of f1 and f2 while they were being 
delivered. Furthermore, some prefrontal and premo-
tor neurons showed sustained activity proportional to 
the frequency of f1 during the delay period between f1 
and f2. Most remarkably, many neurons in those areas, 
especially in PMv, encoded the difference in frequency 
between f2 and f1 independently of their actual fre-
quencies when f2 was delivered (Figure 34–13). This 
centrally generated signal is appropriate to mediate 
the perceptual discrimination that determines which 
button to push. Neurons that encoded the f2–f1 differ-
ence were absent in S-I and were far more common in 
SMC and PMv than in S-II.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    837
Figure 34–12  Some neurons in the ventral premotor cortex 
of a monkey discharge selectively during one type of grasp-
ing.  This neuron discharges vigorously during a precision grip 
with the thumb and index finger of either the right or the left hand 
but very weakly during whole-hand prehension with either hand. 
Raster plots and histograms are aligned (vertical line) with the 
moment the monkey touches the food (A) or grasps the handle 
(B). (Reproduced, with permission, from Rizzolatti et al. 1988. 
Copyright © Springer-Verlag 1988.)
0
10
15
0
10
15
Ventral 
premotor area
Contralateral hand
Ipsilateral hand
A  Precision grip
B  Whole-hand prehension
1 s
Several Cortical Motor Areas Are Active When the 
Motor Actions of Others Are Being Observed
Some premotor and parietal areas can be activated 
when no overt action is intended, such as when an 
individual is asked to imagine performing a certain 
motor act. This phenomenon, termed motor imagery, 
has been demonstrated in humans using functional 
brain imaging. The neural activity evoked by motor 
imagery presumably reflects brain mechanisms associ-
ated with motor planning and preparation that have 
been disassociated from its overt execution.
A second condition in which cortical motor cir-
cuits are activated without intending overt action is 
when an individual observes another individual per-
forming motor acts that are part of her own motor 
repertoire. The control of behavior and social interac-
tion depends greatly on the ability to recognize and 
understand what others are doing and why they are 
doing it. Such understanding could result from a high-
order visual perceptual analysis of the nature of the 
observed behavior and by drawing inferences about 
the motivation and purpose of the behavior based on 


===== Page 3 =====
838    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–13  (Right) Neural activity in ventral premo-
tor cortex in monkeys expresses the operations required 
to choose a motor response based on sensory informa-
tion. (Adapted, with permission, from Romo, Hernández, and 
Zainos 2004. Copyright © 2004 Cell Press.)
A. These records of three neurons in the ventral premotor 
cortex of a monkey were made while the animal performed a 
task in which it had to decide whether the second of two vibra-
tion stimuli (f1 and f2, applied to the index finger of one hand) 
was of higher or lower frequency than the first. The choice was 
signaled by pushing one of two buttons with the nonstimu-
lated hand. The frequencies of f1 and f2 are indicated by the 
numbers on the left of each set of raster plots. Cell 1 encoded 
the frequencies of both f1 and f2 while the stimuli were being 
presented but was not active at any other time. This response 
profile resembles that of many neurons in the primary soma-
tosensory cortex. Cell 2 encoded the frequency of f1 and 
sustained its response during the delay period. During the 
presentation of f2, the neuron’s response was enhanced when 
f1 was higher than f2 and suppressed when it was lower. Cell 3 
responded to f1 during stimulation and was weakly active dur-
ing the delay period. However, during exposure to f2, the cell’s 
activity robustly signaled the difference f2–f1 independently of 
the specific frequencies f1 and f2.
B. Histograms show the percentage of neurons in different 
cortical areas whose activity correlated at each instant with dif-
ferent parameters during the tactile discrimination task. Green 
shows the correlation with f1, red the correlation with f2, black 
the interaction between f1and f2, and blue the correlation 
with the difference between f2–f1. (Abbreviations: M1, primary 
motor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; S-I, primary soma-
tosensory cortex; S-II, secondary somatosensory cortex; SMA, 
supplementary motor area.)
S-I
S-II
PMv
SMA
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
40
0
20
Time (s)
M1
Percentage of neurons
26:34
22:30
18:26
14:22
10:18
34:26
30:22
26:18
22:14
18:10
f1
f2
A
B
f2 < f1
f2 > f1
f2 < f1
f2 > f1
f2 < f1
f2 > f1
26:34
22:30
18:26
14:22
10:18
34:26
30:22
26:18
22:14
18:10
26:34
22:30
18:26
14:22
10:18
34:26
30:22
26:18
22:14
18:10
Cell 1
Cell 2
Cell 3
0
30
0
25
0
45
one’s own experience. An alternative explanation is 
the direct-matching hypothesis, the idea that observation 
of the actions of others activates motor circuits in the 
observer that control similar motor actions. Accord-
ing to this hypothesis, empathetic activation of motor 
circuits could provide a link between the observed 
actions and the observer’s stored knowledge of the 
nature, motives, and consequences of similar actions 
that they had performed in the past.
Striking evidence in support of the direct-matching 
hypothesis was provided by the discovery of a remark-
able population of neurons called mirror neurons, first 
in PMv and later in the parietal AIP of monkeys. Mir-
ror neurons discharge both when the monkey actively 
grasps and manipulates objects and when it observes 
similar actions performed by another monkey or the 
experimenter (Figure 34–14). Mirror neurons typically 
do not respond when a monkey simply observes a 
potential target object or when it observes mimed arm 
and hand actions without a target object. Some parietal 
mirror neurons can even differentiate the ultimate goal 
of similar observed actions, such as grasping and pick-
ing up food to eat it versus putting it into a cup.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    839
Figure 34–14  A mirror neuron in the ventral premotor cortex 
(area F5) of a monkey. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Rizzolatti et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 Elsevier Science B.V.)
A. The neuron is active when the monkey grasps an object.
B. The same neuron is also excited when the monkey observes 
another monkey grasping the object.
C. The neuron is similarly activated when the monkey observes 
the human experimenter grasping the object.
    Time zero in the cell activity rasters corresponds approxi-
mately to the time of presentation of the object to grasp (panel 
A) or the onset of the observed grasping actions (panels B  
and C).
Neural-recording and brain-imaging studies show 
that humans are also endowed with a mirror-like mecha-
nism to match observed actions with actions encoded in 
their motor system. This activity arises in various areas of 
cortex, including the rostral inferior parietal lobule, IPS, 
PMv, and posterior sector of the inferior frontal gyrus.
Cortical motor circuits appear to be involved in 
understanding and predicting the outcomes of observed 
events. In one experiment, PMd neurons implicated 
in the selection of reaching targets using visual cues 
(Figure 34–8) also discharged when monkeys sim-
ply watched the same cues and cursor motions on the 
monitor while an unseen party performed the task. The 
monkeys received a free juice reward when the cursor 
moved to the correct target but not if it moved to the 
wrong target. The monkeys began to lick the juice tube 
shortly after the cursor started to move to the correct 
target well before the juice was actually delivered, but 
A
B
C
0.5
0
1.0
1.5 s
quickly removed their mouth from the tube when the 
cursor moved toward the wrong target. This behavior 
showed that the monkeys correctly interpreted what 
they saw and accurately predicted its consequences.
Remarkably, the activity of most of the task-
related PMd neurons was strikingly similar whether 
the monkeys used visual cues to plan and make arm 
movements or simply observed the visual events 
and predicted their outcome. Those neurons stopped 
responding during observation if no reward was deliv-
ered after correct trials or if the animal was sated and 
not interested in drinking juice. This showed that the 
neurons were not simply responding to the sensory 
inputs, but instead were processing the observed sen-
sory events to predict their ultimate outcome for the 
monkey, namely the likelihood of a free juice reward.
This activation in connection with passive obser-
vation supports the idea that activation of premotor 


===== Page 5 =====
840    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–15  Visuomotor processing of object shape is 
distributed across several cortical areas in the monkey.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Schaffelhofer and  
Scherberger 2016.)
A. A set of “mixed” objects elicit different visual responses 
and require different motor responses to grasp them. The plots 
show the percentages of neurons in the anterior intraparietal 
areas (AIP; orange), ventral premotor cortex (PMv; F5; dark 
green), and primary motor cortex (M1; light green) that signifi-
cantly modulated their response as a function of object identity 
across time. Monkeys were first shown the object to grasp 
(cue and planning periods) and then allowed to reach to, grasp, 
and hold the object (grasp and hold periods). The proportion 
of neurons that varied their activity across object types (tuned 
neurons) during the cue and planning periods was greatest in 
AIP and least in M1, indicating that sensitivity to object visual 
shape was most prominent in AIP. During motor action (grasp 
and hold periods), the reverse pattern was observed, with 
many neurons in PMv and especially M1 displaying a strong 
dependence on the different grasping actions required to hold 
onto the different objects.
B. A set of “abstract” objects elicit different visual responses 
but require similar motor responses to grasp them. As with the 
“mixed” object set, many AIP neurons varied their activity as a 
function of object shape during the cue and planning periods, 
but fewer PMv and almost no M1 neurons showed sensitivity 
to observed object shape. During motor action (grasp and hold 
periods), very few PMv and M1 neurons showed any difference 
in activity as a function of the shape of the different objects, all 
of which required the same grasping action.
circuits in nonmotor contexts may contribute to under-
standing the nature and consequences of observed 
events in the environment. It has also been implicated 
in the ability of human subjects to learn new motor 
skills simply by observing a skilled person perform 
the same actions. Moreover, dysfunction of the mirror-
neuron system in young children may contribute to 
some of the symptoms of autism.
Many Aspects of Voluntary Control Are Distributed 
Across Parietal and Premotor Cortex
While we have described the roles of premotor areas 
in parietal and precentral cortex separately, it must be 
PMv
AIP
M1
A  Mixed objects
B  Abstract objects
–0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
10
20
30
50
40
60
70
Cue
Planning
Tuned neurons (%)
Time (s)
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Grasp
Hold
Grasp
Hold
–0.4
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
0
10
20
30
50
40
60
70
Cue
Planning
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
AIP
PMv
M1
Time (s)
emphasized that major sensorimotor control processes 
are shared across multiple cortical regions via their 
reciprocal interconnections.
For instance, the neural processes that link the 
physical affordances of target objects to appropri-
ate hand actions are distributed across parietal area 
AIP, premotor area PMv, and M1, with visuospatial 
aspects of the process more prominent in AIP and 
motor components more prevalent in precentral cor-
tex (Figure 34–15). Likewise, as already noted, neu-
ral correlates of reach target selection in PRR (Figure 
34–8B) strikingly resemble those reported in PMd 
(Figure 34–8A).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    841
The Primary Motor Cortex Plays an Important 
Role in Motor Execution
Once an individual has decided on a behavioral goal, 
motor commands must then be communicated to mus-
cles to move the body. The complexity of this problem 
cannot be underestimated as it requires precise control 
of the spatiotemporal patterns of activity of large num-
bers of muscles acting across many joints to achieve 
the behavioral goal, while also accounting for the com-
plex, nonlinear mechanical properties of the musculo-
skeletal system and forces and loads imposed by the 
environment. These detailed patterns of muscle activity 
are coordinated by spinal motor neurons and interneu-
ronal circuits (Chapter 32). However, the primary motor 
cortex (M1) plays an important role in generating the 
motor commands that control that spinal activity, 
including essential information necessary to select and 
control the timing and magnitude of muscle activity.
The Primary Motor Cortex Includes a Detailed Map 
of the Motor Periphery
The idea that a local region of the cerebral cortex con-
tains a motor map of the body dedicated to voluntary 
motor control dates back to the work of the English 
neurologist John Hughlings Jackson in the middle of 
the 19th century. He reached this conclusion while 
treating patients with epileptic seizures that were 
characterized by recurring spasmodic involuntary 
movements that sometimes resembled fragments of 
purposive voluntary actions and that progressed sys-
tematically to include different parts of the body dur-
ing each seizure episode (Chapter 58). Later in the 19th 
century, improved anesthesia and aseptic surgical tech-
niques allowed direct experimental study of the cer-
ebral cortex in experimental animals. Using those new 
methods, Gustav Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig in Berlin 
and David Ferrier in England showed that electrical 
stimulation of the surface of a limited area of cortex 
in different anesthetized mammalian species evoked 
movements of parts of the contralateral body. In mon-
keys, the electric currents needed to evoke movements 
were lowest in a narrow strip along the rostral bank of 
the central sulcus, the same region now called primary 
motor cortex.
Their experiments demonstrated that within this 
strip of tissue stimulation of adjacent sites evoked 
movements in adjacent body parts, starting with the 
foot, leg, and tail medially, and proceeding to the 
trunk, arm, hand, face, mouth, and tongue more later-
ally. When they lesioned a cortical site at which stimu-
lation had evoked movements of a part of the body, 
movement of that body part was perturbed or lost 
after the animal recovered from surgery. These early 
experiments showed that the motor cortex contains 
an orderly motor map of major parts of the contralat-
eral body and that the integrity of the motor map is 
necessary for voluntary control of the corresponding 
body parts. Studies in the first half of the 20th century 
on many species by Clinton Woolsey and on humans 
undergoing surgery by Wilder Penfield demonstrated 
that the general topographic organization of the rostral 
bank of the central sulcus is conserved across many 
species (Figure 34–16). One important observation 
was that the motor map is not an exact point-to-point 
reproduction of the body’s anatomical form. Instead, 
the most finely controlled body parts, such as the fin-
gers, face, and mouth, are represented by dispropor-
tionately large areas, reflecting the larger number of 
neurons needed for fine motor control.
Today the best-studied regions of the map are 
those parts controlling the arm and hand and reveal 
far more complexity than conveyed in the classic 
diagrams shown in Figure 34–16A,B. First, neurons 
controlling the muscles of the digits, hand, and dis-
tal arm tend to be concentrated within a central zone, 
whereas those controlling more proximal arm mus-
cles are located in a horseshoe-shaped ring around the 
central core (Figure 34–16C). Second, stimulation sites 
overlap extensively, allowing control of muscles acting 
across different joints; conversely, each muscle can be 
activated by stimulating many sites dispersed across 
the arm/hand motor map. Finally, local horizontal 
axonal connections link different sites across the motor 
map, likely allowing coordination of activity across the 
map during the formation of motor commands.
Some Neurons in the Primary Motor Cortex Project 
Directly to Spinal Motor Neurons
As already noted, while many corticospinal axons in 
primates terminate only on spinal interneurons, others 
also synapse directly onto spinal motor neurons. These 
corticomotoneuronal (CM) cells are found only in the 
most caudal part of M1 that lies within the anterior 
bank of the central sulcus. There is extensive overlap 
in the distribution of the CM cells that project to the 
spinal motor neuron pools innervating different mus-
cles (Figure 34–17A).
CM cells are very rare or absent in nonprimate 
species and become a progressively larger component 
of the corticospinal tract in primate phylogeny from 
prosimians to monkeys, great apes, and humans. In 
monkeys, more CM cells project to the motor pools 
for muscles of the digits, hand, and wrist than to 


===== Page 7 =====
842    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–16  The motor cortex contains a topographic map 
of motor output to different parts of the body.
A. Studies by Clinton Woolsey and colleagues confirmed that the 
representation of different body parts in the monkey follows an 
orderly plan. Motor output to the foot and leg is medial, whereas 
the arm, face, and mouth areas are more lateral. The areas of cor-
tex controlling the foot, hand, and mouth are much larger than the 
regions controlling other parts of the body.
B. Wilder Penfield and colleagues showed that the human 
motor cortex motor map has the same general mediolateral 
organization as in the monkey. However, the areas control-
ling the hand and mouth are even larger than in monkeys, 
whereas the area controlling the foot is much smaller. Penfield 
emphasized that this cartoon illustrated the relative size of the 
representation of each body part in the motor map; he did not 
claim that each body part was controlled by a single separate 
part of the motor map.
C. The arm motor map in monkeys has a concentric, horse-
shoe-shaped organization. Neurons that control the distal 
arm (digits and wrist) are concentrated in a central core (pale 
green) surrounded by neurons that control the proximal arm 
(elbow and shoulder; dark green). The neuron populations that 
control the distal and proximal parts of the arm overlap exten-
sively in a zone of proximal-distal co-facilitation (intermediate 
green). (Reproduced, with permission, from Park et al. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Society for Neuroscience.)
Face
Trunk and 
hindlimb
Crown of
central sulcus
Central sulcus
Primary 
motor 
cortex
Forelimb 
representation: 
Proximal
Proximal-distal
cofacilitation
Distal
Fundus
2 mm
Medial
Lateral
Ankle
Knee
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Fingers
Index
Thumb
Neck
Brow
Eyelid and eyeball
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
Toes
[—
–V
oc
ali
za
ti
on
–—
] 
[
M
a
st
ic
at
io
n
]
 
[
S
ali
va
ti
o
n
]
 
B  Human
A  Macaque monkey
C  Forelimb representation


===== Page 8 =====
Figure 34–17  Corticomotoneuronal cells activate complex 
muscle patterns through divergent connections with spinal 
motor neurons that innervate different arm muscles.
A. Corticomotoneuronal (CM) cells, which project monosynap-
tically to spinal motor neurons, are located almost exclusively 
within the anterior bank of the central sulcus in the caudal 
part of the primary motor cortex (M1). The CM cells that con-
trol a single hand muscle are widely distributed throughout 
the arm motor map, and there is extensive overlap of the 
distribution of neurons projecting to different hand muscles. 
The distributions of the cell bodies of CM cells that project 
to the spinal motor pools that innervate the adductor pollicis, 
abductor pollicis longus, and extensor digitorum communis 
(shown on the right) illustrate this pattern of wide distribution 
and extensive overlap of CM cells projecting to different mus-
cles. (Abbreviations: M, medial; R, rostral.) (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Rathelot and Strick 2006.)
B. A single CM axon terminal is shown arborized in the ventral 
horn of one segment of the spinal cord. It forms synapses 
with the spinal motor neuron pools of four different intrinsic 
hand muscles (yellow and blue zones), as well as with sur-
rounding interneuronal networks. Each axon has several such 
terminal arborizations distributed along several spinal seg-
ments. (Reproduced, with permission, from Shinoda, Yokota, 
and Futami 1981.)
C. Different colonies of CM cells in the primary motor cortex 
terminate on different combinations of spinal interneuron 
networks and spinal motor pools, thus activating different 
combinations of agonist and antagonist muscles. Many other 
corticospinal axons terminate only on spinal interneurons (not 
shown). The figure shows CM projections largely onto extensor 
motor neuron pools. Flexor motor pools receive similar com-
plex projections (not shown). (Adapted, with permission, from 
Cheney, Fetz, and Palmer 1985.)
M1
Crown of the
central sulcus
Adductor 
pollicis
2 mm
A
C
Extensor
motor neuron
pools
Flexor motor 
neuron pools
Inhibitory
interneurons
M1
Anterior bank of
the central sulcus
B
Abductor 
pollicis
longus
Extensor
digitorum
longus
Corticomotoneuron
cell clusters
M
R


===== Page 9 =====
844    Part V / Movement
The effects of primary motor cortex (M1) lesions differ 
across species. Large lesions in cats do not cause paraly-
sis; the animals can move and walk on a flat open sur-
face. However, they have severe difficulties using visual 
information to navigate within a complex environment, 
avoid obstacles, or climb the rungs of a ladder. In cats, 
the pyramidal tract neurons in M1 are much more 
strongly activated when an animal must modify its nor-
mal stepping motion to clear an obstacle under visual 
guidance than during normal unimpeded locomotion 
over a flat, featureless surface (Chapter 33).
Large M1 lesions in monkeys have more drastic 
consequences, including initial paralysis and usually 
the permanent loss of independent movements of the 
thumb and fingers. Monkeys nevertheless recover some 
ability to make clumsy movements of the hands and 
arms and to walk and climb.
More focal lesions of M1 typically result in mus-
cle weakness, slowing and imprecision of movements, 
and discoordination of multi-joint motions, perhaps as 
a result of selective perturbations of the control circuitry 
for specific muscles or muscle groups. Lesions limited 
to part of the motor map, such as the contralateral arm, 
leg, or face, lead to paralysis of that body part. There 
is diminished use of the affected body part, and move-
ments of the distal extremities are much more affected 
than those of the proximal arm and trunk.
The severity of the deficits also depends on the 
level of required skill. Control of fine motor skills, such 
as independent movements of the fingers and hand and 
precision grip, is abolished. Any residual control of the 
fingers and the hand is usually reduced to clumsy, claw-
like, synchronous flexion and extension motions of all 
fingers, not unlike the unskilled grasps of young infants. 
Remaining motor functions, such as postural activity, 
locomotion, reaching, and grasping objects with the 
whole hand, are often clumsy.
In humans, large motor cortex lesions are particu-
larly devastating, resulting in severe motor deficits or 
complete paralysis of affected body parts, usually with 
limited potential for recovery. This presumably reflects 
the increased importance in humans of descending sig-
nals from M1 onto spinal interneuronal circuits and spi-
nal motor neurons and a diminished capacity of other 
cortical and subcortical motor structures to compensate 
for the loss of those descending M1 signals.
Box 34–3  Lesions in Primary Motor Cortex Lead to Impairments in Motor Execution
those for more proximal parts of the arm. The termi-
nal of a CM cell axon often branches and terminates 
on spinal motor neurons for several different agonist 
muscles and can also influence the contractile activ-
ity of still more muscles through synapses on spinal 
interneurons (Figure 34–17B,C). This termination pat-
tern is organized to produce coordinated patterns of 
activity in a muscle field of agonist and antagonist mus-
cles. Most frequently, a CM cell axon directly excites 
the spinal motor neurons for several agonist muscles 
and indirectly suppresses the activity of some antago-
nist muscles through spinal inhibitory interneurons  
(Figure 34–17C). The fact that CM cells are more prom-
inent in humans than in other species may be one of 
the reasons why lesions of M1 in humans have a more 
profound effect on voluntary motor control compared 
to other mammals (Box 34–3).
The complexity of the motor map in M1—as 
revealed by short trains of electrical stimuli and ana-
tomical and neurophysiological studies of direct and 
indirect M1 descending outputs targeting single mus-
cles and small muscle groups—shows how motor 
commands from M1 to the spinal motor apparatus are 
able to control movements of every part of the body, 
with special focus on the fingers, hand, arm, face, and 
mouth in primates.
Activity in the Primary Motor Cortex Reflects Many 
Spatial and Temporal Features of Motor Output
As already noted, a given action such as reaching 
for an object can be described on many levels, rang-
ing from the hand’s spatial trajectory and velocity to 
its joint-centered causal forces and muscle activity 
(Figure 34–1A). Representational models assume that 
the motor system directly plans and controls specific 
parameters of movement. They predict that different 
neural populations encode the intended movement 
in a parameter space (ie, hand or joint motion or joint 
muscular torque) and perform the transformations 
between them. Dynamical models predict that neural 
circuits control movements through changes in their 
activation state from its current state to the desired 
final state. As their activity changes across time, cor-
relates of various parameters and properties of the 
intended movement can be observed in the activity 


