===== Page 1 =====
1436    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
myasthenia, the mother herself has autoimmune myas-
thenia that is transmitted passively to the newborn via 
the immune system. In congenital myasthenia, the 
infant has an inherited defect in some component of 
the neuromuscular junction, rather than an autoim-
mune disease, and thus does not have serum antibod-
ies to the nicotinic ACh receptor or MuSK.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes fall into three 
broad groups based on the site of the defect in the neu-
romuscular synapse: presynaptic, synaptic cleft, and 
postsynaptic forms. Clinical features common to all 
three types include a positive family history, weakness 
with easy fatigability (present since infancy), droop-
ing of the eyelids (ptosis), a decremental response to 
repetitive stimulation on EMG, and negative screening 
for anti-nicotinic ACh receptor antibodies. Subnormal 
development of the skeletal muscles reflects the fact 
that normal function at the neuromuscular synapse is 
required to maintain normal muscle bulk.
In one presynaptic form of congenital myasthe-
nia, the enzyme choline acetyltransferase is absent or 
reduced in the distal motor terminal. This enzyme is 
essential for the synthesis of ACh from choline and 
acetyl-CoA (Chapter 16). In its absence, the synthesis 
of ACh is impaired. The result is weakness that usu-
ally begins in infancy or early childhood. In another 
presynaptic form of congenital myasthenia, the num-
ber of quanta of ACh released after an action potential 
is less than normal; the molecular basis for this defect 
is not known.
Congenital myasthenia may also result from the 
absence of acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft. In 
this circumstance, end-plate potentials and miniature 
end-plate potentials are not small, as in autoimmune 
myasthenia, but are markedly prolonged, which may 
explain the repetitive response of the evoked muscle 
potential in those patients. Cytochemical studies indi-
cate that ACh-esterase is absent from the basement 
membranes. At the same time, nicotinic ACh receptors 
are preserved.
The physiological consequence of ACh-esterase 
deficiency is sustained action of ACh on the end-plate 
and ultimately the development of an end-plate myo-
pathy. This myopathy indicates that skeletal muscle 
can react adversely to excessive stimulation at the 
neuromuscular junction. In treating this disorder, it is 
critical to avoid using agents that inhibit ACh-esterase, 
which can increase the electrical firing at the end-plate 
and thereby exacerbate the muscle weakness.
The majority of congenital myasthenia cases are 
caused by primary mutations in the genes encod-
ing different subunits of the ACh receptor. The slow 
channel syndrome is characterized by prominent limb 
weakness but little weakness of cranial muscles (the 
reverse of the pattern usually seen in autoimmune 
myasthenia, where muscles of the eyes and orophar-
ynx are almost always affected). End-plate currents are 
slow to decay, and there is abnormal prolongation of 
channel opening. The mutations probably act both by 
increasing the affinity of the nicotinic ACh receptor for 
ACh, thereby prolonging the effects of this transmit-
ter, and by directly slowing the channel closing rate. In 
some instances, quinidine is effective therapy for slow 
channel syndrome because it blocks the open receptor-
channel. As with ACh-esterase mutations, end-plate 
function degenerates due to excessive postsynaptic 
stimulation, so anticholinesterase medications are 
potentially dangerous.
In the fast channel syndrome, a different set of 
mutations in one or more nicotinic ACh receptor subu-
nits leads to an accelerated rate of channel closing and 
end-plate current decay. The fast channel syndrome 
may respond to either acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 
or 3,4-diaminopyridine. The latter blocks a presynap-
tic potassium conductance and thereby increases the 
probability of quantal release of ACh, probably by pro-
longing the action potential.
Lambert-Eaton Syndrome and Botulism Also Alter 
Neuromuscular Transmission
Some patients with cancer, especially small-cell cancer 
of the lung, have a syndrome of proximal limb weak-
ness and a neuromuscular disorder with characteristics 
that are the opposite of those seen in myasthenia gravis. 
Instead of a decline in synaptic response to repetitive 
nerve stimulation, the amplitude of the evoked poten-
tial increases; that is, neuromuscular transmission 
is facilitated. Here, the first postsynaptic potential is 
abnormally small, but subsequent responses increase 
in amplitude so that the final summated potential is 
two to four times the amplitude of the first potential.
This disorder, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, is attributed 
to the action of antibodies against voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels in the presynaptic terminals. It is thought that 
these antibodies react with the channels, degrading the 
channels as the antibody–antigen complex is internal-
ized. Calcium channels similar to those of presynaptic 
terminals are found in cultured cells from the small-
cell carcinoma of the lung; development of antibodies 
against these antigens in the tumor might be followed 
by pathogenic action against nerve terminals, another 
kind of molecular mimicry.
A facilitating neuromuscular block is also found in 
human botulism, as the botulinum toxin also impairs 
release of ACh from nerve terminals. Both botulism 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1437
and Lambert-Eaton syndrome are ameliorated by 
administration of calcium gluconate or guanidine, 
agents that promote the release of ACh. These drugs are 
less effective than immunosuppressive treatments for 
long-term control of Lambert-Eaton syndrome, which is 
chronic. Botulism, on the other hand, is transient, and if 
the patient is kept alive during the acute phase by treat-
ing symptoms, the disorder disappears in weeks as the 
infection is controlled and botulinum is inactivated.
Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Can Be Inherited 
or Acquired
The weakness seen in any myopathy is usually attrib-
uted to degeneration of muscle fibers. At first, the miss-
ing fibers are replaced by regeneration of new fibers. 
Ultimately, however, renewal cannot keep pace and 
fibers are progressively lost. This leads to the appear-
ance of compound motor unit potentials of brief dura-
tion and reduced amplitude. The decreased number of 
functioning muscle fibers then accounts for the dimin-
ished strength, whether the skeletal muscle disease is 
inherited or acquired.
Dermatomyositis Exemplifies Acquired Myopathy
The prototype of an acquired myopathy is dermatomy-
ositis, defined by two clinical features: rash and myo-
pathy. The rash has a predilection for the face, chest, 
and extensor surfaces of joints, including the fingers. 
The myopathic weakness primarily affects proximal 
limb muscles. The rash and weakness usually appear 
simultaneously and become worse in a matter of 
weeks. The weakness may be mild or life-threatening.
This disorder affects children or adults. About 10% 
of adult patients have malignant tumors. Although 
the pathogenesis is not known, dermatomyositis is 
thought to be an autoimmune disorder of small intra-
muscular blood vessels.
Muscular Dystrophies Are the Most Common 
Inherited Myopathies
The best-known inherited muscle diseases are the 
muscular dystrophies; several major types are distin-
guished by clinical and genetic patterns (Table 57–4). 
Some types are characterized by weakness alone 
(Duchenne, facioscapulohumeral, and limb-girdle 
dystrophies); others (eg, the myotonic muscular dys-
trophies) have additional clinical features. Most are 
recessively inherited and begin in early childhood 
(Duchenne, Becker, and limb-girdle dystrophy); less 
frequently, the dystrophies are dominantly inherited 
(facioscapulohumeral or myotonic dystrophy). The 
cardinal trait of limb-girdle dystrophies is slowly pro-
gressive proximal weakness; in the myotonic muscular 
dystrophies, progressive weakness is accompanied by 
severe muscle stiffness.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy affects only males 
because it is transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait. 
It starts in early childhood and progresses relatively 
rapidly, so that patients are in wheelchairs by age 12 
and usually die in their third decade. This dystrophy 
is caused by mutations that severely reduce levels of 
dystrophin, a skeletal muscle protein that apparently 
confers tensile strength to the muscle cell. In a related 
inherited muscle disorder, Becker muscular dystrophy, 
dystrophin is present but is either abnormal in size or 
reduced in quantity. Becker dystrophy is thus typi-
cally much milder, although there is considerable clini-
cal variability according to how much dystrophin is 
retained; individuals with Becker dystrophy typically 
are able to walk well into adulthood, albeit with weak-
ness of the proximal leg and arm muscles.
Dystrophin is encoded by the DMD gene, the sec-
ond largest human gene, spanning about 2.5 million 
base pairs, or 1% of the X chromosome and 0.1% of 
the total human genome (Figure 57–10A). It contains at 
least 79 exons that encode a 14-kb mRNA. The inferred 
amino acid sequence of the dystrophin protein sug-
gests a rod-like structure and a molecular weight of 
427,000, with domains similar to those of two cytoskel-
etal proteins, alpha-actinin and spectrin. Dystrophin 
is localized to the inner surface of the plasma mem-
brane. The amino terminus of dystrophin is linked to 
cytoskeletal actin, whereas the carboxy terminus is 
linked to the extracellular matrix by transmembrane 
proteins (Figure 57–11).
The majority of boys with Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy have a deletion in the DMD gene; about a 
third have point mutations. In either case, these muta-
tions introduce premature stop codons in the mutant 
RNA transcripts that prevent synthesis of full-length 
dystrophin. Becker dystrophy is also caused by dele-
tions and missense mutations, but the mutations do 
not introduce stop codons. The resulting dystrophin 
protein is nearly normal in length and can at least 
partially substitute for normal dystrophin (Figure 
57–10B). Some boys with Duchenne dystrophy ben-
efit from treatment with ASOs that cause skipping of 
specific mutant exons, generating a shortened but par-
tially functional dystrophin protein (Figure 57–10C). 
Another promising approach is to deliver a form of 
the DMD gene to the muscle using adeno-associated 
virus. While the full-length DMD gene is too large to fit 


===== Page 3 =====
1438    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Table 57–4  Representative Muscular Dystrophy Genes
Site of primary defect
Protein
Disease
Extracellular matrix
Collagen VI α1, α2, and α3
Bethlem myopathy
 
Merosin laminin α2-subunit
Congenital myopathy
Transmembrane
α-Sarcoglycan
LGMD-2D
 
β-Sarcoglycan
LGMD-2E
 
χ-Sarcoglycan
LGMD-2C
 
σ-Sarcoglycan
LGMD-2F
 
Dysferlin
LGMD-2B, Miyoshi myopathy
 
Caveolin-3
LGMD-1C, rippling muscle disease
 
α7-Integrin
Congenital myopathy
 
XK protein
McLeod syndrome
Submembrane
Dystrophin
Duchenne, Becker dystrophies
Sarcomere/myofibrils
Tropomyosin B
Nemaline rod myopathy
 
Calpain
LGMD-2A
 
Titin
Distal (Udd) dystrophy
 
Nebulin
Nemaline rod myopathy
 
Telethonin
LGMD-2G
 
Skeletal muscle actin
Nemaline rod myopathy
 
Troponin
Nemaline rod myopathy
Cytoplasm
Desmin
Desmin storage myopathy
 
αβ-Crystallin
Distal myofibrillar myopathy
 
Selenoprotein
Rigid spine syndrome
 
Plectin
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Ryanodine receptor
Central core disease, malignant hyperthermia
 
SERCA1
Brody myopathy
Nucleus
Emerin
Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy
 
Lamin A/C
Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy
 
Poly A binding protein, repeat
Oculopharyngeal dystrophy
Enzymes/miscellaneous
Myotonin kinase, CTG repeat
Myotonic dystrophy
 
Zinc finger 9, CCTG repeat
Proximal myotonic dystrophy
 
Epimerase
Inclusion body myositis
 
Myotubularin
Myotubular myopathy
 
Chorein
Chorea-acanthocytosis
Golgi apparatus
Fukutin
Fukuyama congenital dystrophy
 
Fukutin-related peptide
Limb-girdle dystrophy
 
POMT1
Congenital muscular dystrophy
 
POMGnT1
Congenital muscular dystrophy
LGMD, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1439
within that virus, there is evidence that some truncated 
versions of dystrophin retain partial function; indeed, 
severely shortened dystrophins have been discovered 
in patients with very mild forms of Becker dystrophy. 
Packaging of genes encoding mini-dystrophins into the 
adeno-associated virus is feasible, permitting delivery 
to skeletal muscle and improvement of the dystrophic 
process (Figure 57–10C).
The discovery of the affected gene product in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy by Louis Kunkel in 
the mid-1980s stimulated rapid discovery of numer-
ous other novel muscle proteins, some with an inti-
mate relationship to dystrophin. As a result, the 
primary genetic and protein defects underlying most 
major muscular dystrophies have now been identified  
(Figure 57–11). From these, several themes have 
emerged in our understanding of the biology of the 
muscular dystrophies.
First, and perhaps most important, is the con-
cept that normal muscle requires a functional unit 
linking the contractile proteins through dystrophin 
to a complex of dystrophin-associated transmem-
brane proteins (sarcoglycans, β-dystroglycan) that, in 
turn, are linked to proteins at the membrane surface 
(eg, α-dystroglycan) and the extracellular matrix (eg, 
laminin). Disruption of this linked network due to a 
mutation in one of the proteins leads to reductions in 
levels of many of the proteins (Table 57–4).
Second, some of these proteins have attached 
sugar groups that are critical for binding the extracel-
lular matrix proteins. Genetic defects in several of the 
intracellular Golgi proteins (fukutin, fukutin-related 
peptide, POMT1, POMTGn1) impair the deposition of 
the sugars (glycosylation) of the transmembrane pro-
teins, often leading to aberrant muscle development 
and pronounced clinical pathology, not only in muscle 
but sometimes in the brain.
Third, the integrity of the extracellular matrix is 
essential for normal muscle function: Defects in extra-
cellular matrix proteins (laminin α2 or α7-integrin) 
also cause muscular dystrophies.
Fourth, other proteins (eg, dysferlin), distinct from 
those complexed with dystrophin, mediate membrane 
repair after injury. Whereas dystrophin is important in 
maintaining the tensile strength and integrity of the 
muscle membrane, dysferlin and its binding partner 
caveolin-3 are central to generating rafts of vesicles 
that coalesce and heal breaches that occur in the mus-
cle membrane.
It is of clinical interest that disorders due to defects 
in many of these proteins are less aggressive and more 
slowly disabling than those in Duchenne dystrophy. 
Defects in this diverse group of skeletal muscle proteins 
lead to the limb-girdle phenotype, characterized by 
slowly progressive proximal weakness of the arms and 
legs. Most are recessively inherited; mutations in both 
copies of a particular gene prevent expression of the 
normal protein product and lead to loss of function of 
that protein. Some limb-girdle genes are dominantly 
transmitted; mutations in only one copy of the gene in 
a pair can cause pathology. As in most primary mus-
cle diseases, in the limb-girdle phenotype, weakness 
is prominent in the torso and in proximal muscles of 
the arms and legs. Why this pattern is so common is 
not known, especially since the affected proteins are 
expressed in both distal and proximal muscles. The 
pattern of degeneration most likely reflects muscle use. 
The proximal muscles are, on average, more subject to 
low-level but chronic contractile activity because they 
serve as antigravity muscles.
Myotonic dystrophy has several distinctive fea-
tures including an autosomal inheritance pattern, 
weakness that is predominantly distal, involvement 
of nonmuscle tissues, and striking muscle stiffness 
(myotonia). The stiffness is induced by excessive elec-
trical discharges of the muscle membrane associated 
with voluntary muscle contractions or percussion or 
electrical stimulation of the muscle. It is most intense 
within the first few movements after a period of rest  
and improves with continued muscular activity 
(“warm-up” phenomenon). Patients typically have 
difficulty relaxing the grip of a handshake for several 
seconds, opening the eyelids after forceful squinting, 
or moving their legs with the first few steps after rising 
from a chair. EMG demonstrates that the muscle cell 
membrane is electrically hyperexcitable in myotonic 
dystrophy; after a contraction, bursts of repetitive 
action potentials wax and wane in amplitude and fre-
quency (20–100 Hz) over several seconds and thereby 
delay relaxation (Figure 57–12A). This sustained con-
traction is truly myogenic and independent of nerve 
supply because it persists after blockade of either the 
incoming motor nerve or neuromuscular transmission 
with agents such as curare.
The manifestations of myotonic dystrophy are 
not confined to muscles, however. Almost all patients 
have cataracts; affected men commonly have testicular 
atrophy and baldness and often develop cardiac con-
duction system defects that lead to irregularities in the 
heartbeat. The primary genetic defect is a dominantly 
transmitted expansion of a triplet of base pairs (CTG) 
in a noncoding region of a gene (myotonin kinase) 
on chromosome 19. RNA transcripts of the expanded 
CTG segments accumulate in the nucleus and alter 
splicing of several critical genes, including the ClC-1 
Cl– channel. Loss of function of this channel leads to 


===== Page 5 =====
1440    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
A  The DMD gene
1  Deletion of single exon results in severe (Duchenne) dystrophy
B  Effects of deletion
2  Deletion of four exons results in milder (Becker) dystrophy
Xp21
Gene
Dystrophin protein
mRNA
~2 × 106
base pairs
~14 × 103
base pairs
~3.6 × 103
amino acids
Internally deleted,
semifunctional dystrophin
Allowed to persist by cell
Severely truncated dystrophin
Rapidly degraded by cell
Normal dystrophin staining
Dystrophin staining in Duchenne dystrophy
Dystrophin staining in Becker dystrophy
Deletion
Deletion
C  Exon skipping and mini gene replacement therapies in Duchenne dystrophy
mRNA
Gene
46
47
51
52
46
47
51
52
Duchenne dystrophy
Exons 48, 49, 50 deleted
Exons 48, 49, 50 deleted
46
47
51
52
ASO-mediated exon skipping therapy
Gene therapy
No dystrophin produced
Therapeutic level of shortened 
dystrophin produced
Therapeutic level of
mini dystrophin produced
Premature 
stop codon
46
47
51
52
Skipping 51 eliminates 
stop codon
Reading frame
restored
ASO
46
47
52
AAV with 
DMD
mini gene


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1441
Figure 57–10  (Opposite) Two forms of muscular dystro-
phy are caused by deletion mutations in the dystrophin 
gene. (After Hoffman and Kunkel 1989.)
A. The relative position of the DMD gene within the Xp21 
region of the X chromosome. An enlargement of this locus 
shows the 79 exons (light blue lines) and introns (dark blue 
lines) defining the gene with about 2.0 × 106 base pairs. Tran-
scription of the gene gives rise to mRNA (about 14 × 103 base 
pairs), and translation of this mRNA gives rise to the protein 
dystrophin (molecular weight 427,000).
B. A deletion that disrupts the reading frame results in the 
clinically severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy, whereas a 
deletion that preserves the reading frame usually results 
in the clinically milder Becker muscular dystrophy. In both 
cases, the gene is transcribed into mRNA and the exons 
flanking the deletion are spliced together. 1. If the borders 
of neighboring exons do not maintain the translational read-
ing frame, then incorrect amino acids are inserted into the 
growing polypeptide chain until an abnormal stop codon 
is reached, causing premature termination of the protein. 
The truncated protein may be unstable, may fail to be local-
ized in the membrane, or may fail to bind to glycoproteins. 
Functional dystrophin is then almost totally absent. 2. If the 
deletion preserves the reading frame, a dystrophin mol-
ecule is produced with an internal deletion but intact ends. 
Although the protein is smaller than normal and may be 
present in less than normal amounts, it can often suffice to 
preserve some muscle function.
C. One approach to correcting a deletion of the DMD gene is 
to induce formation of an mRNA transcript that skips one or 
more exons to restore the reading frame. For example, when 
there is a deletion of exons 48, 49, and 50, the splicing of exon 
47 to exon 51 yields a transcript that is out of frame, in which a 
stop codon is introduced, preventing production of dystrophin. 
However, addition of an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) that 
binds exon 51 and prevents its splicing will promote the in-
frame splicing of exon 47 to exon 52. Although this transcript is 
slightly shorter than normal, as is the resulting dystrophin pro-
tein, the protein will nonetheless function well enough to ame-
liorate the muscle degeneration. Another therapeutic approach 
is to deliver a short form of the dystrophin gene (mini- or micro-
dystrophin, ~30% of the full-length protein) to the muscle using 
adeno-associated virus (AAV); full-length dystrophin is too large 
to be delivered within the AAV.
excessive electrical activity in skeletal muscle and, as 
a consequence, myotonia. As discussed below, direct 
mutations in the same Cl– channel gene can lead to a 
similar abnormal pattern of muscle activity.
Some Inherited Diseases of Skeletal Muscle 
Arise From Genetic Defects in Voltage-Gated Ion 
Channels
The electrical excitability of skeletal muscle is essen-
tial to the rapid and nearly synchronous contraction 
of an entire muscle fiber. The depolarizing end-plate 
potential at the neuromuscular junction triggers an 
action potential that propagates longitudinally along 
the surface of the muscle fiber and radially inward 
along the transverse tubules, invaginations of the fiber 
membrane in apposition with the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum (Chapter 31).
Depolarization of the transverse tubules induces 
a conformational change in L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels that is directly transmitted to Ca2+ release 
channels (the ryanodine receptors) in the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum, causing the channels to open. The release 
of Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum raises myo-
plasmic Ca2+ and thus activates adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP)-dependent movement of actin-myosin 
filaments.
Normally, one action potential is generated in 
a muscle fiber for each end-plate potential. Repo-
larization of the muscle action potential depends 
on inactivation of Na+ channels and the opening of 
delayed-rectifier voltage-gated K+ channels similar to 
those in axons. This repolarization is also augmented 
by Cl– influx through the ClC-1 Cl– channels. Inherited 
muscle diseases arise from mutations in any one of 
these channels.
The electrical coupling of the end-plate potential 
to depolarization of the transverse tubules is disrupted 
in several inherited diseases of muscle. These disor-
ders reflect a variety of defects in excitability, ranging 
from complete failure of action potential generation to 
prolonged bursts of repetitive discharges in response 
to a single stimulus (Figure 57–12). The derangements 
of muscle fiber excitability are transient and result in 
periodic paralysis from reduced excitability or myoto-
nia from hyperexcitability. Between episodes, muscle 
function is normal. These are rare diseases of skeletal 
muscle, with a prevalence of 1 per 100,000 or less. 
Inheritance is autosomal dominant, except for one 
form of myotonia.
Weakness may be so severe during an attack of 
periodic paralysis that a patient is bedridden for hours, 
unable to raise an arm or leg off the bed. Fortunately, 
during such attacks, the muscles of respiration and 
swallowing are spared, so life-threatening respiratory 
arrest does not occur; consciousness and sensation are 
also spared. Attack frequency varies from almost daily 
to only a few in a lifetime.
During an attack, the resting potential of affected 
muscles is depolarized from a normal value of –90 mV 


===== Page 7 =====
1442    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Dystroglycans
Sarcoglycan
complex
Calpain
Dystrophin
F-Actin
Integrin
complex
Caveolin-3
Collagen VI
Laminin α2
Laminin α2
Mutations accelerate
muscle breakdown
Mutations slow
muscle repair
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
Dysferlin
Golgi apparatus
POMT1
POMGnT1
Fukutin
Fukutin-related peptide
Selenoprotein
nNOS
α
α
β
β1
α7
β
δ
γ
Figure 57–11  In muscular dystrophy, mutated proteins 
either weaken the muscle cell membrane or slow its 
repair after injury. For example, a deficiency of dystro-
phin, a submembrane protein, causes Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy. Dystrophin interacts with complexes of other 
membrane proteins that are mutated in other dystrophies, 
including the dystroglycans and the sarcoglycans, which 
are closely associated with extracellular proteins such as 
laminin α2 and collagen. Several other proteins mutated in 
different forms of muscular dystrophy are normally present 
in the Golgi apparatus, where they are essential for adding 
sugar groups to membrane proteins. These include POMT1 
(protein-O-mannosyl transferase 1), POMGnT1 (protein-O-
mannosyl α-,2-N-acetylglucosaminyl transferase), fukutin, 
fukutin-related peptide, and a selenoprotein. Dysferlin, which 
is mutated in still other dystrophies, is involved in the repair 
of skeletal muscle membrane after injury. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Brown and Mendell 2005.)
to about –60 mV. At this potential, most Na+ channels 
are inactivated, rendering the muscle fiber chronically 
refractory and thus unable to generate action poten-
tials. Recovery of strength occurs spontaneously and 
is associated with repolarization to a resting poten-
tial within a few millivolts of normal and recovery of 
excitability.
Two variants of periodic paralysis have been 
delineated. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis attacks 
occur during periods of high venous K+ (≥6.0 mM ver-
sus normal levels of 3.5–4.5 mM). Ingesting foods with 
high K+ content such as bananas or fruit juice may trig-
ger an attack. Conversely, hypokalemic periodic paral-
ysis presents as episodic weakness in association with 
low blood K+ (≤2.5 mM). Affected muscle is paradoxi-
cally depolarized in the setting of reduced extracellu-
lar K+, which shifts the reversal potential for K+ to more 
negative values. Both forms are inherited as autosomal 
dominant traits.
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is caused 
by missense mutations in a gene that encodes the 
pore-forming subunit of a voltage-gated Na+ channel 


===== Page 8 =====
Na+ channels
A
V (mV)
B
Normal muscle
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis muscle
4 pA
4 pA
–40
–120
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
10
20
Popen
–40
–120
0
20
40
60
50
0
50
25
0
100
150
200
C
Normal (f = 0.001)
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
mV
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
mV
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80
–100
mV
50
25
0
mA/cm2
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Myotonic (f = 0.02)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Paralytic (f = 0.03)
ms
20 ms
100 µV 
ms
50
25
0
Figure 57–12  Myotonia or paralysis can result from  
genetically altered function in ion channels in skeletal 
muscle.
A. The electrical signature of myotonia (muscle stiffness) is a 
rapid burst of action potentials in response to a single stimulus. 
The action potentials, here shown in extracellular recordings, 
vary in amplitude and wax and wane in frequency. Such a burst 
may follow a voluntary muscle contraction or a mechanical 
stimulus, such as percussion of the muscle.
B. Cell-attached patch recordings from cultured human mus-
cle cells. In normal muscle, the Na+ channels open early and 
briefly in response to a 60 msec voltage-clamp depolarization 
from –120 mV to –40 mV. In muscle from patients with hyper-
kalemic periodic paralysis (defective M1592V Na+ channel), the 
prolonged openings and reopenings indicate impaired inactiva-
tion. The probability of channel opening (obtained by averaging 
individual records) persists in the hyperkalemic muscle  
following inactivation. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Cannon 1996.)
C. Even modest disruption of Na+ channel inactivation is sufficient 
to produce bursts of myotonic discharges or depolarization-
induced loss of excitability. These computer simulation records 
show muscle voltage in response to depolarizing current injec-
tion (dashed line). Among the total pool of mutant channels, 
a small fraction (f) fails to inactivate normally. In these simula-
tions, f was varied from normal to values appropriate for  
myotonic or paralytic muscle. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Cannon 1996.)


===== Page 9 =====
1444    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–14  The myotonias and periodic paralyses are 
caused by mutations in genes that code for diverse voltage-
gated ion channels in the skeletal muscle membrane. Some 
of these channel disorders are characterized only by myotonia, 
some by periodic paralysis without myotonia, and some by both 
myotonia and paralysis. Some clinical disorders (eg, hypoka-
lemic periodic paralysis) can arise from defects in different 
channels in different individuals.
expressed in skeletal muscle. The resulting mutant Na+ 
channels have inactivation defects. Subtle inactivation 
defects produce myotonia, whereas more pronounced 
defects result in chronic depolarization and loss of 
excitability with paralysis (Figure 57–12A–C). Hypoka-
lemic paralysis is caused by missense mutations in the 
voltage-sensor domains of either Ca2+ channels or Na+ 
channels in skeletal muscle. Disruption of the voltage-
sensor domain allows an influx of ion current through 
an anomalous pathway, separate from the channel pore 
(Figure 57–13). This current “leak” in resting fibers 
produces a susceptibility to depolarization and loss of 
A
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
–110
–100
–90
–80
–70
–60
Vr  (mV)
Extracellular [K+] (mM)
HypoPP
Normal
a b
EK
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
– – –
+ + +
Cation
leak 
Voltage
sensor
+
+++
+
Myotonia
Myotonia
congenita
Cl– channel
CLCN1
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
Na+ channel
SCN4A
K+ channel
Kir2.1
Ca2+ channel
CACNL1S
Periodic paralysis
Potassium-
aggravated
myotonia
Paramyotonia
congenita
Hyperkalemic
periodic
paralysis
Hypokalemic
periodic paralysis
Andersen
syndrome
excitability in low extracellular K+. A rare form of peri-
odic paralysis that is characterized by weakness, devel-
opmental defects, and cardiac irritability is caused by 
primary mutations in an inwardly rectifying K+ channel 
important for the resting potential (Figure 57–13).
In myotonia congenita, muscle stiffness is present 
from birth and is nonprogressive. Unlike myotonic 
dystrophy, there is no muscle wasting, permanent 
muscle weakness, or other organ involvement. Con-
genital myotonia is a consequence of mutations in the 
gene coding for the ClC-1 Cl– channel in skeletal mus-
cle membrane (Figure 57–14). The resultant decrease 
Figure 57–13  Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is 
caused by leaky ion channels. 
A. In HypoPP, missense mutations in the voltage-sensor domains 
create leaky Ca2+ or Na+ channels that allow cation influx via an 
anomalous pathway separate from the channel pore.
B. Although this leak is small (~0.5% of the total resting 
membrane conductance), model simulations show that it 
causes an increased susceptibility to depolarization of resting 
potential (Vr), resulting in inexcitability and weakness as the 
external [K+] is lowered. This paradoxical depolarization of Vr 
diverges from the Nernst potential for K+ (EK) because of loss 
of the contribution from the inward rectifier K+ channel in low 
[K+]. Normally, this depolarization occurs only at extremely 
low [K+] (<2 mM) and is not seen in healthy people, but for 
patients with HypoPP, the cation leak shifts the depolarization 
point into the physiological range of [K+]. For this simulation,  
in 3.3 mM [K+] (line b), excitability is preserved for normals 
(Vr = –95.6 mV), whereas HypoPP fibers may be excitable 
(Vr = –89 mV) or refractory and inexcitable (Vr = –67.7 mV). 
Reduction of [K+] to 3.0 mM (line a) results in complete loss 
of excitability for all HypoPP fibers (–66.3 mV) and retained 
excitability for normal fibers (Vr = –97.8 mV). (Adapted, with 
permission, from Cannon 2017.)


