===== Page 1 =====
732    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–13  Learning new coordination patterns in 
walking.
A. A subject walks on a split-belt treadmill. When the two belts 
move at the same speed, subjects have a symmetric gait pat-
tern with equal step lengths.
B. In an adaptation study, the speeds of the belts are initially 
the same, then become split so that the right belt moves faster 
than the left, and then finally return to the same speed (top). 
Step length symmetry is initially lost when the belts move at 
different speeds, causing the subject to limp. Over time, the 
symmetry is restored and the limping is abolished. When the 
belts are once again moving at the same speed, an aftereffect 
is seen (middle).
  Maurice Smith and colleagues have shown that this type 
of adaptation is composed of multiple underlying processes 
that adapt on different timescales (bottom). The change in the 
step length symmetry is composed of two processes: a fast 
process (light green line) that adapts quickly but also rapidly 
forgets what has been learned, and a slow process (dark green 
line) that learns more slowly but has better retention. These 
processes both adapt to learn from the error, and the sum of 
these processes is the final adaptation (blue line). This dual-
rate learning system gives rise to the typical double exponential 
learning curves seen in many forms of adaptation in which 
adaptation is initially fast but tends to slow down as learning 
proceeds. (Adapted, with permission, from Roemmich, Long, 
and Bastian 2016.)
0
0
A
B
Step length
asymmetry
Symmetry
change
Baseline
Adaptation
Deadaptation
Belt speed
Fast belt
Fast belt
Step length
Slow belt
Slow belt
200 steps
that shift visual space, for example, they initially miss 
when reaching to targets but soon learn to reach cor-
rectly. After repeated trials, the mere feel of the glasses, 
without the prisms in place, is sufficient to evoke the 
adaptive behavior appropriate for the prisms.
In general, we can quantify performance with 
two measurements, accuracy and precision. Accuracy 
is a measure of systematic errors or biases, for exam-
ple, on average how far a series of thrown darts are 
away from the target. In contrast, precision is a meas-
ure of random errors, or statistical variability, in our 
actions. Both accuracy and precision contribute to 
performance. In general, accuracy can be improved 
by adapting or calibrating motor commands so as to 
reduce systematic errors. Although there is always 
some variability in movement arising from irreducible 
sensory and motor noise, the variability, as we have 
seen, can be reduced through planning so as to have 
minimal impact on task success. Most motor learning 
tends to become automatic (ie, implicit) with time, but 
early learning of some tasks can be aided by explicit 
learning (ie, strategy), such as a verbal instruction on 
how best to approach the task.
Not all sensory modalities are equally important 
in learning all motor tasks. In learning dynamic tasks, 
proprioception and tactile input are more important 
than vision. We normally learn dynamic tasks equally 
well with or without vision. However, individuals 
who have lost proprioception and tactile input have 
particular difficulty controlling the dynamic proper-
ties of their limbs or learning new dynamic tasks with-
out vision (Box 30–3).
Skill Learning Relies on Multiple Processes  
for Success
In contrast to error-based learning in which the sensori-
motor system adapts to a perturbation to return to pre-
perturbation performance, learning skills such as tying 
one’s shoelaces, juggling, typing, or playing the piano 
instead involves improving performance in the absence 
of a perturbation. Such learning tends to improve the 
speed–accuracy trade-off. Initially, we may be able to hit 
the correct keys on a keyboard when paced 1 second apart, 
but with practice, the same accuracy can be achieved at 
an increasingly quickening pace.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    733
While visual impairment certainly has limiting effects 
on sensorimotor control, blind people are able to walk 
normally and reach and grasp known objects with ease. 
This is in stark contrast to the rare loss of proprioceptive 
and tactile sense.
Some sensory neuropathies selectively damage the 
large-diameter sensory fibers in peripheral nerves and 
dorsal roots that carry most proprioceptive informa-
tion. Impairments in motor control resulting from loss of 
proprioception have fascinated neurologists and physi-
ologists for well over a century. Studies of patients with 
sensory neuropathies provide invaluable insight into the 
interactions between sensation and movement planning.
As expected, such patients lose joint position sense, 
vibration sense, and fine tactile discrimination (as well 
as tendon reflexes), but both pain and temperature 
senses are fully preserved. Patients with peripheral neu-
ropathies are unable to maintain a steady posture, for 
example, while holding a cup or standing, with the eyes 
closed. Movements also become clumsy, uncoordinated, 
and inaccurate.
Some recovery of function may occur over many 
months as the patient learns to use vision as a substitute 
for proprioception, but this compensation still leaves 
patients completely incapacitated in the dark. Some of 
this difficulty reflects an inability to detect errors that 
develop during unseen movements, as occurs if the 
weight of an object differs from expectation.
Peripheral neuropathies are particularly incapaci-
tating when patients try to make movements with rapid 
direction reversals. Analyses of the joint torques during 
these movements show that subjects with intact pro-
prioception anticipate intersegmental torques, whereas 
those without proprioception fail to do so (Figure 30–14).
However, the same patients easily adapt to dras-
tic kinematic changes, such as tracing a drawing while 
viewing their hand in a mirror. In fact, they perform 
better than normal subjects, perhaps because they have 
learned to guide their movements visually and, because 
they lack proprioception, do not experience any conflict 
between vision and proprioception.
Even in normal subjects, the relative importance of 
tactile input in manipulation tasks can be easily demon-
strated. It is relatively easy to light a match with one’s 
eyes closed. However, if the tips of the digits are made 
numb with local anesthetic, then even under full vision 
the task is remarkably hard because the match tends to 
slip from the fingers.
Box 30–3  Proprioception and Tactile Sense Are Critical for Sensorimotor Control
5 cm
125°
0°
60°
20°
Control
Subject with proprioceptive loss
Elbow
Shoulder
Extend
Flex
Figure 30–14  Patients lacking proprioception cannot 
make an accurate movement that requires a rapid 
reversal in path.  (Left) The subject tries to trace a template 
(gray line) while her hand is hidden from view. The joint 
angles for the elbow and shoulder of a normal subject show 
good alignment (Right top), leading to an accurate reversal 
(Left top). In contrast, the timing of the joint reversal is poor 
in subjects who lack proprioceptive input (Right bottom), lead-
ing to large errors in the path (Left bottom). These patients 
cannot anticipate and correct for the intersegmental dynam-
ics that occur around the path reversal. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Sainburg et al. 1995.)


===== Page 3 =====
734    Part V / Movement
For some skills, there can be a complex relation 
between the actions performed and success or failure 
at the task. For example, when children first sit on a 
swing, they have to learn the complex sequence of leg 
and body movements required to make the swing go 
higher. In contrast to error-based learning, there is no 
readily available error signal that can be used to adjust 
the current action because the swing’s height is not 
directly determined by the current action but by a long 
history of body and leg motion. Learning in such com-
plex scenarios can be achieved using reinforcement 
learning in which the sensorimotor system adjusts 
its commands in an effort to maximize reward, that 
is, task success. In the most general form, the perfor-
mance measure that the reinforcement learning tries to 
maximize is the sum of all future rewards. However, 
as we tend to favor an immediate versus time-delayed 
reward, the sum is typically weighted to reflect this by 
progressively discounting future rewards.
Reinforcement learning is more general than error-
based learning in that the training signal is success 
or failure, rather than an error at each point in time. 
Another distinguishing property of reinforcement 
learning is that the success or failure that the learning 
system receives can depend in nontrivial ways on the 
history of the actions taken. For tasks that require a 
complex sequence of actions to take place to achieve a 
goal, such as tying one’s shoelaces, and the outcome or 
reward is removed in time from the action, error-based 
learning cannot easily be applied. A key problem that 
reinforcement solves is that of credit assignment: 
Which action within a sequence should we credit or 
blame when we eventually succeed or fail? This is just 
the sort of problem reinforcement learning algorithms 
are good at solving.
There are two main classes of reinforcement 
learning, those that depend on an internal model and 
those that do not. Model-based reinforcement builds 
a model of the task (eg, the structure of a maze). With 
such a model, the learner can efficiently plan in a 
goal-directed manner. In contrast, with model-free 
reinforcement learning, the learner simply associates 
movements with success or failure; those that lead to 
success are more likely to be performed again. Such 
learning can lead to motor habits. While model-free 
learning avoids the computational burden of building 
a model, it is also less able to generalize to novel situ-
ations. These two types of reinforcement learning can 
even act together, and different tasks can rely on them 
to different extents. Dopaminergic systems in the basal 
ganglia have been tied to signals that one would expect 
in reinforcement learning, such as expected reward. 
Moreover, dysfunction in these systems is related to 
movement disorders, addiction, and other problems that 
could be related to reinforcement signals (Chapter 38).
Finally, the development of efficient strategies plays 
a key part in motor skill acquisition. Skill learning for 
real-world tasks typically involves a sequence of 
decision-making processes at different spatiotemporal 
scales. The skill of a tennis player, for example, is not only 
determined by the precision with which she can strike 
the ball but also by the speed with which she can make 
the correct decision on where to aim it and how well she 
uses her senses to extract task-relevant information.
Sensorimotor Representations Constrain Learning
The information obtained during a single movement is 
often too sparse or noisy to unambiguously determine 
the source of error. For example, if a tennis player hits 
a shot into the net on the serve, the problem could be 
that the ball was not thrown high enough, the ball was 
hit too early, the racquet strings are loose, there was a 
gust of wind, or the player is fatigued. If the racquet 
dynamics have changed, the player would do well to 
adapt to these for the next shot. If a temporary gust of 
wind was the problem, then no adjustment is needed. 
To resolve this issue, the sensorimotor learning system 
constrains the way in which the system is updated in 
response to errors. These constraints reflect the internal 
assumptions about the task structure and the source of 
errors and determine how the system represents the 
task. Indeed, on a slower timescale, learning itself can 
alter the representation.
While the final output of the motor system is the 
contraction of its 600 or so muscles, it is not the case that 
the brain controls each independently. In current mod-
els of sensorimotor control, motor commands are gener-
ated by multiple modules that can be selectively engaged 
depending on the requirements of the task. Examples of 
modular architectures include multiple internal models, 
motor primitives, and motor synergies (Chapter 36).
Motor primitives can be thought of as neural con-
trol modules that can be flexibly combined to gener-
ate a large repertory of behaviors. A primitive might 
represent the temporal profile of a particular muscle 
activity or a set of muscles that are activated together, 
termed a synergy. The overall motor output will be the 
sum of all primitives, weighted by the level of the acti-
vation of each module. The makeup of the population 
of such primitives then determines which structural 
constraints are imposed on learning. For example, a 
behavior for which the motor system has many primi-
tives will be easy to learn, whereas a behavior that can-
not be approximated by any existing primitives would 
be impossible to learn.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    735
Highlights
  1.  The primary purpose of the elaborate informa-
tion processing and storage that occurs in the 
brain is to enable us to interact with our environ-
ment through our motor system.
  2.  Our infinitely varied and purposeful motor 
behaviors are governed by the integrated actions 
of the motor systems, including the motor cortex, 
spinal cord, cerebellum, and basal ganglia.
  3.  To control action, the central nervous system 
uses a hierarchy of sensorimotor transformations 
that convert incoming sensory information into 
motor outputs.
  4.  There is a trade-off in the speed versus sophistica-
tion of the different levels of sensorimotor response 
from rapid reflexes to slower voluntary control.
  5.  The motor systems generate commands using 
feedforward circuits or error-correcting feedback 
circuits; most movement involves both types of 
control.
  6.  The brain uses internal models of the sensorimo-
tor system to facilitate control.
  7.  The state of the body is estimated using both sen-
sory and motor signals together with a forward 
predictive mode to reduce the adverse effects of 
delays in feedback.
  8.  Variability in the sensory inputs and motor out-
puts together with inaccuracies in sensorimotor 
transformations underlie the errors and variabil-
ity in movement, leading to the trade-off between 
speed and accuracy.
  9.  Motor planning can use the redundancy of the 
motor system to move in such a way as to reduce 
the negative consequences of motor noise while 
reducing effort.
10.  Motor control circuits are not static but undergo 
continual modification and recalibration through-
out life.
11.  Motor learning improves motor control in novel 
situations, and different forms of sensory infor-
mation are vital for learning. Error-based learn-
ing is particularly important for adapting to 
simple sensorimotor perturbations. Reinforce-
ment learning is particularly important for more 
complex skill learning and can rely on a model 
(model-based) or on simply reinforcing motor 
actions directly (model-free).
12.  The motor representations used by the brain con-
strain the way the sensorimotor system updates 
during learning.
13.  Studies of sensorimotor control have focused 
on developing a detailed understanding of 
relatively simple tasks, such as reaching and 
walking. Although these tasks are amenable to 
analysis and modeling, they do not capture the 
full complexity of real-world motor control. The 
challenge will be to determine if these principles 
can be generalized to tasks such as tying shoe-
laces and learning to skateboard.
 Daniel M. Wolpert 
  Amy J. Bastian 
Selected Reading
Diedrichsen J, Shadmehr R, Ivry RB. 2010. The coordina-
tion of movement: optimal feedback control and beyond. 
Trends Cogn Sci 14:31–39.
Roemmich RT, Bastian AJ. 2018. Closing the loop: From motor 
neuroscience to neurorehabilitation. Annu Rev Neurosci 
41:415–429.
Scott SH. 2016. A functional taxonomy of bottom-up sensory 
feedback processing for motor actions. Trends Neurosci 
39:512–526.
Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer JW. 2010. Error correc-
tion, sensory prediction, and adaptation in motor control. 
Annu Rev Neurosci 33:89–108.
Wolpert DM, Diedrichsen J, Flanagan JR. 2011. Principles of 
sensorimotor learning. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:739–751.
Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR. 2016. Computations underlying 
sensorimotor learning. Curr Opin Neurobiol 37:7–11.
References
Blakemore SJ, Frith CD, Wolpert DM. 1999. Spatio-temporal 
prediction modulates the perception of self-produced 
stimuli. J Cogn Neurosci 11:551–559.
Blakemore SJ, Goodbody S, Wolpert DM. 1998. Predicting the 
consequences of our own actions: the role of sensorimotor 
context estimation. J Neurosci 18:7511–7518.
Brashers-Krug T, Shadmehr R, Bizzi E. 1996. Consolidation 
in human motor memory. Nature 382:252–255.
Burdet E, Osu R, Franklin DW, Milner TE, Kawato M. 2001. 
The central nervous system stabilizes unstable dynamics 
by learning optimal impedance. Nature 414:446–449.
Craik KJW. 1943. The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge Univ. Press.
Crapse TB, Sommer MA. 2008. Corollary discharge across 
the animal kingdom. Nature Rev Neurosci 9:587.
Crevecoeur F, Scott SH. 2013. Priors engaged in long-latency 
responses to mechanical perturbations suggest a rapid 
update in state estimation. PLoS Comput Biol 9:e1003177.


===== Page 5 =====
736    Part V / Movement
Crevecoeur F, Scott SH. 2014. Beyond muscles stiffness: 
importance of state-estimation to account for very fast 
motor corrections. PLoS Comput Biol 10:e1003869.
Diedrichsen J, Kornysheva K. 2015. Motor skill learn-
ing between selection and execution. Trends Cogn Sci 
19:227–233.
Ernst MO, Bulthoff HH. 2004. Merging the senses into a 
robust percept. Trends Cogn Sci 8:162–169.
Faisal AA, Selen LP, Wolpert DM. 2008. Noise in the nervous 
system. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:292–303.
Flanagan JR, Beltzner MA. 2000. Independence of perceptual 
and sensorimotor predictions in the size-weight illusion. 
Nat Neurosci 3:737–741.
Goodale MA, Milner AD. 1992. Separate visual pathways for 
perception and action. Trends Neurosci 15:20–25.
Harris CM, Wolpert DM. 1998. Signal-dependent noise deter-
mines motor planning. Nature 394:780–784.
Huberdeau DM, Krakauer JW, Haith AM. 2015. Dual-process 
decomposition in human sensorimotor adaptation. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 33:71–77.
Krakauer JW, Mazzoni P. 2011. Human sensorimotor learn-
ing: adaptation, skill, and beyond. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
21:636–644.
Land MF, McLeod P. 2000. From eye movements to actions: 
how batsmen hit the ball. Nat Neurosci 3:1340–1345.
McDougle SD, Ivry RB, Taylor JA. 2016. Taking aim at the 
cognitive side of learning in sensorimotor adaptation 
tasks. Trends Cogn Sci 20:535-544.
Morasso P. 1981. Spatial control of arm movements. Exp 
Brain Res 42:223–227.
Muller H, Sternad D. 2004. Decomposition of variability in 
the execution of goal-oriented tasks: three components of 
skill improvement. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 
30:212–233.
O’Doherty JP, Lee SW, McNamee D. 2015. The structure of 
reinforcement-learning mechanisms in the human brain. 
Curr Opin Behav Sci 1:94–100.
Pruszynski JA, Scott SH. 2012. Optimal feedback control 
and the long-latency stretch response. Exp Brain Res 
218:341–359.
Raibert MH. 1977. Motor control and learning by the state space 
model. Ph.D. Dissertation. Cambridge, MA: Artificial 
Intelligence Laboratory, MIT.
Reisman DS, Block HJ, Bastian AJ. 2005. Interlimb coordina-
tion during locomotion: what can be adapted and stored? 
J Neurophysiol 94:2403–2415.
Roemmich RT, Long AW, Bastian AJ. 2016. Seeing the errors 
you feel enhances locomotor performance but not learn-
ing. Curr Biol 26:1–10.
Rothwell JC, Traub MM, Day BL, Obeso JA, Thomas PK, 
Marsden CD. 1982. Manual motor performance in a deaf-
ferented man. Brain 105:515–542.
Sainburg RL, Ghilardi MF, Poizner H, Ghez C. 1995. Control 
of limb dynamics in normal subjects and patients without 
proprioception. J Neurophysiol 73:820–835.
Schmidt RA, Zelaznik H, Hawkins B, Frank JS, Quinn JT. 
1979. Motor-output variability: a theory for the accuracy 
of rapid motor acts. Psychol Rev 47:415–451.
Scott SH, Cluff T, Lowrey CR, Takei T. 2015. Feedback con-
trol during voluntary motor actions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
33:85–94.
Sing GC, Joiner WM, Nanayakkara T, Brayanov JB, Smith MA. 
2009. Primitives for motor adaptation reflect correlated 
neural tuning to position and velocity. Neuron 64:575–589.
Smith MA, Ghazizadeh A, Shadmehr R. 2006. Interacting 
adaptive processes with different timescales underlie 
short-term motor learning. PLoS Biol 4:e179.
Todorov E, Jordan MI. 2002. Optimal feedback control as a 
theory of motor coordination. Nat Neurosci 5:1226–1235.
Torres-Oviedo G, Macpherson JM, Ting LH. 2006. Muscle 
synergy organization is robust across a variety of postural 
perturbations. J Neurophysiol 96:1530–1546.
Valero-Cuevas FJ, Venkadesan M, Todorov E. 2009. Struc-
tured variability of muscle activations supports the 
minimal intervention principle of motor control. J Neuro-
physiol 102:59–68.
van Beers RJ, Sittig AC, Gon JJ. 1999. Integration of proprio-
ceptive and visual position-information: an experimen-
tally supported model. J Neurophysiol 81:1355–1364.
Wolpert DM, Flanagan JR. 2001. Motor prediction. Curr Biol 
11:R729–732.
Yang SC-H, Wolpert DM, Lengyel M. 2016. Theoretical per-
spectives on active sensing. Curr Opin Behav Sci 11:100–108.


===== Page 6 =====
31
The Motor Unit and Muscle Action
activate the muscles that provide the forces needed to 
move in a particular way. This is not a simple task. Not 
only must the nervous system decide which muscles to 
activate, how much to activate them, and the sequence 
in which they must be activated in order to move one 
part of the body, but it must also control the influence 
of the resultant muscle forces on other body parts and 
maintain the required posture.
This chapter examines how the nervous system 
controls muscle force and how the force exerted by a 
limb depends on muscle structure. We also describe 
how muscle activation changes to perform different 
types of movement.
The Motor Unit Is the Elementary Unit of 
Motor Control
A Motor Unit Consists of a Motor Neuron and 
Multiple Muscle Fibers
The nervous system controls muscle force with signals 
sent from motor neurons in the spinal cord or brain 
stem to the muscle fibers. A motor neuron and the 
muscle fibers it innervates are known as a motor unit, 
the basic functional unit by which the nervous system 
controls movement, a concept proposed by Charles 
Sherrington in 1925.
A typical muscle is controlled by a few hun-
dred motor neurons whose cell bodies are clustered 
in a motor nucleus in the spinal cord or brain stem. 
The axon of each motor neuron exits the spinal cord 
through the ventral root or through a cranial nerve in 
the brain stem and runs in a peripheral nerve to the 
The Motor Unit Is the Elementary Unit of Motor Control
A Motor Unit Consists of a Motor Neuron and Multiple 
Muscle Fibers
The Properties of Motor Units Vary
Physical Activity Can Alter Motor Unit Properties
Muscle Force Is Controlled by the Recruitment and 
Discharge Rate of Motor Units
The Input–Output Properties of Motor Neurons Are 
Modified by Input From the Brain Stem
Muscle Force Depends on the Structure of Muscle
The Sarcomere Is the Basic Organizational Unit of 
Contractile Proteins
Noncontractile Elements Provide Essential  
Structural Support
Contractile Force Depends on Muscle Fiber Activation, 
Length, and Velocity
Muscle Torque Depends on Musculoskeletal Geometry
Different Movements Require Different Activation Strategies
Contraction Velocity Can Vary in Magnitude  
and Direction
Movements Involve the Coordination of Many Muscles
Muscle Work Depends on the Pattern of Activation
Highlights
A
ny action—ascending a flight of stairs, typing 
on a keyboard, even holding a pose—requires 
 coordinating the movement of body parts. This 
is accomplished by the interaction of the nervous sys-
tem with muscle. The role of the nervous system is to 


===== Page 7 =====
738    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–1  A typical muscle consists of many thousands 
of muscle fibers working in parallel and organized into a 
smaller number of motor units. A motor unit comprises a 
motor neuron and the muscle fibers it innervates, illustrated 
here by motor neuron A1. The motor neurons innervating one 
muscle are usually clustered into an elongated motor nucleus 
that may extend over one to four segments within the ventral 
spinal cord. The axons from a motor nucleus exit the spinal 
cord in several ventral roots and peripheral nerves but are 
collected into one nerve bundle near the target muscle. In 
the figure, motor nucleus A includes all those motor neurons 
innervating muscle A; likewise, motor nucleus B includes all 
the motor neurons that innervate muscle B. The extensively 
branched dendrites of each motor neuron (not shown in the 
figure) tend to intermingle with those of motor neurons from 
other nuclei.
muscle. When the axon reaches the muscle, it branches 
and innervates from a few to several thousand muscle 
fibers (Figure 31–1).
Once synaptic input depolarizes the membrane 
potential of a motor neuron above threshold, the neu-
ron generates an action potential that is propagated 
along the axon to its terminals in the muscle. The 
action potential releases acetylcholine at the neuro-
muscular synapse, triggering an action potential at the 
sarcolemma of the muscle fiber (Chapter 12). A mus-
cle fiber has electrical properties similar to those of a 
large-diameter, unmyelinated axon, and thus, action 
Ventral root
Motor
nucleus B
Motor
neuron A1
Motor
nucleus A
Muscle A
Muscle B
Muscle
ﬁbers
Aponeurosis
Tendon
potentials propagate along the sarcolemma, although 
more slowly due to the higher capacitance of the fiber 
resulting from the transverse tubules (see Figure 31–9). 
Because the action potentials in all the muscle fibers 
of a motor unit occur at approximately the same time, 
they contribute to extracellular currents that sum to 
generate a field potential near the active muscle fibers.
Most muscle contractions involve the activation of 
many motor units, whose currents sum to produce sig-
nals (compound action potentials) that can be detected by 
electromyography. The electromyogram (EMG) is typi-
cally large and can be easily recorded with electrodes 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    739
Table 31–1  Innervation Numbers in Human Skeletal Muscles
Muscle
Alpha 
motor 
axons
Muscle 
fibers
Average 
innervation 
number
Biceps brachii
774
580,000
750
Brachioradialis
333
129,200
410
Cricothyroid
112
18,550
155
Gastrocnemius (medial)
579
1,042,000
1,800
Interossei dorsales (1)
119
40,500
340
Lumbricales (1)
96
10,269
107
Masseter
1,452
929,000
640
Opponens pollicis
133
79,000
595
Platysma
1,096
27,100
25
Posterior cricoarytenoid
140
16,200
116
Rectus lateralis
4,150
22,000
5
Temporalis
1,331
1,247,000
936
Tensor tympani
146
1,100
8
Tibialis anterior
445
272,850
613
Transverse arytenoid
139
34,470
247
Source: Adapted, with permission, from Enoka 2015. © Human 
Kinetics, Inc.
placed on the skin over the muscle. The timing and 
amplitude of EMG activity, therefore, reflect the acti-
vation of muscle fibers by the motor neurons. EMG 
signals are useful for studying the neural control of 
movement and for diagnosing pathology (Chapter 57).
Each fiber in most mature vertebrate muscles is 
innervated by a single motor neuron. The number of 
muscle fibers innervated by one motor neuron, the 
innervation number, varies across muscles. In human 
skeletal muscles, the innervation number ranges from 
average values of 5 for an eye muscle to 1,800 for a 
leg muscle (Table 31–1). Because innervation number 
denotes the number of muscle fibers within a motor 
unit, differences in innervation number determine the 
differences in increments in force produced by activa-
tion of different motor units in the same muscle. Thus, 
the innervation number also indicates the fineness of 
control of the muscle at low forces; the smaller the 
innervation number, the finer the control achieved by 
varying the number of activated motor units.
The differences in innervation numbers between 
motor units in the same muscle can be substantial. For 
example, motor units of the first dorsal interosseous 
muscle of the hand have innervation numbers ranging 
from approximately 21 to 1,770. The strongest motor 
unit in the hand’s first dorsal interosseous muscle can 
exert approximately the same force as the average 
motor unit in the leg’s medial gastrocnemius muscle 
due to different ranges of innervation numbers in the 
two muscles.
The muscle fibers of a single motor unit are dis-
tributed throughout the muscle and intermingle with 
fibers innervated by other motor neurons. The muscle 
fibers innervated by a single motor unit can be distrib-
uted across 8% to 75% of the volume in a limb muscle, 
with 2 to 5 muscle fibers belonging to the same motor 
unit among 100 muscle fibers. Therefore, the muscle 
fibers in a cross-section through the middle of an entire 
muscle are associated with 20 to 50 different motor 
units. This distribution and even the number of motor 
units change with age and with some neuromuscular 
disorders (Chapter 57). For example, muscle fibers that 
lose their innervation after the death of a motor neuron 
can be reinnervated by collateral sprouts from neigh-
boring axons.
Some muscles comprise discrete compartments 
that are each innervated by a different primary branch 
of the muscle nerve. Branches of the median and ulnar 
nerves in the forearm, for example, innervate distinct 
compartments in three multitendon extrinsic hand 
muscles that enable the fingers to be moved relatively 
independently. The muscle fibers belonging to each 
motor unit in such muscles tend to be confined to one 
compartment. A muscle can therefore consist of several 
functionally distinct regions.
The Properties of Motor Units Vary
The force exerted by a muscle depends not only on 
the number of motor units that are activated during 
a contraction but also on three properties of motor 
units: contraction speed, maximal force, and fatiga-
bility. These properties are assessed by examining the 
force exerted by individual motor units in response 
to variations in the number and rate of evoked action 
potentials.
The mechanical response to a single action poten-
tial is known as a twitch contraction. The time it takes 
the twitch to reach its peak force, the contraction time, 
is one measure of the contraction speed of the muscle 
fibers that compose a motor unit. The motor units in a 
muscle typically exhibit a range of contraction times 
from slow to fast contracting. The mechanical response 
to a series of action potentials that produce overlapping 
twitches is known as a tetanic contraction or tetanus.
The force exerted during a tetanic contraction 
depends on the extent to which the twitches overlap 


===== Page 9 =====
740    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–2  The force exerted by a motor unit varies with 
the rate at which its neuron generates action potentials.
A. Traces show the forces exerted by fast- and slow-contracting 
motor units in response to a single action potential (top trace) 
and a series of action potentials (set of four traces below). The 
time to the peak twitch force, or contraction time, is briefer in 
the faster unit. The rates of the action potentials used to evoke 
the tetanic contractions range from 17 to 100 Hz in the slow-
contracting unit to 46 to 100 Hz in the fast-contracting unit. The 
peak tetanic force evoked by 100-Hz stimulation is greater for 
the fast-contracting unit. Note the different force scales for the 
two sets of traces. (Adapted, with permission, from Botterman, 
Iwamoto, and Gonyea 1986; adapted from Fuglevand,  
Macefield, and Bigland-Ritchie 1999; and Macefield, Fuglevand, 
and Bigland-Ritchie 1996.)
B. Relation between peak force and the rate of action poten-
tials for fast- and slow-contracting motor units. The absolute 
force (left plot) is greater for the fast-contracting motor unit at 
all frequencies. At lower stimulus rates (right plot), the force 
evoked in the slow-contracting motor unit (longer contraction 
time) sums to a greater relative force (percent of peak force) 
than in the fast-contracting motor unit (shorter contraction time).
and summate (ie, the force varies with the contraction 
time of the motor unit and the rate at which the action 
potentials are evoked). At lower rates of stimulation, 
the ripples in the tetanus denote the peaks of individ-
ual twitches (Figure 31–2A). The peak force achieved 
during a tetanic contraction varies as a sigmoidal 
function of action potential rate, with the shape of the 
curve depending on the contraction time of the motor 
unit (Figure 31–2B). Maximal force is reached at lower 
100 Hz
60
56
46
200 ms
400 ms
100 mN
40 ms
40 ms
Slow twitch
100 Hz
25
21
17
5 mN
Fast twitch
Fast
Slow
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Peak force (mN)
Frequency (Hz)
0
20
40
60
80
100
20
0
40
60
80
100
Peak force (% maximum)
Frequency (Hz)
Fast
Slow
300
200
100
500
400
0
Force (mN)
75
50
25
100
0
Force (mN)
A
B
action potential rates for slow-contracting motor units 
than the rates needed to achieve maximal force in fast-
contracting units.
The functional properties of motor units vary across 
the population and between muscles. At one end of the 
distribution, motor units have long twitch contraction 
times and produce small forces, but are less fatigable. 
At the other end of the distribution, motor units have 
short contraction times, produce large forces, and are 


