===== Page 1 =====
628    Part IV / Perception
Spoendlin H. 1974. Neuroanatomy of the cochlea. In:  
E Zwicker, E Terhardt (eds). Facts and Models in Hearing, 
pp. 18–32. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stauffer EA, Scarborough JD, Hirono M, et al. 2005. Fast 
adaptation in vestibular hair cells requires myosin-1c 
activity. Neuron 47:541–553.
Tinevez JY, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2007. Unifying the various 
incarnations of active hair-bundle motility by the verte-
brate hair cell. Biophys J 93:4053–4067.
von Békésy G. 1960. Experiments in Hearing. EG Wever (ed, 
transl). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson JP. 1980. Evidence for a cochlear origin for acoustic 
re-emissions, threshold fine-structure and tonal tinnitus. 
Hear Res 2:233–252.
Wu Z, Müller U. 2016. Molecular identity of the mecha-
notransduction channel in hair cells: not quiet there yet.  
J Neurosci 36:10927–10934.


===== Page 2 =====
27
The Vestibular System
Caloric Irrigation as a Vestibular Diagnostic Tool
Bilateral Vestibular Hypofunction Interferes With 
Normal Vision
Highlights
M
odern vehicular travel on earth  and 
through extraterrestrial space relies upon 
sophisticated guidance systems that inte-
grate acceleration, velocity, and positional informa-
tion through transducers, computational algorithms, 
and satellite triangulation. Yet the principles of iner-
tial guidance are ancient: Vertebrates have used analo-
gous systems for 500 million years and invertebrates 
for even longer. In these animals, the inertial guidance 
system, termed the vestibular system, serves to detect 
and interpret motion through space as well as orienta-
tion relative to gravity.
Through extensive research over many decades, 
it is apparent that most, if not all, organisms on Earth 
have evolved to sense one of the most prevalent 
“forces” in our universe, gravity. The mechanisms for 
the sensory transduction are as diverse as nature could 
devise. Gravity is most precisely referenced as gravito-
inertial acceleration (GIA), a distinct form of linear 
acceleration directed toward the core of our planet. In 
truth, gravity varies systematically by as much as 0.5% 
between the equator and the poles; it increases over 
mineral-dense regions and decreases over mineral-
light regions of the Earth’s surface. Yet every single 
behavior that animals perform is referenced to the GIA, 
and all of our actions and cognitive directives depend 
The Vestibular Labyrinth in the Inner Ear Contains Five 
Receptor Organs
Hair Cells Transduce Acceleration Stimuli Into  
Receptor Potentials
The Semicircular Canals Sense Head Rotation
The Otolith Organs Sense Linear Accelerations
Central Vestibular Nuclei Integrate Vestibular, Visual, 
Proprioceptive, and Motor Signals
The Vestibular Commissural System Communicates 
Bilateral Information
Combined Semicircular Canal and Otolith Signals 
Improve Inertial Sensing and Decrease Ambiguity of 
Translation Versus Tilt
Vestibular Signals Are a Critical Component of Head 
Movement Control
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Stabilize the Eyes When the  
Head Moves
The Rotational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates for 
Head Rotation
The Translational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex Compensates 
for Linear Motion and Head Tilts
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Are Supplemented by 
Optokinetic Responses
The Cerebellum Adjusts the Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex
The Thalamus and Cortex Use Vestibular Signals for 
Spatial Memory and Cognitive and Perceptual Functions
Vestibular Information Is Present in the Thalamus
Vestibular Information Is Widespread in the Cortex
Vestibular Signals Are Essential for Spatial Orientation 
and Spatial Navigation
Clinical Syndromes Elucidate Normal Vestibular Function


===== Page 3 =====
630    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–1  The vestibular apparatus 
of the inner ear.
A. The orientations of the vestibular and 
cochlear divisions of the inner ear are 
shown with respect to the head.
B. The inner ear is divided into bony and 
membranous labyrinths. The bony laby-
rinth is bounded by the petrosal portion 
of the temporal bone. Lying within this 
structure is the membranous labyrinth, 
which contains the receptor organs for 
hearing (the cochlea) and equilibrium (the 
utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals). 
The space between bone and mem-
brane is filled with perilymph, whereas 
the membranous labyrinth is filled with 
endolymph. Sensory cells in the utricle, 
saccule, and ampullae of the semicircu-
lar canals respond to motion of the head. 
(Adapted from Iurato 1967.)
upon knowledge of our motion and orientation rela-
tive to it. The first developments of what we refer to as 
a vestibular system were actually gravity sensors; as 
behavior became increasingly mobile, sensory organs 
evolved to process rotational accelerations as well.
In this chapter we will concentrate on the vestibu-
lar system of vertebrates, which has remained highly 
conserved across many species. Vestibular signals 
originate in the labyrinths of the internal ear (Figure 
27–1B). The bony labyrinth is a hollow structure within 
the petrous portion of the temporal bone. Within it lies 
the membranous labyrinth, which contains sensors for 
both the vestibular and auditory systems.
Endolymphatic 
sac
Horizontal
Anterior
vertical
Semicircular canals 
(head rotation)
Superior
and inferior
vestibular
ganglia
of Scarpa
Utricle
Utricle
Saccule
Saccule
Spiral 
ganglion
of cochlea
Cochlea
Cochlear nerve
Cochlear 
duct
Facial nerve
Superior and inferior 
vestibular nerves
Direction
of view
A
B
Greater
saccular
nerve
Superior
saccular
ramus
Endolymphatic 
sac
Dura
Ampulla
Stapes in
oval window
Round window
Perilymphatic
duct
Scala
tympani
Scala
vestibuli
Helicotrema
Ductus 
reuniens
Posterior
vertical
Horizontal
Anterior
vertical
Semicircular
canals:
Posterior
vertical
Otolith organs 
(linear motion)
Sensory 
receptor organs:
Membranous 
labyrinth
Endolymph
Perilymph
Bone
The vestibular receptors consist of two parts: two 
otolith organs, the utricle and saccule, which measure lin-
ear accelerations, and three semicircular canals, which 
measure angular accelerations. Rotational motion 
(angular acceleration) is experienced during head 
turns, whereas linear acceleration occurs during walk-
ing, falling, vehicular travel (ie, translations), or head 
tilts relative to gravity. These receptors send vestibu-
lar information to the brain, where it is integrated into 
an appropriate signal regarding direction and speed 
of motion, as well as the position of the head relative 
to the GIA. Many of the central vestibular neurons 
at the first junction with receptor afferent fibers also 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    631
Figure 27–2  Hair cells in the vestibular 
labyrinth transduce mechanical stimuli 
into neural signals. At the apex of each cell 
are the stereocilia, which increase in length 
toward the single kinocilium. The membrane 
potential of the receptor cell depends on the 
direction in which the stereocilia are bent. 
Deflection toward the kinocilium causes the 
cell to depolarize and thus increases the rate 
of firing in the afferent fiber. Bending away 
from the kinocilium causes the cell to hyper-
polarize, thus decreasing the afferent firing 
rate. (Adapted, with permission, from Flock 
1965.)
receive convergent signals from other systems such as 
proprioceptors, visual signals, and motor commands. 
Central processing of these multimodal signals occurs 
very rapidly to ensure adequate coordination of visual 
gaze and postural responses, autonomic responses, 
and awareness of spatial orientation.
The Vestibular Labyrinth in the Inner Ear 
Contains Five Receptor Organs
The membranous labyrinth is supported within the bony 
labyrinth by a filamentous network of connective tissue. 
The vestibular portion of the membranous labyrinth lies 
lateral and posterior to the cochlea. Vestibular receptors 
are contained in specialized enlarged regions of the mem-
branous labyrinth, termed the ampullae for the semicir-
cular canals and maculae for the otolith organs (Figure 
27–1B). Both of the otolith organs lie in a central compart-
ment of the membranous labyrinth, the vestibule, which 
is surrounded by the bony labyrinth of the same name.
The membranous labyrinth is filled with endo-
lymph, a K+-rich (150 mM) and Na+-poor (16 mM) fluid 
whose composition is maintained by the action of ion 
pumps in specialized cells. Endolymph bathes the sur-
face of the vestibular receptor cells. Surrounding the 
membranous labyrinth, in the space between the mem-
branous labyrinth and the wall of the bony labyrinth, 
is perilymph. Perilymph is a high-Na+ (150 mM), low-K+ 
(7 mM) fluid similar in composition to cerebrospinal 
fluid, with which it is in communication through the 
cochlear duct. Perilymph bathes the basal surface of 
the receptor epithelia and the vestibular nerve fibers. 
Two fluid-tight partitions in the bony labyrinth, the 
oval and round windows (Figure 27–1B), connect the 
perilymphatic space to the middle ear cavity. The oval 
window is connected to the tympanic membrane by 
the middle ear ossicles. These windows are important 
for sound transduction (Chapter 26). The endolymph 
and perilymph are kept separate by a junctional com-
plex of support cells that surrounds the apex of each 
receptor cell. Disruption of the balance between these 
two fluids (by trauma or disease) can result in vestibu-
lar dysfunction, leading to dizziness, vertigo, and spa-
tial disorientation.
During development, the labyrinth progresses 
from a simple sac to a complex set of interconnected 
sensory organs, but retains the same fundamental top-
ological organization. Each organ originates as an epi-
thelium-lined pouch that buds from the otic cyst, and 
the endolymphatic spaces within the several organs 
remain continuous in the adult. The endolymphatic 
spaces of the vestibular labyrinth are also connected 
to the cochlear duct through the ductus reuniens 
(Figure 27–1B). In addition, the membranous laby-
rinth contains a small tube, the endolymphatic duct, 
which extends through a space in the sigmoid bone, 
the vestibular aqueduct, to end in a blind sac adjacent 
to the dura in the epidural space of the posterior cra-
nial fossa. It is thought that the endolymphatic sac has 
both absorptive and excretive functions to maintain 
the ionic composition of the endolymphatic fluid.
Hair Cells Transduce Acceleration Stimuli Into 
Receptor Potentials
Each of the five receptor organs has a cluster of hair 
cells responsible for transducing head motion into ves-
tibular signals. Hair cells are so named due to an array 
of nearly 100 staggered height stereocilia. The shortest 
stereocilia are at one end of the cell and the tallest at 
the other, ending with the only true cilium of the hair 
cell, termed the kinocilium. The kinocilium is typically 
the tallest of all stereocilia. Angular or linear accelera-
tion of the head leads to a deflection of the stereocilia, 
which together compose the hair bundle (Figure 27–2).
Receptor potential
Depolarization
Hyperpolarization
Nerve impulses
Resting
discharge
Increased
impulse
frequency
Decreased
impulse
frequency
Excitation
Inhibition


===== Page 5 =====
632    Part IV / Perception
Specialized ion channels in the tips of the hair 
bundle stereocilia allow K+ to enter or be blocked from 
the surrounding endolymph (Chapter 26). This action 
allows hair cells to act as mechanoreceptors, where 
deflection of the stereocilia produces a depolarizing 
or hyperpolarizing receptor potential depending on 
which direction the hair bundle moves (Figure 27–2). 
These depolarizations and hyperpolarizations of the 
receptor membrane lead to excitation and inhibition, 
respectively, in the firing rate of the innervating affer-
ent (Figure 27–2). In each vestibular receptor organ, 
hair cells are arranged so that movement directional 
specificity is defined by excitation in some cells and 
inhibition in other cells.
Vestibular signals are carried from the hair cells 
to the brain stem by branches of the vestibulocochlear 
nerve (cranial nerve VIII), which enter the brain stem 
and terminate in the ipsilateral vestibular nuclei, cer-
ebellum, and reticular formation. Cell bodies of the 
vestibular nerve are located in Scarpa’s ganglia within 
the internal auditory canal (Figure 27–1A). The superior 
vestibular nerve innervates the horizontal and anterior 
canals and the utricle, whereas the inferior vestibular 
nerve innervates the posterior canal and the saccule. 
The labyrinth’s vascular supply, which arises from the 
anterior inferior cerebellar artery, travels with nerve 
VIII. The anterior vestibular artery supplies the struc-
tures innervated by the superior vestibular nerve, and 
the posterior vestibular artery supplies the structures 
innervated by the inferior vestibular nerve.
All vertebrate receptor hair cells receive efferent 
inputs from the brain stem. The function of the efferent 
innervation of vestibular receptors is still a subject of 
debate. Stimulation of the efferent fibers from the brain 
stem changes the sensitivity of the afferent axons from 
the hair cells. It increases the excitability of some affer-
ents and hair cells while inhibiting others, and varies 
across species.
The Semicircular Canals Sense Head Rotation
An object undergoes angular acceleration when its 
rate of rotation about an axis changes. Therefore, the 
head undergoes angular acceleration when it turns or 
tilts, when the body rotates, and during active or pas-
sive locomotion. The three semicircular canals of each 
vestibular labyrinth detect these angular accelerations 
and report their magnitudes and motion directions to 
the brain.
Each semicircular canal is a semicircular tube of 
membranous labyrinth extending from the vestibule. 
One end of each canal is open to the vestibule, whereas 
at the other end, the ampulla, the entire lumen of the 
canal is traversed by a fluid-tight gelatinous diaphragm, 
the cupula. The stereocilia and the kinocilium protrude 
into the gelatinous cupula, while the hair cells are 
located below in a receptor epithelium, the crista, along 
with the innervating afferent terminals (Figure 27–3).
The vestibular organs detect accelerations of the 
head because the inertia of endolymph and cupula 
results in forces acting on the stereocilia. Consider the 
simplest situation, a rotation in the plane of a semi-
circular canal. When the head begins to rotate, the 
membranous and bony labyrinths move along with 
it. Because of its inertia, however, the endolymph lags 
behind the surrounding membranous labyrinth, thus 
pushing the cupula in a direction opposite that of the 
head (Figure 27–3B).
The motion of endolymph in a semicircular canal 
can be demonstrated with a cup of coffee. While gen-
tly twisting the cup about its vertical axis, observe a 
particular bubble near the fluid’s outer boundary. As 
the cup begins to turn, the coffee tends to maintain its 
initial orientation in space and thus counter-rotates in 
the cup. If you continue rotating the cup at the same 
speed, the coffee (and the bubble) eventually catches 
up to the cup and rotates with it. When the cup decel-
erates and stops, the coffee keeps rotating, moving in 
the opposite direction relative to the cup.
In the ampulla, this relative motion of the endo-
lymph creates pressure on the cupula, bending it toward 
or away from the adjacent vestibule, depending on the 
direction of endolymph flow. The resulting deflection 
of the stereocilia alters the membrane potential of the 
hair cells, thereby changing the firing rates of the asso-
ciated sensory fibers. Each semicircular canal is maxi-
mally sensitive to rotations in its plane. The horizontal 
canal is oriented approximately 30° elevated above the 
naso-occipital axis (roughly in the horizontal plane as a 
person walks and looks at the ground ahead) and thus 
is most sensitive to rotations in the horizontal plane. 
The stereocilia are arranged so that leftward rotational 
motion is excitatory for the left horizontal canal and 
inhibitory for the right horizontal canal. The anterior 
and posterior canals are oriented more vertically in the 
head, at an angle of approximately 45 degrees from the 
sagittal plane (Figure 27–4). Similar rotational motion 
downward in the plane of the anterior canals is excita-
tory for anterior canal hair cells, while upward head 
motion is excitatory for posterior canals.
Because there is approximate mirror symmetry 
of the left and right labyrinths, the six canals effec-
tively operate as three coplanar pairs. The two hori-
zontal canals form one pair; each of the other pairs 
consists of one anterior canal on one side of the head 
and the contralateral posterior canal. Further, the three 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    633
Figure 27–3  The ampulla of a semi-
circular canal.
A. A thickened zone of epithelium, the 
ampullary crista, contains the hair cells. 
The stereocilia and the kinocilia of the 
hair cells extend into a gelatinous dia-
phragm, the cupula, which stretches 
from the crista to the roof of the 
ampulla.
B. The cupula is displaced by the rela-
tive movement of endolymph when the 
head turns. As a result, the hair bundles 
are also displaced. Their movement is 
greatly exaggerated in the diagram.
Figure 27–4  The bilateral symmetry of the semicircular 
canals.  The horizontal canals on both sides lie in approxi-
mately the same plane and therefore are functional pairs. The 
bilateral vertical canals have a more complex relationship. 
The anterior canal on one side and the posterior canal on the 
opposite side lie in parallel planes and therefore constitute a 
functional pair. The vertical semicircular canals lie nearly 45° 
from the midsagittal plane. Each of the semicircular canals on 
one side of the head lie in approximately orthogonal planes to 
each other.
Left horizontal
semicircular
canal
Hair
cells
Ampulla
Cupula
Ampullary
crista
Cupula
displaced
A
B
Angular
acceleration
Hair bundles 
deﬂected
Sensory
ﬁbers ﬁre
Semicircular
canal
Angular
acceleration
Endolymph
ﬂow
Cochlear nerve
Cochlea
Midsagittal line
Angle at which the plane of
the anterior vertical semicircular
canal crosses the midsagittal line
Semicircular canals:
Anterior vertical
Horizontal
Posterior vertical
Internal acoustic
meatus
Vestibular nerve
Foramen magnum
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (VIII)


===== Page 7 =====
634    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–5  The left and right horizontal semi-
circular canals work together to signal head 
movement. Because of inertia, rotation of the head 
in a counterclockwise direction causes endolymph 
to move clockwise with respect to the canals. This 
deflects the stereocilia in the left canal in the excita-
tory direction, thereby exciting the afferent fibers on 
this side. In the right canal, the afferent fibers are 
hyperpolarized so that firing decreases.
semicircular canals on each side of the head lie roughly 
orthogonal to each other (Figure 27–4). When the head 
moves toward the receptor hair cells (eg, leftward 
head turns for the left horizontal semicircular canal), 
the stereocilia are bent toward the tall kinocilium, thus 
exciting (depolarizing) the cell. Head motion in the 
opposite direction causes bending away from the kino-
cilum and toward the smallest stereocilia, thus closing 
the channels and inhibiting (hyperpolarizing) the cell.
The left and right ear semicircular canals have 
opposite polarity; thus, when you turn your head to 
the left, the receptors in the left horizontal semicircular 
canal will be excited (increased firing rate), whereas 
right horizontal canal receptors will be inhibited 
(decreased firing rate; Figure 27–5). The same relation-
ship is true for the vertical semicircular canals. The 
canal planes are also roughly aligned to the pulling 
planes of specific eye muscles. The pair of horizontal 
canals lies in the pulling plane of the lateral and medial 
rectus muscles. The left anterior and right posterior 
canal pair lie in the pulling plane of the left superior 
Left
Axis of
hair cells
Fluid
motion
in canals
Afferent 
ﬁbers of
nerve VIII
Increase
in ﬁring
Right
Axis of
hair cells
Horizontal
canals
Decrease
in ﬁring
Ampulla
Tu
rni
ng
 m
oti
on
 of
 h
ea
d 
and inferior rectus and right superior and inferior 
oblique muscles. The right anterior and left posterior 
pair occupies the pulling plane of the left superior and 
inferior oblique and right superior and inferior rectus 
muscles.
The Otolith Organs Sense Linear Accelerations
The vestibular system must compensate not only for 
head rotations but also for linear motion. The two oto-
lith organs, the utricle and saccule, detect linear motion 
as well as the static orientation of the head relative to 
gravity, which is itself a linear acceleration. Each organ 
consists of a sac of membranous labyrinth approxi-
mately 3 mm in the longest dimension. The hair cells 
of each organ are arranged in a roughly elliptical patch 
called the macula. The human utricle contains approxi-
mately 30,000 hair cells, whereas the saccule contains 
some 16,000.
The hair bundles of the otolithic hair cells extend 
into a gelatinous sheet, the otolithic membrane, which 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    635
Figure 27–6  The utricle detects tilt of the head. Hair cells in 
the epithelium of the utricle have apical hair bundles that project 
into the otolithic membrane, a gelatinous material that is covered 
by millions of calcium carbonate particles (otoconia). The hair 
bundles are polarized but are oriented in different directions. 
The directional polarity of each hair cell is organized relative to a 
reversal region running through the center of the utricle, termed 
the striola (see Figure 27–7). Thus, when the head is tilted, the 
gravitational force on the otoconia bends each hair bundle in 
a particular direction. When the head is tilted in the direction 
of a hair cell’s axis of polarity, that cell depolarizes and excites 
the afferent fiber. When the head is tilted in the opposite direc-
tion, the same cell hyperpolarizes and inhibits the afferent fiber. 
(Adapted from Iurato 1967.)
Figure 27–7  The axis of mechanical sensitivity of each hair 
cell in the utricle is oriented toward the striola.  The striola 
curves across the surface of the macula containing the hair 
cells, resulting in a characteristic variation in the axes of mecha-
nosensitivity (arrows) in the population of hair cells. Because 
of this arrangement, tilt in any direction depolarizes some 
cells and hyperpolarizes others, while having no effect on the 
remainder. (Adapted, with permission, from Spoendlin 1966.)
covers the entire macula (Figure 27–6). Embedded on 
the surface of this membrane are fine, dense particles 
of calcium carbonate called otoconia (Greek root trans-
lates to “ear dust”), which give the otolith (“ear stone”) 
organs their name. Otoconia are typically 0.5 to 30 μm 
long; thousands of these particles are attached to the 
otolithic membranes of the utricle and saccule.
Gravity and other linear accelerations exert shear 
forces on the otoconial matrix and the gelatinous oto-
lithic membrane, which can move relative to the mem-
branous labyrinth. This results in a deflection of the hair 
bundles, altering activity in the vestibular nerve to sig-
nal linear acceleration owing to translational motion or 
gravity. The orientations of the otolith organs and the 
directional sensitivity of individual hair cells are such 
that a linear acceleration along any axis can be sensed. 
For example, with the head in its normal position, the 
macula of each utricle is raised above the naso-occipital 
axis by approximately 30°, similar to the horizontal 
semicircular canal. In normal resting head position, the 
utricle is deviated to bring the utricle approximately 
equal to an Earth horizontal plane. Any acceleration 
in the horizontal plane excites some hair cells in each 
Hair cells
hyperpolarize,
inhibiting
afferent ﬁbers
Hair cells
depolarize,
exciting
afferent ﬁbers
Otolithic
membrane
Utricle
Striola
Otoconia
Striola
utricle and inhibits others, according to their orienta-
tions (Figures 27–6 and 27–7).
The operation of the paired saccules resembles 
that of the utricles. The hair cells represent all possible 
Medial
Striola
Lateral
Anterior
Posterior


===== Page 9 =====
636    Part IV / Perception
orientations within the plane of each saccular macula, 
but the maculae are oriented vertically in nearly parasag-
ittal planes. The saccules are therefore especially sensi-
tive to vertical accelerations. Certain saccular hair cells 
also respond to accelerations in the horizontal plane, in 
particular those along the anterior–posterior axis.
Central Vestibular Nuclei Integrate Vestibular, 
Visual, Proprioceptive, and Motor Signals
The vestibular nerve projects ipsilaterally from the 
vestibular ganglion mainly to four vestibular nuclei 
(medial, lateral, superior, and descending) in the dor-
sal part of the pons and medulla, in the floor of the 
fourth ventricle. Many vestibular nerve fibers also 
bifurcate, sending a direct projection to the fastigial 
nucleus, the nodulus and uvula, and the reticular for-
mation (Figure 27–8A). These nuclei integrate signals 
from the vestibular organs with signals from the spinal 
cord, cerebellum, and visual system.
The vestibular nuclei project, in turn, to many cen-
tral targets, including the oculomotor nuclei, reticular 
and spinal centers concerned with gaze and postural 
movement, and the thalamus (Figure 27–9). Many ves-
tibular nuclei neurons have reciprocal connections with 
the cerebellum, primarily in the floculo-nodular lobe, 
that form important regulatory mechanisms for eye 
movements, head movements, and posture (Figures 
27–8 and 27–9). The vestibular nuclei receive inputs 
from the premotor cortex, the accessory optic system 
(nucleus of the optic tract), the neural integrator nuclei 
(nucleus prepossitus hypoglossi and interstitial nucleus 
of Cajal), and the reticular formation (Figure 27–8). 
Further projections from the vestibular nuclei reach 
the rostral and caudal lateral medulla nuclei that are 
involved in regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, res-
piration, and bone remodeling, as well as the parabra-
chial nucleus for homeostasis modulation. Finally, there 
are projections from the vestibular nuclei to the medial 
geniculate (auditory) nuclei, as well as the supragenual 
nucleus and dorsal tegmental nucleus, which contribute 
to spatial orientation (Figure 27–9).
The superior and medial vestibular nuclei receive 
fibers predominantly from the semicircular canals in 
the medial regions and some otolith input in the lateral 
regions (Figure 27–8). They send fibers predominantly 
to the cerebellum, reticular formation, thalamus, ocu-
lomotor centers, and spinal cord (Figure 27–9). Ocu-
lomotor center outputs include the three oculomotor 
nuclei (abducens, oculomotor, trochlear), as well as 
the neural integrators for converting head velocity 
into head position signals in the nucleus hypoglossi 
(horizontal eye movements) and interstitial nucleus 
of Cajal (vertical eye movements). These nuclei are 
described in some detail later.
Another major output pathway concerned with 
gaze control arises from the medial vestibular nucleus 
(as well as lesser projections from the descending and 
lateral vestibular nuclei) and projects bilaterally to the 
cervical spinal cord through the medial vestibulospi-
nal tract (Figure 27–9; see Chapter 35). There are two 
categories of medial vestibulospinal fibers. Vestibulo-
spinal neurons project only to the spinal cord to control 
neck musculature. Vestibulo-ocular neurons project to 
both the spinal cord and the oculomotor nuclei and are 
involved in coordinated eye and head movements to 
maintain gaze stability.
The lateral vestibular nucleus (Deiters’ nucleus) 
receives fibers from the semicircular canals medially 
and the otolith organs laterally. There is a major output 
to all levels of the ipsilateral spinal cord through the lat-
eral vestibulospinal tract that is concerned principally 
with postural reflexes through modulation of limb 
and axial musculature (Figure 27–9). Lateral vestibu-
lar nuclei neurons also project heavily to the reticular 
formation. The descending vestibular nucleus receives 
predominantly otolithic input, but also receives semi-
circular canal fibers medially, and projects to the cer-
ebellum, reticular formation, and spinal cord (medial 
vestibulospinal tract). The primary neurotransmitters 
for excitatory vestibular nuclear projections include 
glutamate, whereas the inhibitory projections are 
either glycine or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Vestibu-
lar projections to the spinal systems are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 36.
The Vestibular Commissural System Communicates 
Bilateral Information
Many of these vestibular nuclei neurons receive con-
vergent motion information from the opposite ear 
through an inhibitory commissural pathway that uses 
GABA as a neurotransmitter (Figure 27–8B). The com-
missural pathway is highly organized according to the 
type of receptor from which information is received. 
For example, cells receiving signals from the ipsilat-
eral horizontal excitatory canal will also receive sig-
nals from the contralateral horizontal canal through an 
inhibitory interneuron. Due to the directional selectiv-
ity of the receptors in each ear, the contralateral hori-
zontal canal input will always be decreased during 
an ipsilateral head turn, in effect “disinhibiting” the 
inhibitory input from the contralateral side.
The effect of the commissural system is to increase 
the response of the vestibular nuclei neuron and 


