===== Page 1 =====
884    Part V / Movement
unexpected motions of the boat evoke automatic pos-
tural responses that prevent falls. Before you reach 
out to place a glass on the table, your nervous system 
makes anticipatory postural adjustments to maintain 
your balance.
Somatosensory, vestibular, and visual information 
are integrated to provide a coherent sense of the posi-
tion and velocity of the body in space with respect to 
the support surface, gravity, and visual environment. 
Since the surface is unstable and vision is not provid-
ing earth-stable information, your dependence on ves-
tibular information is greater than usual. Your head is 
kept stable while your trunk motions and walking pat-
tern adjust for disequilibrium caused by the moving 
surface. You notice that both your voluntary tasks and 
your balance control deteriorate when trying to attend 
to both goals.
Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie  
Posture Control
Postural equilibrium refers to the ability to actively sta-
bilize the upper body by resisting external forces act-
ing on the body. Although the dominant external force 
affecting equilibrium on earth is gravity, other inertial 
forces and external perturbations must also be resisted. 
Depending on the particular task or behavior, different 
sets of muscles are activated in response to or in antici-
pation of disturbance to equilibrium.
Postural orientation refers to the ability to actively 
align body segments, such as the trunk and head, with 
respect to each other and to the environment. Depend-
ing on the particular task or behavior, body segments 
may be aligned with respect to gravitational vertical, 
visual vertical, or the support surface. For example, 
when skiing downhill, the head may be oriented to 
gravitational and inertial vertical, but not to the visual 
or support surface references that are inclined.
The biomechanical requirements of postural con-
trol depend on anatomy and postural orientation and 
thus vary among species. Nevertheless, in a variety 
of species, the control mechanisms for postural equi-
librium and orientation have many common features. 
The sensorimotor mechanisms for postural control are 
quite similar in humans and quadrupedal mammals 
even though their habitual stance is different.
Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body’s  
Center of Mass
With many segments linked by joints, the body is 
mechanically unstable. To maintain balance, the 
nervous system must control the position and motion 
of the body’s center of mass as well as the body’s rota-
tion about it. The center of mass is a point that repre-
sents the average position of the body’s total mass. In 
the standing adult, for example, the center of mass is 
located about 2 cm in front of the second lumbar ver-
tebra; in a young child, it is higher. The location of the 
center of mass is not fixed but depends on postural ori-
entation. For example, when you flex at the hips while 
standing, the center of mass moves from a location 
inside the body to a position outside the body.
Although gravity pulls on all body segments, 
the net effect on body equilibrium acts through 
the body’s center of mass. The force due to gravity 
is opposed by the forces between the feet and the 
ground. Each point on the surface will generate a 
force on the foot. All the forces acting between the 
foot and the ground can be summed to yield a sin-
gle force vector termed the ground reaction force. This 
origin of the ground reaction force vector on the sur-
face is the point at which the rotational effect of all 
the forces on the feet are balanced and is termed the 
center of pressure (Box 36–1).
Maintaining balance while standing requires keep-
ing the downward projection of the center of mass 
within the base of support, an imaginary area defined 
by those parts of the body in contact with the environ-
ment. For example, the two feet or one foot of a stand-
ing human define a base of support (Box 36–1). However, 
when a standing person leans against a wall or is sup-
ported by crutches, the base of support extends from 
the ground under the feet to the contact point between 
the body and the wall or crutches. Because the body 
is always in motion, even during stable stance, the 
body’s center of mass continually moves about with 
respect to the base of support. Postural instability is 
determined by how fast the center of mass is acceler-
ating toward and beyond the boundary of its base of 
support and how close the downward projection of the 
body’s center of mass is to the boundary.
Upright stance requires two actions: (1) maintain-
ing support against gravity by keeping the center of 
mass at some height and joints stable and (2) maintain-
ing balance by controlling the trajectory of the center 
of mass in the horizontal plane. Balance and antigrav-
ity support are controlled separately by the nervous 
system and may be differentially affected in certain 
pathological conditions. For example, antigravity sup-
port can be excessive when spasticity is present after a 
stroke or insufficient in the hypotonia of cerebral palsy, 
although balance control may be preserved. Alterna-
tively, in vestibular disorders, antigravity support can 
be normal, although balance control is disordered.


===== Page 2 =====
Figure 36–1  The center of mass is controlled by mov-
ing the center of pressure.
A. The force caused by gravity passes through the center 
of mass (CoM) in the trunk. The surface exerts an upward 
force against each foot, such that the ground reaction 
force vector originates at the center of pressure (CoP) on 
the support surface. Below: Even when the feet remain 
in place, the CoP (blue displacement) and CoM (gold 
displacement) are always in motion as we sway. During 
normal standing on two feet, the projection of the CoM of 
the body remains within the base of support (light blue 
rectangle around the feet in contact with the ground) for 
equilibrium. The base of support of the standing human is 
defined by contact of the feet on the support surface.
B. In a dynamic situation, such as standing on one leg on a  
narrow beam, equilibrium can be maintained even when the 
body CoM displacements (gold displacements) go outside of 
the base of support for brief periods. Strategies such as  
counter-rotation of the lower and upper body can tilt the ground 
reaction force so that it accelerates the body CoM back over its 
base of support. (Adapted, with permission, from Otten 1999. 
Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
The center of pressure (CoP) is defined as the origin 
of the ground reaction force vector on the support sur-
face. For the body to be in static equilibrium, that is, 
to remain motionless, the force caused by gravity and 
the ground reaction force must be equal and opposite, 
and the CoP must be directly under the center of mass 
(CoM) (Figure 36–1A). Misalignment of the CoM and 
CoP causes motion of the CoM. For example, if the 
CoM projection onto the base of support is to the right 
of the CoP, the body will sway to the right until the CoP 
moves to the right to move the CoM back over the base 
of support.
However, standing is never truly static. While the 
body is in motion (postural sway), CoM and CoP are not 
aligned and dynamic equilibrium must maintain bal-
ance (Figure 36–1B). In fact, when the body is unsup-
ported, CoP and CoM are continually in motion and are 
rarely aligned, although when averaged over time dur-
ing quiet stance, they are coincident. The sway of the 
body during quiet stance can be described by the trajec-
tory of either CoM or CoP over time, such as sway path, 
area, velocity, and frequency.
In more dynamic situations like walking, running, 
turning, and jumping, stability can be achieved even 
when the CoM briefly goes outside the base of support. 
For example, when standing on one leg or on a narrow 
beam, momentum from rotating the hips, arms, and 
other body parts or movement of the CoP can be used 
to change the direction of the ground reaction force to 
return the body CoM over its base of support to main-
tain stability (Figure 36–1B). If the CoM is outside the 
base of support and heading away from it, subjects may 
need to take a step or grab a stable object to change the 
base of support and avoid a fall.
Box 36–1  Center of Pressure
Force plate
Base of
support
A
Force
plate
Ground
reaction
force
CoM
CoP
Mediolateral
Anteroposterior
10 mm
B
Ground
reaction
force
CoM
CoP
Mediolateral
5 cm
CoP
CoM


===== Page 3 =====
886    Part V / Movement
Antigravity support, or “postural tone,” is pro-
vided by the tonic activation of muscles that generate 
force against the ground to keep the trunk and limbs 
extended and the center of mass at the appropriate 
height. In humans, much of the support against grav-
ity is provided by passive bone-on-bone forces in joints 
such as the knees, which can be fully extended during 
stance, and in stretched ligaments such as those at the 
front of the hips. Nevertheless, antigravity support in 
humans also requires active tonic muscle contraction, 
for example, in ankle, trunk, and neck extensors. Pos-
tural tone, however, should not be considered a static 
state of muscle activation, as can be seen in pathologies 
such as decerebrate rigidity or the rigidity of parkin-
sonism. Normal postural tone is constantly changing, 
as a “wave” or “reed in the wind,” to accommodate 
changes in postural alignment, voluntary movements, 
and task requirements.
Postural tone is not sufficient, however, for main-
taining balance. Both bipeds and quadrupeds are 
inherently unstable, and their bodies sway during 
quiet stance. Actively contracted muscles exhibit a 
spring-like stiffness that helps to resist body sway, but 
muscle stiffness alone is insufficient for maintaining 
balance. Even stiffening of the limbs through muscle co-
contraction is not sufficient for balance control. Instead, 
complex patterns of muscle activation produce direc-
tion-specific forces to control the body’s center of mass. 
Body sway caused by even subtle movements, such as 
the motion of the chest during breathing, is actively 
counteracted by alterations in postural tone.
Postural Orientation Anticipates Disturbances  
to Balance
Postural orientation is the manner in which body parts 
are aligned with respect to each other and to the envi-
ronment. Animals arrange their bodies to accomplish 
specific tasks efficiently. Although this postural orien-
tation interacts with balance control, the two systems 
can act independently. For example, soccer goalies 
may orient their body to intercept a ball by sacrificing 
the goal of maintaining balance. In contrast, a patient 
with Parkinson disease or thoracic kyphosis may use 
an inefficient, flexed postural alignment to maintain 
effective control of balance while standing.
The energy needed to maintain body position over 
a period of time can influence postural orientation. In 
humans, for example, the upright orientation of the 
trunk with respect to gravity minimizes the forces 
and thus the energy required to hold the body’s center 
of mass over the base of support. Task requirements 
also affect postural orientation. For some tasks, it is 
important to stabilize the arrangement of the body in 
space, whereas for others, it is necessary to stabilize 
one body part with respect to another. When walking 
while carrying a full glass, for example, it is important 
to stabilize the hand against gravity to prevent spill-
age. In contrast, when walking while reading a cell 
phone, the hand must be stabilized with respect to the 
head and eyes to maintain visual acuity.
Subjects may adopt a particular postural orienta-
tion to optimize the accuracy of sensory signals regard-
ing body motion. For example, when standing and 
walking inside a ship, in which the surface and visual 
references may be unstable, information about earth 
vertical is derived primarily from vestibular inputs. A 
person often aligns his head with respect to gravita-
tional vertical when balancing on an unstable surface 
because the perception of vertical is most accurate 
when the head is upright and stable.
Anticipatory alterations of habitual body orienta-
tion can minimize the effect of a possible disturbance. 
For example, people often lean in the direction of an 
anticipated external force, or they flex their knees, 
widen their stance, and extend their arms when antici-
pating that stability will be compromised.
Postural Responses and Anticipatory  
Postural Adjustments Use Stereotyped 
Strategies and Synergies
When a sudden disturbance causes the body to sway, 
various postural motor strategies are used to main-
tain the center of mass within the base of support. In 
one strategy, the base of support remains fixed rela-
tive to the support surface: While the feet remain in 
place, the body rotates about the ankles back to the 
upright position (Figure 36–2A). In other strategies, 
the base of support is moved or enlarged, for exam-
ple, by taking a step or by grabbing a support with 
the hand (Figure 36–2B).
Older views of motor control focused on trunk 
and proximal limb muscles as the main postural effec-
tors. Recent behavioral studies show that any group 
of muscles from the neck and trunk, legs and arms, or 
feet and hands can act as postural muscles depending 
on the body parts in contact with the environment and 
the biomechanical requirements of equilibrium.
When studying the posture control system, sci-
entists disrupt balance in a controlled manner to 
determine the subject’s automatic postural response. 
This response is described by the ground reaction 
force vector, the motion of the center of pressure, and 
movements of parts of the body. The electrical activity 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    887
Figure 36–2  Automatic postural responses 
keep the center of mass within the base of 
support.
A. One postural strategy for regaining balance is 
to bring the center of mass back to its origin over 
the base of support. When the platform on which 
a subject is standing is suddenly moved backward, 
the body sways forward and the projection of the 
center of mass moves toward the toes. During 
recovery, the body actively exerts force into the 
surface about the ankles, bringing the center of 
mass back to the original position over the feet.
B. An alternative postural strategy enlarges the 
base of support to keep the center of mass within 
the base. A disturbance causes the subject to 
sway forward and the center of mass moves 
toward the boundary of the base of support (blue 
area on the ground). The base can be enlarged 
in two ways: taking a step and placing the foot 
in front of the center of mass to decelerate the 
body’s motion, or grabbing a support and thereby 
extending the base to include the contact point 
between the hand and support.
1  Surface moves
 
backward
2  Body sways
 
forward
A  Bringing center of mass back over base of support
3  Recovery
1  Disturbance
2  Responses
B  Extending base of support to capture center of mass
Sway
Stepping
Using arm 
for support
of many muscles is recorded by electromyography 
(EMG), which reflects the firing of alpha motor neu-
rons that innervate skeletal muscle and thus provides 
a window into the nervous system’s output for balance 
control. The combination of all these measurements 
allows investigators to infer the active neural processes 
underlying balance control.
Automatic Postural Responses Compensate for 
Sudden Disturbances
An automatic postural response to a sudden dis-
turbance is not a simple stretch reflex but rather the 
synergistic activation of a group of muscles in a charac-
teristic sequence with the goal of maintaining equilib-
rium. That is, the recruitment of a muscle for a postural 
response serves the requirements of equilibrium and 
is not a reflexive change in the muscle’s length caused 
by the disturbance. For example, when the surface 
under a person is rotated in the toes-up direction, the 
ankle extensor (gastrocnemius) is lengthened and a 
small stretch reflex may occur. However, the postural 
response for balance recruits the antagonist ankle flexor 
(tibialis anterior), which itself is shortened by the sur-
face rotation, while suppressing the stretch response in 
the gastrocnemius. In contrast, when the platform is 
moved backward, the gastrocnemius is again length-
ened but now it is recruited for the postural response, 
as evidenced by a second burst of EMG activity after 
the stretch reflex. Thus, the initial change in length of 
a muscle induced by perturbation does not determine 
whether that muscle is recruited for postural control, 
and stretch reflexes are not the basis for postural con-
trol. In fact, monosynaptic stretch reflexes are too weak 
to move the body center of mass effectively, and very 
often, the postural muscles activated to recover equi-
librium have not been stretched.
Automatic postural responses to sudden distur-
bances have characteristic temporal and spatial fea-
tures. A postural response in muscles must be recruited 
rapidly following the onset of a disturbance. Sudden 
movement of the support surface under a standing cat 
evokes EMG activity within 40 to 60 ms (Figure 36–3). 
Humans have longer latencies of postural response 
(90–120 ms in the ankle muscles); the increased delay is 
attributed to the larger body size of humans and thus 


===== Page 5 =====
888    Part V / Movement
Figure 36–3  Automatic postural responses have stereotypical 
temporal characteristics. Electromyographic (EMG) activity has 
a characteristic latency. Anterior motion of the platform evokes 
an EMG response in the hip extensor muscle (anterior biceps 
femoris) of a cat approximately 40 ms after the onset of platform 
acceleration (100 ms in a human). This latency is stereotyped and 
repeatable across subjects and is approximately four times as long 
as that of the monosynaptic stretch reflex. As the platform moves, 
the paws are carried forward and the trunk remains behind owing 
to inertia, causing the center of mass to move backward with 
increasing velocity with respect to the platform. The velocity of 
the center of mass peaks and then decreases as the horizontal 
component of the ground reaction force (GRFh) increases follow-
ing muscle activation. The delay of approximately 30 ms between 
the onset of EMG activity and the onset of the active response 
reflects excitation–contraction coupling and musculoskeletal 
compliance. The automatic postural response extends the hind 
limb, propelling the trunk forward and restoring the position of the 
center of mass with respect to the paws. (Abbreviations:  
A, anterior; P, posterior.) (Data from J. Macpherson.)
4.0 cm
0.25 g
Platform
0
0.5
1.0
50 µV
Anterior biceps 
femoris EMG
Position
Position
Velocity
Time (s)
5 cm/s
2.5 cm
1 N
Left 
hindlimb
GRFh
Passive
displacement
Active
response
Quiet
stance
Balance
restored
Center 
of mass
Acceleration
Onset 
of active 
force
EMG 
onset
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
Delay
Onset platform 
acceleration
the greater signal conduction distances from sensory 
receptors to the central nervous system and thence 
to leg muscles. The latency of automatic postural 
responses is shorter than voluntary reaction time but 
longer than the monosynaptic stretch reflex.
Postural responses involving a change in support 
base, such as stepping, have even longer latencies 
than those that occur when the feet remain in place. 
The longer time presumably affords greater flexibility 
in the commands transmitted by long loops through 
the cortex; for example, the choice of foot to begin the 
step, the direction of the step, and the path of the step 
around obstacles.
Activation of postural muscles results in contrac-
tion and the development of force in the muscles, lead-
ing to torque (rotational force) at the joints. The net 
result is an active response, the ground reaction force 
(Box 36–1), that restores the center of mass to its origi-
nal position over the base of support (Figure 36–3). 
The delay between EMG activation and the active 
response, approximately 30 ms in the cat and 50 ms 
in humans, reflects the excitation–contraction coupling 
time of each muscle as well as the compliance of the 
musculoskeletal system.
The amplitude of EMG activity in a particular muscle 
depends on both the speed and direction of postural dis-
turbance. The amplitude increases as the speed of a mov-
able platform under a standing human or cat increases, 
and it varies in a monotonic fashion as the direction of 
platform motion is varied systematically. Each muscle 
responds to a limited set of perturbation directions with 
a characteristic tuning curve (Figure 36–4).
Although individual muscles have unique direc-
tional tuning curves, muscles are not activated inde-
pendently but instead are activated together in 
synergies, with characteristic time delays. The muscles 
within a synergy receive a common command signal 
during postural responses. In this way, the many mus-
cles of the body are controlled by just a few signals, 
reducing the time needed to compute the appropriate 
postural response (Box 36–2).
The set of muscles recruited in a postural response 
to a disturbance depends on the body’s initial stance. 
The same disturbance elicits very different postural 
responses in someone standing unaided, standing 
while grasping a stable support, or crouching on all 
four limbs. For example, forward sway activates mus-
cles in the back of the legs and trunk during upright 
free stance. When the subject is holding onto a stable 
support, muscles of the arms rather than those of the 
legs are activated first. When the subject is crouched on 
toes and fingers, like a cat, muscles in the front of the 
legs and in the arms are activated (Figure 36–6A).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    889
Figure 36–4  Automatic postural 
responses have stereotypical direc-
tional characteristics. (Adapted from 
Macpherson 1988.)
A. The gluteus medius muscle in 
the cat, a hip extensor and abductor, 
responds to a range of directions of 
motion in the horizontal plane. The elec-
tromyographic (EMG) records shown 
here are from a cat standing on a plat-
form that was moved in the horizontal 
plane in each of 16 evenly spaced 
directions. The gluteus medius muscle 
of the left hind limb was activated by 
motion in several directions (pink) and 
inhibited in the remaining directions 
(gray). The dashed vertical lines indi-
cate the onset of platform accelera-
tion. In the center is a polar plot of the 
amplitude of EMG activity versus the 
direction of motion during the auto-
matic postural response; it represents a 
directional tuning curve for the muscle. 
EMG amplitude was computed from 
the area under the curve during the 
first 80 ms of the response.
B. Every muscle has a characteristic 
directional tuning curve that differs 
from that of other muscles, even if they 
have similar actions. The middle biceps 
femoris and cranial semimembranosus, 
for example, are both extensors of  
the hip.
A  Directional tuning of postural responses for a single muscle
B  Each muscle has unique directional tuning
Right
Anterior
Left
Posterior
500 ms
100 µV
Cranial
semimembranosus
Extensors
Iliopsoas
Flexors
Anterior
sartorius
Vastus
lateralis
Middle
biceps
femoris
Anterior
Left
Posterior
Gluteus medius
Because postural responses are influenced by 
recent experience, they adapt only gradually to new 
biomechanical conditions. When forward sway is 
induced by backward motion of a platform on which 
a subject is standing, the posterior muscles of the 
ankle, knee, and hip are activated in sequence beginning 
90 ms after the platform starts moving. This postural 
response, the ankle strategy, restores balance primarily 
by rotating the body about the ankle joints. However, 
when forward sway is induced by backward motion of 
a narrow beam, it is impossible to use surface torque 
alone to recover equilibrium and the anterior mus-
cles of the hip and trunk are activated. This postural 
response, the hip strategy, restores the body’s center of 
mass by bending forward at the hip joints and counter-
rotating at the ankles (Figure 36–6B).
When a subject moves from standing on a wide 
platform to a narrow beam, she or he persists in using 
the ankle strategy in the first few trials. This strategy 
does not work when standing on the beam, and the 
subject falls. Over several trials, the subject will gradu-
ally switch to using the hip strategy. Similarly, moving 
from the beam back to the platform requires several 
trials to adapt the postural response back to the ankle 
strategy (Figure 36–6C).
Although sensory stimulation changes immediately 
after subjects move from the beam to the floor, the pos-
tural response adjusts gradually as it is tuned for opti-
mal behavior by trial and error. If postural responses 
were simple reflexes, they would change immediately 
upon a change in sensory drive. Trial-to-trial changes in 
postural behavior generally occur at the subconscious 
level (implicit learning) and involve updating of the 
body schema and internal model of the world within 
the right parietal cortex. This body schema is dynamic, 
as it is constantly updated based on experience.
Postural responses not only improve with practice, 
but the improvements are retained, a sign of motor 


===== Page 7 =====
Figure 36–5  Postural commands activate synergies 
rather than individual muscles. Synergistic activation 
of several muscles allows movement goals to be trans-
lated into specific muscle activity patterns. Each muscle 
synergy activates a group of muscles in a fixed propor-
tion (colored bars) to produce the mechanical output 
needed to achieve a postural goal. The height of each bar 
represents the relative amount of activation, or weighting, 
for each muscle (1–13). Each synergy is activated more or 
less at particular times during a behavior driven by central 
commands and sensory drive (recruitment function). For 
example, different postural synergies are activated for dif-
ferent directions of falling. (Abbreviation: CoM, center of 
mass.) (Reproduced, with permission, from L. Ting.)
Coordinated movements require precise control of the 
many joints and muscles in the body. Maintaining con-
trol is biomechanically complex, in part because different 
combinations of joint rotations and muscle activations 
can achieve the same goal. Such redundancy confers 
great flexibility, for example, in modifying stepping pat-
terns to negotiate obstacles in our path, but comes at the 
cost of increased complexity in the brain’s computation 
of movement trajectories and forces.
Many factors must be included in the computation 
of movement commands, including the effect of exter-
nal forces such as gravity and the forces that one body 
segment exerts on another during motion. All these fac-
tors come into play when the brain computes postural 
responses to sudden disturbances, but with the added 
constraint of a time limit on computation: Responses 
must occur within a certain time or balance will be lost.
It has long been believed that the brain simplifies the 
control of movement by grouping control variables, for 
example, activating several muscles together. Using math-
ematical techniques that parse complex data into a small 
number of components, one can determine that only four 
synergies are needed to account for the vast majority of 
Box 36–2  Synergistic Activation of Muscles
activation patterns of 13 muscles of the human leg and 
trunk during automatic postural responses to many direc-
tions of platform motion (Figure 36–5). Activation of each 
synergy produces a unique direction of force against the 
ground, suggesting that postural control is based on task-
related variables such as the force between foot and ground 
rather than the contraction force of individual muscles.
Like the arrangement of notes in a musical chord, 
each muscle synergy specifies the timing and amplitude 
of activation for a particular muscle together with oth-
ers. Just as one note belongs to several different chords, 
each muscle belongs to more than one synergy. When 
several chords are played simultaneously, the chord 
structure is no longer evident in the multitude of notes. 
Similarly, when several synergies are activated concur-
rently, the observed muscle pattern gives the appearance 
of unstructured complexity, but a particular muscle’s 
activation is the result of the systematic addition of 
synergy commands. Concurrent activation of synergies 
simplifies the neural command signals for movement as 
only a few central commands are required instead of a 
separate command for each muscle, while allowing flex-
ibility and adaptability to postural control.
Goal
Muscle synergy
Recruitment coefﬁcient
Move CoM
leftward
Move CoM
back and
rightward
Move CoM
forward
Move CoM
back and
leftward
Muscles
Perturbation direction
1
Right Front Left Back
Right
Front
Left
Back
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    891
0
100
200
300
Time (ms)
0
100
200
300
Time (ms)
ABD
GAS
PSP
PSP
ABD
GAS
Trial 1
3
5
8
Hip strategy
(on beam)
Ankle strategy
(on platform)
C  Adaptation of postural response
A  Stance determines postural response
B  Platform width affects postural response
QUAD
HAM
HAM
QUAD
QUAD
HAM
Ankle strategy  
Hip strategy  
Narrow 
beam
Wide 
platform
Adaptation over 
successive trials 
on wide platform
Move to 
wide platform
Figure 36–6  Automatic postural responses change with  
biomechanical conditions.
A. The backward movement of a platform activates different 
groups of muscles depending on initial stance. Gray stick  
figures show initial positions (upright unsupported, quadru-
pedal, or upright supported). The muscles activated in each 
postural response are shown in red. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Dunbar et al. 1986.)
B. When a subject stands on a narrow beam that is abruptly 
moved backward, the anterior muscles—abdominals (ABD) 
and quadriceps (QUAD)—are recruited to flex the trunk and 
extend the ankles, moving the hips backward (the hip strategy). 
When the subject instead stands on a wide platform that is 
moved backward, his posterior muscles—paraspinals (PSP), 
hamstrings (HAM), and gastrocnemius (GAS)—are activated 
to bring the body back to the erect position by rotating at the 
ankles (the ankle strategy). Muscles representative of dif-
ferent postural responses are highlighted in color. Dashed 
vertical lines in the plots indicate onset of platform (or beam) 
acceleration.
C. Postural strategy adapts after the subject moves from the nar-
row beam onto the wide platform. On the beam, the quadriceps 
are activated and the hamstrings are silent; after adaptation to 
the wide platform, the reverse is observed. The transition from 
quadriceps to hamstrings activation occurs over a series of trials; 
the activity in the quadriceps gradually decreases in amplitude, 
whereas the hamstrings are activated earlier and earlier until, by 
trial 8, quadriceps activity disappears altogether. Ankle and trunk 
muscles show similar patterns of adaptation. (B. and C, adapted, 
with permission, from Horak and Nashner 1986.)


===== Page 9 =====
892    Part V / Movement
Figure 36–7  Postural responses can be 
learned and retained with practice.
A. Displacement of body center mass 
(CoM, gold oscillation) in response to 
forward and backward platform oscilla-
tions of varying amplitudes (gray) as a 
healthy subject learns to reduce postural 
instability.
B. Displacement of the body CoM by 
forward–backward surface oscillations is 
reduced across training sessions on  
day 1, and this improvement is retained 
on day 2 in healthy control subjects.  
People with multiple sclerosis also learn 
to reduce CoM displacements but do not 
retain this improvement the next day. 
The mean and standard error of group 
changes in gain (CoM/surface displace-
ment) are compared. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Gera et al. 2016.)
learning. For example, when subjects practice stand-
ing on an oscillating surface, they gradually learn to 
decrease the extent of the displacement of their center 
of mass, and much of this improvement is retained the 
next day (Figure 36–7). Patients with neurological dis-
orders, such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson disease, 
who have significantly impaired postural responses 
can often learn to improve their postural control with 
practice, although they may need more practice than 
normal to retain the improvements (Figure 36–7).
Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for 
Voluntary Movement
Voluntary movements can also destabilize postural 
orientation and equilibrium. For example, rapidly lift-
ing the arms forward while standing produces forces 
that extend the hips, flex the knees, and dorsiflex the 
ankles, moving the body’s center of mass forward 
relative to the feet. The nervous system has advance 
knowledge of the effects of voluntary movement on 
postural alignment and stability and activates antici-
patory postural adjustments, often in advance of the 
primary movement (Figure 36–8A).
Anticipatory postural adjustments are specific 
to biomechanical conditions. When a freely standing 
subject rapidly pulls on a handle fixed to the wall, the 
leg muscles (gastrocnemius and hamstrings) are acti-
vated before the arm muscles (Figure 36–8B). When the 
0.04
Body CoM
Platform
5
10
15
Time (s)
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
Multiple 
sclerosis 
Control 
Training
(day 1) 
Retention
(day 2)
CoM / platform displacement
Displacement
A
B
Backward
Forward
subject performs the same pull while his shoulders are 
propped against a rigid bar, no anticipatory leg muscle 
activity occurs because the nervous system relies on 
the support of the bar to prevent the body from mov-
ing forward. When the handle is pulled in response to 
an external cue, the arm muscles are activated faster in 
the supported condition than in the freestanding con-
dition. Thus, voluntary arm muscle activation is nor-
mally delayed when the task requires active postural 
stability.
Another common preparatory postural adjustment 
occurs when one begins to walk. The center of mass 
is accelerated forward and laterally by the unweight-
ing of one leg. This postural adjustment appears to be 
independent of the stepping program that underlies 
ongoing locomotion (Chapter 33). Similarly, a forward 
shift of the center of mass precedes the act of standing 
on the toes. A subject is unable to remain standing on 
his toes if he simply activates the calf muscles without 
moving his center of mass forward; he rises onto his 
toes only momentarily before gravity restores a flat-
footed stance. Moving the center of mass forward over 
the toes before activating the calf muscles aligns it over 
the anticipated base of support and thus stabilizes the 
toe stance.
Postural equilibrium during voluntary movement 
requires control not only of the position and motion 
of the body’s center of mass but also of the angu-
lar momentum about the center of mass. A diver can 


