===== Page 1 =====
124    Part I / Overall Perspective
A  Regions involved in episodic memory
B  Multiple functions of the hippocampus
Hippocampus
Overlap
0%
100%
Hippocampus
Precuneus
Medial
prefrontal
cortex
Inferior
frontal
gyrus
Angular
gyrus
Attention
Perception
Place
Events
Associations
Reward
Learning
Memory
Figure 6–3  Challenges of mapping mind and brain. Any 
interpretation of data from fMRI must consider the complex-
ity of the relationship between cognitive functions and brain 
regions. This complexity is illustrated here with a meta-analysis 
from a database containing more than 14,000 published fMRI 
studies. (Data retrieved in 2019 from http://neurosynth.org, 
displayed on brain from Edlow et al. 2019; figure updated and 
adapted from Shohamy and Turk-Browne 2013 by Tristan Yates.)
A. This map shows that multiple brain regions are engaged by 
episodic memory—that is, encoding and retrieval of specific 
events from one’s past. Colored voxels indicate a high probabil-
ity of the term “episodic” in studies that reported activation in 
these voxels (reverse inference). This example illustrates how a 
single cognitive function can be associated with multiple brain 
regions (one-to-many mapping).
B. These maps show that multiple cognitive functions engage 
the hippocampus (circled in white in each hemisphere). Colored 
voxels in each inset brain indicate a high probability that these 
voxels were activated in studies that examined the corre-
sponding term (forward inference). The overlap map shows 
the percentage of these terms that activated each voxel. This 
example illustrates how a single brain region can be associated 
with multiple cognitive functions and behaviors (many-to-one 
mapping).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 6 / Imaging and Behavior    125
The ability to image the human brain with noninvasive 
tools and to measure internal mental processes has led 
to interest in applying fMRI to a variety of real-world 
problems, such as clinical diagnosis and treatment, law 
and justice, artificial intelligence, marketing and eco-
nomics, and politics.
In the clinical realm, one interesting direction is the 
use of fMRI to examine patients in a vegetative state. 
Studies suggest that some such patients exhibit brain 
activity that reflects mental processing. For example, 
a patient might appear comatose—unconscious, non-
communicative, and unreactive to external stimuli—yet 
exhibit neural activity in the motor cortex when asked to 
think of an action or in category-specific visual regions 
when asked to imagine specific visual cues. Such find-
ings could influence the prognosis and treatment of 
patients by clinicians.
Another potential real-world application of fMRI 
is lie detection. The ability to accurately distinguish 
truth from lies based on brain activity could have sig-
nificant value in the courtroom. Some laboratory studies 
have reported differential brain activity when groups 
of subjects are instructed to lie repeatedly. To be useful, 
however, fMRI would need to provide highly reliable 
evidence about whether an individual person is lying 
about a specific event, in a way that is immune from 
strategies or countermeasures. This is not possible at 
present, and indeed, fMRI evidence is generally inad-
missible in court.
These and other applications of fMRI raise ethical 
and privacy concerns. For example, authorities could 
use fMRI data to justify consequential decisions (eg, guilt 
or innocence), exploiting the public’s bias to believe bio-
logical explanations, even when the underlying science 
is not settled. More troubling, humans currently have 
autonomy over whether we share our internal thoughts 
and feelings, but devices that sense this information 
could change that. As a result, an important challenge 
for neuroscientists when considering practical appli-
cations is to accurately convey that fMRI is powerful 
but has limitations and that our understanding of the 
human brain is a work in progress.
Box 6–2  Brain Imaging in the Real World
astrocytes and other glia, neuromodulatory systems, 
and the vascular system. A better understanding of 
the relationship between BOLD activity and these pro-
cesses is essential for knowing when and why measure-
ments of different types align and diverge. Although 
some experimental conditions lead to an increase in 
both neuronal activity and BOLD activity, others do 
not. For example, although the presentation of a visual 
cue increases both blood flow in the visual cortex and 
neuronal firing, if this visual cue is highly expected but 
not presented, blood flow can still increase but with-
out an increase in neuronal activity. This suggests that 
there are important nuances to the coupling of neural 
and vascular activity that may have functional signifi-
cance and that the vascular signals themselves may be 
more complex than previously appreciated.
As the history of fMRI shows, scientific discover-
ies in one field can lead to unexpected breakthroughs 
in other fields. The discovery of MRI in the 1970s 
(which 20 years later led to fMRI) came from physics 
and chemistry, and was so profound and far-reaching 
that it was recognized by the Nobel Prize in Physiol-
ogy or Medicine in 2003 to Paul Lauterbur and Peter 
Mansfield. This in turn was made possible by the dis-
covery of nuclear magnetic resonance decades earlier, 
which resulted in the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1944 
to Isidor Rabi and in 1952 to Felix Bloch and Edward 
Purcell. These discoveries had no initial connection 
to neuroscience but came to spark a revolution in the 
study of mind, brain, and behavior.
Highlights
1.	 Functional brain imaging methods in cognitive 
neuroscience seek to record activity in the human 
brain associated with mental processes as they 
unfold in the human mind, linking biological and 
behavioral measures. Currently, the dominant 
technique is fMRI.
2.	 fMRI is based on two main concepts: the physics 
of magnetic resonance and the biology of neuro-
vascular coupling. Combined, they allow fMRI to 
measure the BOLD response to neuronal activity. 
When human subjects perform cognitive tasks 
during fMRI, measurements of BOLD activity 
can be linked to particular mental processes and 
behaviors over time.
3.	 The link between BOLD activity and behavior is 
inferred through a series of preprocessing steps 
and statistical analyses. These analyses can answer 


===== Page 3 =====
126    Part I / Overall Perspective
a range of questions, such as which brain regions 
are active during specific tasks, what information 
is coded in the spatial pattern of activity within a 
region, and how regions interact with each other 
over time as part of a network.
4.	 Human brain imaging has led to fundamental 
insights about the neural mechanisms of behavior 
across many domains. Some prominent examples 
are understanding how the human brain processes 
faces, how memories are stored and retrieved, and 
how we learn from trial and error. Across these 
domains, data from fMRI have converged with 
findings from neuronal recordings in animals and 
with theoretical predictions from computational 
models, providing a more complete picture of the 
relationship between brain and mind.
5.	 fMRI records brain activity but does not directly 
modify activity. Therefore, it does not support 
inferences about whether a brain region is neces-
sary for a behavior, but rather whether the region 
is involved in that behavior. Most studies sup-
port forward inferences about this involvement, 
whereby activity in the brain can be linked to a 
mental process because the experiment manipu-
lates that process.
6.	 fMRI provides an opportunity to study the func-
tion of the human brain as it engages in a variety 
of mental processes, in both health and disease. 
This technology and analyses of the data it gen-
erates are undergoing continual development to 
improve the temporal and spatial resolution of 
biological measurements and to clarify the links 
between these measurements, mental processes, 
and behavior.
Daphna Shohamy 
Nick Turk-Browne 
Suggested Reading
Bandettini PA. 2012. Twenty years of functional MRI: the 
science and the stories. NeuroImage 62:575–588.
Bullmore E, Sporns O. 2009. Complex brain networks: graph 
theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 10:186–198.
Cohen JD, Daw N, Engelhardt B, et al. 2017. Computational 
approaches to fMRI analysis. Nat Neurosci 20:304–313.
Daw ND, Doya K. 2006. The computational neurobiology of 
learning and reward. Curr Opin Neurobiol 16:199–204.
Kanwisher N. 2010. Functional specificity in the human 
brain: a window into the functional architecture of the 
mind. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:11163–11170.
Poldrack RA, Mumford JA, Nichols TE. 2011. Handbook of Func-
tional MRI Data Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Shohamy D, Turk-Browne NB. 2013. Mechanisms for wide-
spread hippocampal involvement in cognition. J Exp 
Psychol Gen 142:1159–1170.
References
Aly M, Ranganath C, Yonelinas AP. 2013. Detecting changes 
in scenes: the hippocampus is critical for strength-based 
perception. Neuron 78:1127–1137.
Aly M, Turk-Browne NB. 2016. Attention stabilizes repre-
sentations in the human hippocampus. Cereb Cortex 
26:783–796.
Brewer JB, Zhao Z, Desmond JE, Glover GH, Gabrieli JD. 
1998. Making memories: brain activity that predicts 
how well visual experience will be remembered. Science 
281:1185–1187.
Dricot L, Sorger B, Schiltz C, Goebel R, Rossion B. 2008. The 
roles of “face” and “non-face” areas during individual 
face perception: evidence by fMRI adaptation in a brain-
damaged prosopagnosic patient. NeuroImage 40:318–332.
Edlow BL, Mareyam A, Horn A, et al. 2019. 7 Tesla MRI of the ex 
vivo human brain at 100 micron resolution. Sci Data 30:244.
Farah MJ, Hutchinson JB, Phelps EA, Wagner AD. 2014. 
Functional MRI-based lie detection: scientific and societal 
challenges. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:123–131.
Foerde K, Shohamy D. 2011. Feedback timing modu-
lates brain systems for learning in humans. J Neurosci 
31:13157–13167.
Fox MD, Raichle ME. 2007. Spontaneous fluctuations in 
brain activity observed with functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:700–711.
Friston KJ, Holmes AP, Worsley KJ, Poline JP, Frith CD, 
Frackowiak, RS. 1994. Statistical parametric maps in func-
tional imaging: a general linear approach. Hum Brain 
Mapp 2:189–210.
Grill-Spector K, Henson R, Martin A. 2006. Repetition and 
the brain: neural models of stimulus-specific effects. 
Trends Cogn Sci 10:14–23.
Hannula DE, Ranganath C. 2009. The eyes have it: hip-
pocampal activity predicts expression of memory in eye 
movements. Neuron 63:592–599.
Huettel SA, Song AW, McCarthy G. 2014. Functional Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer 
Associates, Inc.
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. 1997. The fusiform 
face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex special-
ized for face perception. J Neurosci 17:4302–4311.
Kim H. 2011. Neural activity that predicts subsequent mem-
ory and forgetting: a meta-analysis of 74 fMRI studies. 
NeuroImage 54:2446–2461.
Kriegeskorte N, Mur M, Bandettini P. 2008. Representational 
similarity analysis—connecting the branches of systems 
neuroscience. Front Syst Neurosci 2:4.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 6 / Imaging and Behavior    127
McCarthy G, Puce A, Gore JC, Allison T. 1997. Face-specific 
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. J Cog Neurosci 
9:605–610.
Moeller S, Freiwald WA, Tsao DY. 2008. Patches with links: a 
unified system for processing faces in the macaque tem-
poral lobe. Science 320:1355–1359.
Norman KA, Polyn SM, Detre GJ, Haxby JV. 2006. Beyond 
mind-reading: multi-voxel pattern analysis of fMRI data. 
Trends Cogn Sci 10:424–430.
O’Doherty JP, Hampton A, Kim H. 2007. Model-based fMRI 
and its application to reward learning and decision mak-
ing. Ann NY Acad Sci 1104:35–53.
Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, 
Pickard JD. 2006. Detecting awareness in the vegetative 
state. Science 313:1402.
Schapiro AC, Kustner LV, Turk-Browne NB. 2012. Shaping of 
object representations in the human medial temporal lobe 
based on temporal regularities. Curr Biol 22:1622–1627.
Sirotin Y, Das A. 2009. Anticipatory haemodynamic signals 
in sensory cortex not predicted by local neuronal activity. 
Nature 457:475–479.
Squire LR. 1992. Memory and the hippocampus: a synthesis 
from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans. Psychol 
Rev 99:195–231.
Turk-Browne NB. 2013. Functional interactions as big data in 
the human brain. Science 342:580–584.
Wagner AD, Schacter DL, Rotte M, et al. 1998. Building mem-
ories: remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences 
as predicted by brain activity. Science 281:1188–1191.
Wimmer GE, Shohamy D. 2012. Preference by association: 
how memory mechanisms in the hippocampus bias deci-
sions. Science 338:270–273.
Yarkoni T, Poldrack RA, Nichols TE, Van Essen DC, Wager 
TD. 2011. Large-scale automated synthesis of human 
functional neuroimaging data. Nat Methods 8:665–670.


===== Page 5 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 6 =====
Part II


===== Page 7 =====
Preceding Page
Crystal structure of the MthK Ca2+-regulated K+ channel from the archaeon Methano-
bacterium thermoautotrophicum, a thermophilic microbe. The view is from the extra-
cellular side of the channel in the Ca2+-bound open state. MthK consists of two major 
functional domains. An integral membrane protein forms an aqueous pore (blue), which 
selects and conducts K+ ions, and has a gate that switches between open and closed 
conformations; an intracellular Ca2+-binding gating ring (gray) controls the gate. When it 
binds Ca2+, the resulting conformational change is mechanically transmitted to the pore, 
causing it to switch to the open state. (Used with permission of Kenton Swartz, based 
on PDB code 1LNQ, from Jian Y, Lee A, Chen J, et al. 2002. Nature 417:523–526.)


===== Page 8 =====
Cell and Molecular Biology of 
Cells of the Nervous System
II
I
n all biological systems, from the most primitive to the most 
advanced, the basic building block is the cell. Cells are often 
organized into functional modules that are repeated in complex 
biological systems. The vertebrate brain is the most complex example 
of a modular system. Complex biological systems have another basic 
feature: They are architectonic—that is, their anatomy, fine structure, 
and dynamic properties all reflect a specific physiological function. 
Thus, the construction of the brain and the cell biology, biophysics, 
and biochemistry of its component cells reflect its fundamental func-
tion, which is to mediate behavior. 
The nervous system is made up of glial cells and nerve cells. Ear-
lier views of glia as purely structural elements have been supplanted 
by our current understanding that there are several types of glial 
cells, each of which is specialized to regulate one or more particu-
lar aspects of neuronal function. Different varieties of glial cells play 
essential roles in enabling and guiding neural development, insulat-
ing axonal processes, controlling the extracellular milieu, supporting 
synaptic transmission, facilitating learning and memory, and modu-
lating pathological processes within the nervous system. Some glial 
cells have receptors for neurotransmitters and voltage-gated ion 
channels that enable them to communicate with one another and 
with neurons to support neuronal signaling. 
In contrast to glial cells, the great diversity of nerve cells—the 
fundamental units from which the modules of the nervous systems 
are assembled—are variations on one basic cell plan. Four features 
of this plan give nerve cells the unique ability to communicate with 
one another precisely and rapidly over long distances. First, the 
neuron is polarized, possessing receptive dendrites on one end and 
communicating axons with presynaptic terminals at the other. This 
polarization of functional properties restricts the predominant flow 
of voltage impulses to one direction. Second, the neuron is electri-
cally excitable. Its cell membrane contains specialized proteins—ion 
channels and receptors—that permit the influx and efflux of spe-
cific inorganic ions, thus creating electrical currents that generate 
the voltage signals across the membrane. Third, the neuron contains 
proteins and organelles that endow it with specialized secretory 


===== Page 9 =====
properties that allow it to release neurotransmitters at syn-
apses. Fourth, this system for rapid signaling over the long 
distances between the cell body and its terminals is enabled 
by a cytoskeletal structure that mediates, on a slower time 
scale, efficient transport of various proteins, mRNAs, and 
organelles between the two compartments.
In this part of the book, we shall be concerned with the 
distinctive cell biological properties that allow neurons and 
glia to fulfill their various specialized functions. A major 
emphasis will be on properties of ion channels that endow 
neurons with the ability to generate and propagate electri-
cal signals in the form of action potentials. We begin the 
discussion of neurons by considering general properties 
shared by ion channels—the ability to select and conduct 
ions, and to gate between open and closed conformations. 
Neurons use four major classes of channels for signaling: (1) 
resting channels generate the resting potential and underlie 
the passive electrical properties of neurons that determine 
the time course of synaptic potentials, their spread along 
dendrites, and the threshold for firing an action potential; 
(2) sensory receptor channels respond to certain sensory 
stimuli to generate local receptor potentials; (3) ligand-
gated channels open in response to neurotransmitters, 
generating local synaptic potentials; and (4) voltage-gated 
channels produce the currents that generate self-propagat-
ing action potentials. In this part, we focus mainly on rest-
ing and voltage-gated channels. In Part III, we consider in 
more detail ligand-gated channels, and the neurotransmit-
ters and second messengers that control their activity. The 
channels that are activated by sensory stimuli will be exam-
ined in Part IV.
Part Editors: John D. Koester and Steven A. Siegelbaum
Part II
Chapter 7	
The Cells of the Nervous System
Chapter 8	
Ion Channels
Chapter 9	
Membrane Potential and the Passive 
Electrical Properties of the Neuron
Chapter 10 	 Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential


