===== Page 1 =====
1252    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–14  Loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in  
Parkinson disease can be treated by grafting embryonic 
cells into the putamen.
A. In the healthy brain, dopaminergic projections from the sub-
stantia nigra (SN) innervate the putamen, which in turn activates 
neurons in the globus pallidus (GP). Pallidal outputs to the brain 
and spinal cord facilitate movement. The image below shows 
melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in human substantia nigra.
B. In Parkinson disease, the loss of dopaminergic neurons in 
the substantia nigra deprives the putamen–globus pallidus 
pathways of their drive. The image beneath the diagram shows 
the virtual absence of melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in the 
substantia nigra of an individual with Parkinson disease.
C. Direct injection of embryonic dopaminergic neurons into the 
putamen reactivates the globus pallidus output pathways. The 
image below shows tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the cell 
bodies and axons of embryonic mesencephalic dopaminergic 
neurons grafted into the putamen of a human patient. (Image 
reproduced, with permission, from Kordower and  
Sortwell 2000. Copyright © 2000. Published by Elsevier B.V.)
One is to replace dopaminergic cells that die in 
Parkinson disease. When transplanted into the stria-
tum, these neurons release dopamine onto their tar-
gets without the need to grow long axons or form 
elaborate synapses (Figure 50–14). Another is to 
transplant immature inhibitory interneurons from 
the ganglionic eminences in which they are pro-
duced (Chapter 46) to the cortex, where they mature 
and form synapses. By enhancing inhibition, these 
neurons attenuate the manifestations of disorders in 
which insufficient inhibitory drive plays a role, such 
as epilepsy and anxiety.
Unfortunately, application of these methods to 
human patients has been fraught with difficulties. One 
is the difficulty of obtaining and growing develop-
ing neurons in sufficient numbers and with sufficient 
purity. Second, it has been challenging to modify neu-
rons by introducing new genes so as to improve their 
chances of functioning in a new environment. Third, in 
many cases, the grafted neurons are already too mature 
A  Normal
Spinal
cord
GP
Putamen
B  Parkinson disease
C  Recovery 
SN
GP
Putamen
SN
Injection of
DA neurons


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1253
Figure 50–15  Induced pluripotent stem cells can be repro-
grammed to generate precursors of many neuronal and 
glial types.  The precursors can then be transplanted into the 
brain or spinal cord, where cells complete their differentiation 
and integrate into functional circuits. (Abbreviations: DA,  
dopamine; DG, dentate gyrus; NPC, neural progenitor cell; 
OPC, oligodendrocyte progenitor cell.) (Adapted, with permission, 
from Wen et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.)
to differentiate properly or to integrate effectively into 
functional circuits.
These obstacles can be overcome by transplanting 
neural precursors into the adult brain where they can 
go on to differentiate into neurons in a hospitable envi-
ronment. Several classes of precursors have been trans-
planted successfully, including neural stem cells and 
committed precursors. Some initial success has been 
obtained with embryonic stem (ES) cells. These cells are 
derived from early blastocyst stage embryos and can 
give rise to all cells of the body. Because they can divide 
indefinitely in culture, large numbers of cells can be 
generated, induced to differentiate, and then engrafted.
More recently, this technology has been enhanced 
by the molecular reprogramming of skin fibroblast 
cells to create induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 
(Figure 50–15). These cells have a distinct advantage 
over ES cells; embryos are not required for their pro-
duction, effectively bypassing a minefield of practi-
cal, political, and ethical concerns that have hindered 
research using human ES cells. Another advantage of 
iPS cells is that they can be generated from an indi-
vidual patient’s own skin cells, neatly avoiding issues 
of immunological incompatibility. It is also possible to 
genetically modify the iPS cells in culture by repairing 
a defective gene before transplantation.
Because ES and iPS cells have the potential to gener-
ate any cell type, it is essential that their differentiation 
be guided along specific pathways in culture before they 
are transplanted. Methods for generating specific classes 
of neural precursors, neurons, and glial cells from ES 
and iPS cells have now been devised (Figure 50–15). 
Neuronal
subtypes
BMP/ TGFβ / WNT
SHH
BMP/ TGFβ 
SHH/WNT/ FGF8
WNT3a
BMP/ TGFβ / SHH
FGF / PDGF-A
BMP/ TGFβ / SHH
Treatment
Progenitor
cells
Dorsal forebrain
NPCs
Ventral forebrain
NPCs
Midbrain floor plate
NPCs
Hippocampal
NPCs
OPC
Myelinating
oligodendrocyte
Midbrain
DA neuron
Cortical GABAergic
neuron
Cortical glutamatergic
neuron
Hippocampal
DG granule cell
Human- induced 
pluripotent 
stem cells


===== Page 3 =====
1254    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–16  Induced pluripotent stem cells 
derived from an individual with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) can differentiate into 
spinal motor neurons. Fibroblasts from the 
skin of a patient with ALS were used to generate 
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which were 
then directed to a motor neuron fate (see Figure 
50–15). These cells can be used to analyze mech-
anisms that underlie motor neuron loss in ALS. 
The images at right show (from top to bottom) 
cultured fibroblasts, an iPS cell clump, and differ-
entiated motor neurons expressing characteristic 
nuclear transcription factors (green) and axonal 
proteins (red). (Micrographs reproduced, with 
permission, from C. Henderson, H. Wichterle,  
G. Croft, and M. Weygandt.)
For example, it is possible to generate neurons that pos-
sess many or all of the properties of the spinal motor 
neurons that are lost in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(Figure 50–16) or to generate the dopaminergic neurons 
lost from the striatum in Parkinson disease and then to 
engraft such neurons into the spinal cord or brain.
Although many hurdles need to be overcome, 
clinical trials using ES and iPS cell-derived neurons 
are underway. In addition, these cells are being used in 
chemical screens to identify compounds that counteract 
the cellular defects that underlie human neurodegenera-
tive disease.
Stimulation of Neurogenesis in Regions of Injury 
May Contribute to Restoring Function
What if, following injury in adults, endogenous neu-
ronal precursors could be stimulated to produce 
neurons capable of replacing those that have been lost? 
Two sets of recent findings suggest that this idea is not 
so far-fetched.
First, precursors capable of forming neurons in 
culture have been isolated from many parts of the 
adult nervous system, including the cerebral cortex 
and spinal cord, even though neurogenesis in adults 
is ordinarily confined to the olfactory bulb and hip-
pocampus. This diversion of cell fate led to the idea 
that neurogenesis in the adult occurs in only a few 
sites, because only they contain appropriate permissive 
or stimulatory factors. This hypothesis has spurred a 
search for such factors, in the hope that they could be 
used to render a larger range of sites capable of sup-
porting neurogenesis.
Second, in a few cases, the generation of new neu-
rons can be stimulated by traumatic or ischemic injury 
(akin to stroke), even in areas such as the cerebral cortex 
Collect 
skin ﬁbroblasts
Reprogram 
skin ﬁbroblasts
to iPS cells
Retinoic acid
Hedgehog
ALS 
patient
Skin 
ﬁbroblasts
Motor 
neurons 
iPS cells


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1255
Figure 50–17  Restoration of 
myelination in the central nervous 
system by transplanted oligo-
dendrocyte stem cells. In rodents 
with demyelinated axons, grafts of 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells can 
restore myelination to near normal. 
Sections through central nerve tracts 
are shown in the images at right. 
(Adapted, with permission, from 
Franklin and ffrench-Constant 2008. 
Copyright © 2008 Springer Nature.)
or spinal cord in which neurogenesis normally fails to 
occur. The fact that recovery after stroke and injury is 
poor demonstrates that spontaneous compensatory 
neurogenesis, if it occurs in humans, is insufficient for 
tissue repair. However, injury-induced neurogenesis 
has been enhanced in experimental animals in several 
ways. In one, administration of growth factors pro-
motes neuronal production from progenitors grown in 
culture. In another, glial cells that retain the capacity to 
divide, such as Müller glia in the retina or astrocytes 
in the cortex, are reprogrammed to differentiate into 
neurons. If such interventions could be adapted to 
humans, the range of neurons subject to replacement 
would be greatly increased.
Transplantation of Nonneuronal Cells or Their 
Progenitors Can Improve Neuronal Function
Cells other than neurons are lost after brain injury. 
Among the most profound losses are those of oligo-
dendrocytes, the cells that form the myelin sheath 
around central axons. The stripping of myelin contin-
ues long after traumatic injury and contributes to pro-
gressive loss of function of axons that may not have 
been injured directly.
Although the adult brain and spinal cord are capa-
ble of generating new oligodendrocytes and replacing 
lost myelin, this production is insufficient to restore 
function in many cases. Since several common neuro-
logical diseases, most notably multiple sclerosis, are 
accompanied by a profound state of demyelination, 
there is strong interest in providing the nervous sys-
tem with additional oligodendrocyte precursors in 
order to augment remyelination.
Neural stem cells, multipotential progenitors, ES 
cells, and iPS cells can give rise not only to neurons 
but also to nonneural cells, including oligodendrocytes 
and their direct precursors. Indeed, at present, human 
ES cells are being channeled into oligodendrocyte pro-
genitor cells and implanted into injured spinal cords of 
experimental animals. Transplanted cells that differen-
tiate into oligodendrocytes enhance remyelination and 
substantially improve the locomotor ability of experi-
mental animals (Figure 50–17).
Restoration of Function Is the Aim of  
Regenerative Therapies
We need to bear in mind that efforts to replace central 
neurons or to enhance the regeneration of their axons 
Demyelination 
Normal 
Remyelination


===== Page 5 =====
1256    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–18  Regenerated retinal ganglion axons in the 
optic nerve can form functional synapses. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Keirstead et al. 1989. Copyright © 1989 
AAAS.)
A. A segment of optic nerve in an adult rat was removed, and 
a segment of sciatic nerve was grafted in its place. The other 
end of the sciatic nerve was attached to the superior collicu-
lus. Some retinal ganglion cell axons regenerated through the 
sciatic nerve and entered the superior colliculus.
B. Once the axons of the retinal ganglion neurons had regen-
erated, recordings were made from the superior colliculus. 
Flashes of light delivered to the eye elicited action potentials 
in collicular neurons, demonstrating that at least some regen-
erated axons had formed functional synapses.
would be of little use if these axons were unable to 
form functional synapses with their target cells. The 
same fundamental questions asked about axon regen-
eration in adults therefore apply to synaptogenesis: 
Can it happen, and if not, why not?
It has been difficult to address these questions 
because axonal regeneration following experimentally 
induced injury is usually so poor that the axons never 
reach appropriate target fields. However, several of the 
studies discussed earlier in this chapter offer hope that 
synapse formation is possible within the dense adult 
neuropil. In fact, axon branches that regenerate follow-
ing injury can form synapses on nearby targets. For 
example, Aguayo and his colleagues found that retinal 
axons were able to regrow into the superior colliculus 
when they were channeled through a peripheral nerve 
that had been grafted into the optic nerve (Figure 
50–18A). Remarkably, some collicular neurons fired 
action potentials when the eye was illuminated, show-
ing that functional synaptic connections had been 
reestablished (Figure 50–18B). More recent studies have 
promoted regeneration of severed axons by enhancing 
their intrinsic growth programs, as described above, 
and observed some restoration of function.
Likewise, neurons that arise endogenously or 
are implanted by investigators can form and receive 
synapses. Thus, there is reason to believe that if injured 
axons can be induced to regenerate, or new neurons 
supplied to replace lost ones, they will wire up in ways 
that help restore lost functions and behaviors.
Highlights
  1.  When axons are transected, the distal segment 
degenerates, a process called Wallerian degen-
eration. The proximal segment and cell body also 
undergo changes, as do the injured neuron’s syn-
aptic inputs and targets.
  2.  It was long thought that Wallerian degeneration 
was a passive and inevitable consequence of the 
distal segment being deprived of sustenance 
from the cell body, but it is not known to be an 
active, regulated process. Genes called NMNAT 
and SARM1 are key components of a core sign-
aling pathway that controls the process. Inter-
vention in the pathway can slow or even halt 
degeneration.
  3.  Axons can regenerate and form new synapses 
following injury, but in mammals, regeneration is 
far more widespread and effective in peripheral 
axons than in central axons.
Stimulation
Graft
A
B
Superior
colliculus
Optic nerve
(removed)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1257
  4.  A key factor in the differential response of 
peripheral and central axons is that the environ-
ment confronting injured central axons is poor at 
supporting growth. It both lacks nutritive factors 
present in the pathway of peripheral nerves and 
contains growth-inhibitory factors absent from 
peripheral nerves.
  5.  Structures that inhibit regeneration include 
myelin fragments that persist following Walle-
rian degeneration and astrocytes that form glial 
scars at injury sites. Inhibitory factors in myelin 
include Nogo and myelin-associated glycopro-
tein. Inhibitory factors secreted by astrocytes 
include chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans.
  6.  Central regeneration is also hindered by intrin-
sic decreased ability of adult central neurons 
to grow, due to downregulation of growth pro-
grams active during development. Interven-
tions that restore or disinhibit growth pathways, 
such as JAK/STAT and mTOR signaling, enable 
regeneration.
  7.  However, it is important to note that the failure 
of regeneration following injury may be related 
to the stabilization of connections that occurs at 
the end of critical periods. For example, myelina-
tion, which occurs largely at the end of a critical 
period, may have the secondary effect of prevent-
ing further, large-scale rearrangement of synap-
tic connections. Thus, caution will be needed to 
ensure that treatments aimed at fostering recov-
ery following injury do not end up promoting 
formation of maladaptive circuits.
  8.  Another approach for restoring function fol-
lowing damage is to harness the ability of intact 
axons to form new connections, generating adap-
tive circuits that can compensate to some extent 
for those lost to injury.
  9.  The traditional view that all neurogenesis occurs 
during or shortly after gestation has now been 
modified by the discovery that new neurons are 
born throughout life in a few brain areas. These 
neurons arise from resident stem cells and can 
integrate into functional circuits.
10.  Cells capable of forming new neurons are also 
present in many other areas of the brain and 
spinal cord but remain quiescent. Attempts to 
activate them by providing growth factors or 
introducing growth-promoting genes (tran-
scriptional reprogramming) could harness their 
potential following injury or in neurodegenera-
tive disease.
11.  Another approach to neuronal replacement is 
to implant developing neurons. Although fetal 
neurons are sometimes used for this purpose in 
experimental animals, a more useful source may 
be neurons derived from ES or iPS cells. They can 
be grown in large quantities, genetically modi-
fied if necessary, and treated to differentiate into 
specific neuronal types. Clinical studies using 
this approach are now beginning.
 Joshua R. Sanes 
Selected Reading
Benowitz LI, He Z, Goldberg JL. 2017. Reaching the brain: 
advances in optic nerve regeneration. Exp Neurol 
287:365–373.
Dell’Anno MT, Strittmatter SM. 2017. Rewiring the spinal 
cord: direct and indirect strategies. Neurosci Lett 652: 
625–634.
Gerdts J, Summers DW, Milbrandt J, DiAntonio A. 2016. 
Axon self-destruction: new links among SARM1, MAPKs, 
and NAD+ metabolism. Neuron 89:449–460.
He Z, Jin Y. 2016. Intrinsic control of axon regeneration. Neuron 
90:437–451.
Magnusson JP, Frisén J. 2016. Stars from the darkest night: 
unlocking the neurogenic potential of astrocytes in differ-
ent brain regions. Development 143:1075–1086.
McComish SF, Caldwell MA. 2018. Generation of defined 
neural populations from pluripotent stem cells. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 373:pii: 20170214.
Zhao C, Deng W, Gage FH. 2008. Mechanisms and functional 
implications of adult neurogenesis. Cell 132:645–660.
References
Alilain WJ, Horn KP, Hu H, Dick TE, Silver J. 2011. Func-
tional regeneration of respiratory pathways after spinal 
cord injury. Nature 475:196–200.
Altman J. 1969. Autoradiographic and histological stud-
ies of postnatal neurogenesis. IV. Cell proliferation and 
migration in the anterior forebrain, with special reference 
to persisting neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb. J Comp 
Neurol 137:433–457.
Altman J, Das GD. 1965. Autoradiographic and histological 
evidence of postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis in rats.  
J Comp Neurol 124:319–335.
Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Raineteau O, Mettenleiter 
TC, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. 2004. The injured spinal 
cord spontaneously forms a new intraspinal circuit in 
adult rats. Nat Neurosci 7:269–277.
Bei F, Lee HHC, Liu X, et al. 2016. Restoration of visual func-
tion by enhancing conduction in regenerated axons. Cell 
164:219–232.


===== Page 7 =====
1258    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Beirowski B, Berek L, Adalbert R, et al. 2004. Quantitative 
and qualitative analysis of Wallerian degeneration using 
restricted axonal labelling in YFP-H mice. J Neurosci 
Methods 134:23–35.
Bradbury EJ, McMahon SB. 2006. Spinal cord repair strate-
gies: why do they work? Nat Rev Neurosci 7:644–653.
Bradbury EJ, Moon LD, Popat RJ, et al. 2002. Chondroitinase 
ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal cord 
injury. Nature 416:636–640.
Caroni P, Schwab ME. 1988. Antibody against myelin-
associated inhibitor of neurite growth neutralizes nonper-
missive substrate properties of CNS white matter. Neuron 
1:85–96.
Conforti L, Gilley J, Coleman MP. 2014. Wallerian degenera-
tion: an emerging axon death pathway linking injury and 
disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:394–409.
David S, Aguayo AJ. 1981. Axonal elongation into peripheral 
nervous system “bridges” after central nervous system 
injury in adult rats. Science 214:931–933.
Dimos JT, Rodolfa KT, Niakan KK, et al. 2008. Induced pluri-
potent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be 
differentiated into motor neurons. Science 321:1218–1221.
Duan X, Qiao M, Bei F, Kim IJ, He Z, Sanes JR. 2015. Subtype-
specific regeneration of retinal ganglion cells following 
axotomy: effects of osteopontin and mTOR signaling. 
Neuron 85:1244–1256.
Essuman K, Summers DW, Sasaki Y, Mao X, DiAntonio A, 
Milbrandt J. 2017. The SARM1 toll/interleukin-1 recep-
tor domain possesses intrinsic NAD+ cleavage activity 
that promotes pathological axonal degeneration. Neuron 
93:1334–1343.
Ferri A, Sanes JR, Coleman MP, Cunningham JM, Kato AC. 
2003. Inhibiting axon degeneration and synapse loss 
attenuates apoptosis and disease progression in a mouse 
model of motoneuron disease. Curr Biol 13:669–673.
Franklin RJ, ffrench-Constant C. 2008. Remyelination in 
the CNS: from biology to therapy. Nat Rev Neurosci 
9:839–855.
Galtrey CM, Fawcett JW. 2007. The role of chondroitin sulfate 
proteoglycans in regeneration and plasticity in the central 
nervous system. Brain Res Rev 54:1–18.
Gerdts J, Brace EJ, Sasaki Y, DiAntonio A, Milbrandt J. 2015. 
SARM1 activation triggers axon degeneration locally via 
NAD+ destruction. Science 348:453–457.
Gerdts J, Summers DW, Sasaki Y, DiAntonio A, Milbrandt J. 
2013. Sarm1-mediated axon degeneration requires both 
SAM and TIR interactions. J Neurosci 33:13569–13580.
Goldman SA, Kuypers NJ. 2015. How to make an oligoden-
drocyte. Development 142:3983-3995.
Guo Z, Zhang L, Wu Z, Chen Y, Wang F, Chen G. 2014. In 
vivo direct reprogramming of reactive glial cells into 
functional neurons after brain injury and in an Alzheimer’s  
disease model. Cell Stem Cell 14:188–202.
Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T. 2008. Roles of continu-
ous neurogenesis in the structural and functional integ-
rity of the adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 10:1153–1161.
Jorstad NL, Wilken MS, Grimes WN, et al. 2017. Stimulation 
of functional neuronal regeneration from Müller glia in 
adult mice. Nature 548:103–107.
Keirstead HS, Nistor G, Bernal G, et al. 2005. Human embry-
onic stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cell 
transplants remyelinate and restore locomotion after spi-
nal cord injury. J Neurosci 25:4694–4705.
Keirstead SA, Rasminsky M, Fukuda Y, Carter DA, Aguayo 
AJ, Vidal-Sanz M. 1989. Electrophysiologic responses in 
hamster superior colliculus evoked by regenerating reti-
nal axons. Science 246:255–257.
Kordower J, Sortwell C. 2000. Neuropathology of fetal 
nigra transplants for Parkinson’s disease. Prog Brain Res 
127:333–344.
Lim DA, Alvarez-Buylla A. 2016. The adult ventricular-
subventricular zone (V-SVZ) and olfactory bulb (OB) 
Neurogenesis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 8:pii: a018820.
Lois C, Alvarez-Buylla A. 1994. Long-distance neuronal 
migration in the adult mammalian brain. Science 264: 
1145–1148.
Mack TGA, Reiner M, Beirowski B, et al. 2001. Wallerian 
degeneration of injured axons and synapses is delayed by 
a Ube4b/Nmnat chimeric gene. Nat Neurosci 4:1199–1206. 
Magavi SS, Leavitt BR, Macklis JD. 2000. Induction of neuro-
genesis in the neocortex of adult mice. Nature 405:951–955.
Magnusson JP, Göritz C, Tatarishvili J, et al. 2014. A latent 
neurogenic program in astrocytes regulated by Notch 
signaling in the mouse. Science 346:237–241.
Maier IC, Schwab ME. 2006. Sprouting, regeneration and 
circuit formation in the injured spinal cord: factors and 
activity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361:1611–1634.
Osterloh JM, Yang J, Rooney TM, et al. 2012. dSarm/Sarm1 
is required for activation of an injury-induced axon death 
pathway. Science 337:481–484.
Schwab ME, Thoenen H. 1985. Dissociated neurons regener-
ate into sciatic but not optic nerve explants in culture irre-
spective of neurotrophic factors. J Neurosci 5:2415–2423.
Schwegler G, Schwab ME, Kapfhammer JP. 1995. Increased 
collateral sprouting of primary afferents in the myelin-
free spinal cord. J Neurosci 15:2756–2767.
Smith PD, Sun F, Park KK, et al. 2009. SOCS3 deletion 
promotes optic nerve regeneration in vivo. Neuron 
64:617–623.
Sohur US, Emsley JG, Mitchell BD, Macklis JD. 2006. Adult 
neurogenesis and cellular brain repair with neural pro-
genitors, precursors and stem cells. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 361:1477–1497.
Southwell DG, Nicholas CR, Basbaum AI, et al. 2014. 
Interneurons from embryonic development to cell-based 
therapy. Science 344:1240622.
Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al. 2007. Induction of 
pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by 
defined factors. Cell 131:861–872.
Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. 2006. Induction of pluripotent 
stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast 
cultures by defined factors. Cell 126:663–676.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1259
Tavazoie M, Van der Verken L, Silva-Vargas V, et al. 2008. A 
specialized vascular niche for adult neural stem cells. Cell 
Stem Cell 3:279–288.
Thuret S, Moon LD, Gage FH. 2006. Therapeutic inter-
ventions after spinal cord injury. Nat Rev Neurosci 7: 
628–643.
Torper O, Ottosson DR, Pereira M, et al. 2015. In vivo repro-
gramming of striatal NG2 glia into functional neurons 
that integrate into local host circuitry. Cell Rep 12:474–481.
Wen Z, Christian KM, Song H, Ming GL. 2016. Modeling psy-
chiatric disorders with patient-derived iPSCs. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 36:118–127.
Wernig M, Zhao JP, Pruszak J, et al. 2008. Neurons derived from 
reprogrammed fibroblasts functionally integrate into the 
fetal brain and improve symptoms of rats with Parkinson’s 
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105:5856–5861.
Winkler C, Kirik D, Bjorklund A. 2005. Cell transplantation 
in Parkinson’s disease: how can we make it work? Trends 
Neurosci 28:86–92.
Yiu G, He Z. 2006. Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 7:617–627.
Zhou FQ, Snider WD. 2006. Intracellular control of develop-
mental and regenerative axon growth. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 361:1575–1592.


===== Page 9 =====
51
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System
The physical differences between men and women 
that underlie partner recognition and reproduction are 
obvious to all of us, and their developmental origins 
are well understood. In contrast, our understanding of 
behavioral differences between the sexes is primitive. 
In many cases, their very existence remains contro-
versial, and the origins of those that have been clearly 
demonstrated remain unclear.
In this chapter, we first briefly summarize the 
embryological basis of sexual differentiation. We then 
discuss at greater length the behavioral differences 
between the two sexes, focusing on those differences 
or dimorphisms for which some neurobiological basis 
has been found. These dimorphisms include physio-
logical responses (erection, lactation), drives (maternal 
behavior), and even more complex behaviors (gender 
identity). In analyzing these dimorphisms, we will dis-
cuss three issues.
First, what are the genetic origins of sexual differ-
ences? Human males and females have a complement 
of 23 chromosomal pairs, and only one differs between 
the sexes. Females have a pair of X chromosomes (and 
are therefore XX), whereas males have one copy of 
the X chromosome paired with a Y chromosome (XY). 
The other 22 chromosome pairs, called autosomes, are 
shared between males and females. We will see that 
the initial genetic determinants arise from a single gene 
on the Y chromosome, while later ones arise indirectly 
from sex-specific patterns of expression imposed upon 
other genes as development proceeds.
Second, how are sexual differences initiated by the 
Y chromosome translated into differences between the 
brains of men and women? We will see that key inter-
mediates are the sex hormones, a set of steroids that 
Genes and Hormones Determine Physical Differences 
Between Males and Females
Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal Differentiation of 
the Embryo
Gonads Synthesize Hormones That Promote  
Sexual Differentiation
Disorders of Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis Affect  
Sexual Differentiation
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System Generates 
Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors
Erectile Function Is Controlled by a Sexually Dimorphic 
Circuit in the Spinal Cord
Song Production in Birds Is Controlled by Sexually 
Dimorphic Circuits in the Forebrain
Mating Behavior in Mammals Is Controlled by a Sexually 
Dimorphic Neural Circuit in the Hypothalamus
Environmental Cues Regulate Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors
Pheromones Control Partner Choice in Mice
Early Experience Modifies Later Maternal Behavior
A Set of Core Mechanisms Underlies Many Sexual 
Dimorphisms in the Brain and Spinal Cord
The Human Brain Is Sexually Dimorphic
Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From 
Hormonal Action or Experience
Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with Gender 
Identity and Sexual Orientation
Highlights
F
ew words are more loaded with meaning than 
the word “sex.” Sexual activity is a biological 
imperative and a major human preoccupation. 


