===== Page 1 =====
1492    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
nucleotide polymorphism that confers a small incre-
ment in risk (typically 5%–10%) for schizophrenia. 
The value of such allelic variants is as a tool to iden-
tify genes that play a role in the molecular mechanism 
of disease. In turn, the implicated genes help identify 
molecular pathways that can potentially be exploited 
in the development of therapeutic drugs.
In addition to the utility of genetics for discover-
ing biological processes involved in disease, it can also 
contribute to the stratification of study populations in 
epidemiological and clinical studies. A person’s risk 
of schizophrenia or other disorders can be estimated 
by calculating his or her total burden of common risk 
alleles for the condition. The result is a polygenic risk 
score, a measure that is increasingly being used to 
stratify populations by genetic susceptibility to schizo-
phrenia in both clinical studies and in epidemiologic 
studies of environmental risk factors.
Environmental risk factors for schizophrenia that 
have been replicated across studies include nutrient 
deprivation in utero (notably in studies following fam-
ines), season of birth (winter and early spring birth), 
urban birth, and migration. The analysis of causal fac-
tors within such broad categories of exposure is likely 
to benefit from knowing who is susceptible. Moreover, 
clues to environmentally induced causal pathways 
may be found in the risk genotypes of those with schiz-
ophrenia who have had a particular exposure. 
Given the lack of objective diagnostic tests, current 
diagnostic criteria, such as those within the fifth edi-
tion of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, are based on clinical observation and course 
of illness. As a result, individuals currently diagnosed 
with schizophrenia are highly heterogeneous. Poly-
genic risk scores can explain only a portion of the vari-
ance in schizophrenia cohorts, and the scores provide 
only probabilistic information. However, they repre-
sent the first objective tool that permits stratification 
of subjects diagnosed with schizophrenia. As such, the 
application of such scores may begin to diminish het-
erogeneity in clinical studies ranging from neuroimag-
ing to neurophysiological studies to treatment trials.
Although almost all cases of schizophrenia reflect 
polygenic risks, as predicted by Gottesman, a small 
percentage of cases are highly influenced by the pres-
ence of a penetrant mutation that typically exerts pleio-
tropic effects, including intellectual disability, resulting 
in what is often called syndromic schizophrenia. Most 
of these penetrant mutations are copy number vari-
ants: deletions, duplications, or sometimes triplica-
tions of a particular segment of a chromosome.
The most common and best studied cause of syn-
dromic schizophrenia is the 22q11.2 microdeletion, 
which accounts for approximately 1% of patients diag-
nosed with schizophrenia. The microdeletion typi-
cally occurs de novo and results in loss of one of two 
copies of 38 to 44 genes. As is typical for such copy 
number variations, those affected suffer from a com-
plex of symptoms. The syndrome accompanying the 
22q11.2 microdeletion, sometimes called velocardiofa-
cial or DiGeorge syndrome, includes cognitive disabil-
ity, cardiovascular defects, and facial dysmorphology. 
The penetrance of each of these symptoms and signs is 
independent of the others; thus, affected individuals 
have different combinations of phenotypes. Individu-
als with the 22q.11.2 microdeletion have a 25% to 40% 
risk of schizophrenia and a 20% risk of autism. Other 
syndromic forms of psychosis are similarly variable.
Syndromic forms of schizophrenia can provide 
important windows into the biology of psychosis, even 
if their similarities to common polygenic types of schiz-
ophrenia are still a matter of study. One powerful advan-
tage of penetrant mutations is the ability to generate 
cellular and animal models in order to characterize 
their effects on brain structure and function. A second 
advantage is the ability to prospectively study indi-
viduals carrying these mutations. Studying syndromic 
schizophrenia, therefore, has the potential to reveal 
much about basic pathophysiological mechanisms. 
One important area of investigation is how copy num-
ber variations and other high-penetrance mutations 
that lead to psychosis manifest based on a person’s 
genetic background, specifically the many common 
DNA variants that influence risk. To this point, recent 
findings suggest that the propensity in individuals car-
rying a copy number variation to develop psychotic 
symptoms may result from a strong interaction of the 
copy number variation with the person’s polygenic 
background risk for schizophrenia, suggesting sig-
nificant shared mechanisms between schizophrenia 
associated with single genetic mutations and that asso-
ciated only with polygenic variants.
Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Abnormalities 
in Brain Structure and Function
Abnormalities in the structure and function of the 
brain have been identified in schizophrenia both by 
postmortem examination and by a variety of noninva-
sive technologies in living patients. The best replicated 
finding, both by postmortem study and by structural 
MRI, is loss of gray matter in prefrontal, temporal, and 
parietal regions of cerebral cortex (Figure 60–2) with 
counterbalancing increases in the size of the cerebral 
ventricles (Figure 60–3). Thinning of the cerebral cortex 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1493
Figure 60–2  Gray matter loss in 
schizophrenia. Gray matter loss is 
well documented in schizophrenia. 
First-degree relatives who do not have 
a diagnosis of schizophrenia still often 
exhibit cortical gray matter loss inter-
mediate between healthy individuals 
and those diagnosed with schizophre-
nia. Consistent with this, a study that 
examined losses of cortical gray matter 
in monozygotic and dizygotic twin pairs 
discordant for schizophrenia compared 
to healthy matched control twins found 
significant losses in those at genetic 
risk for schizophrenia but without the 
disease. Those members of twin pairs 
diagnosed with schizophrenia demon-
strated additional, disease-specific cor-
tical thinning in dorsolateral prefrontal, 
superior temporal, and superior parietal 
association areas. These additional 
defects appear to reflect the influ-
ence of nongenetic factors involved in 
pathogenesis (eg, developmental or 
environmental factors). The disease-
specific gray matter loss correlates with 
the degree of cognitive impairment 
rather than with duration of illness 
or drug treatment. The images here 
show regional deficits in gray matter in 
monozygotic twins with schizophrenia 
relative to their healthy co-twins (n = 10 
pairs) viewed from the right, left, and 
right oblique perspectives. Differences 
in twins are illustrated by the pseudoc-
olor scale superimposed on cortical sur-
face maps, with pink and red indicating 
the greatest statistical significance.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from 
Cannon et al. 2002.)
Loss of gray matter in 
twins with schizophrenia
p-value
> 0.050
0.010
0.005
0.001
< 0.001
Unaffected twin
Schizophrenic twin
Figure 60–3  Enlargement of lateral 
ventricles in schizophrenia. Mag-
netic resonance imaging comparison 
of monozygotic twins discordant for 
schizophrenia. The affected member of 
the twin pair has the enlarged ventricles 
characteristic of schizophrenia. Because 
there is a wide range of normal ven-
tricular volumes in the population, an 
unaffected monozygotic twin serves as 
a particularly appropriate control subject. 
Because monozygotic twins have identi-
cal genomes, this comparison also illus-
trates the role of nongenetic factors in 
schizophrenia.


===== Page 3 =====
1494    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
is most pronounced in the dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex, a brain region critical for working memory 
and thus cognitive control of thought, emotion, and 
behavior.
Loss of gray matter in the superior temporal gyrus, 
temporal pole, amygdala, and hippocampus in schizo-
phrenia has also been correlated with impairments in 
cognition, recognition of emotions in others, and reg-
ulation of emotion in the affected person. Functional 
neuroimaging using positron emission tomography 
and functional MRI (fMRI) has demonstrated that 
patients’ deficits in performing working memory tasks 
while being imaged are associated with decrements in 
the activation of dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a brain 
region known to play a critical role in working mem-
ory (Figure 60–4).
There is also growing recognition that schizophre-
nia is characterized by disruptions in connectivity 
between brain regions (Figure 60–5). Anatomical con-
nectivity can be measured by diffusion tensor imag-
ing, which identifies major axon tracts as they course 
between brain regions. Functional connectivity between 
brain regions can be estimated physiologically by 
measuring the degree to which activity patterns in dif-
ferent brain regions correlate with each other, using 
such approaches as resting state fMRI and electro-
physiology. Both imaging and physiological methods 
reveal that individuals with schizophrenia have defi-
cits in the connections between brain regions. Weaker 
connections would likely impair cognition and com-
plex behaviors.
Loss of Gray Matter in the Cerebral Cortex Appears 
to Result From Loss of Synaptic Contacts Rather 
Than Loss of Cells
Postmortem studies have examined the cellular abnor-
malities that underlie the gross anatomical findings 
and functional deficits in schizophrenia. These studies 
have revealed that gray matter loss in the prefrontal 
and temporal cortical regions is not the result of cell 
death but rather a reduction in dendritic processes. As 
a consequence, the packing density of cells in the cer-
ebral cortex increases. More cells per unit volume and 
less total gray matter contribute to enlargement of the 
ventricular spaces.
A reduction in dendrites and dendritic spines on 
pyramidal neurons, the most common type of excit-
atory neuron in the neocortex (Figure 60–6), would 
likely signify a loss of synaptic contacts in affected 
brain regions in individuals with schizophrenia. The 
loss of synaptic connections could underlie abnor-
malities in long-range functional connectivity and 
failures to recruit prefrontal cortical regions during 
tasks that require working memory (Figures 60–4 
and 60–5).
Abnormalities in Brain Development During 
Adolescence May Be Responsible for Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia exhibits a stereotypic onset between 
late adolescence and early adulthood, with cognitive 
decline and negative symptoms occurring months or 
years before the onset of psychosis. This timing sug-
gests the pathogenesis of schizophrenia might involve 
abnormalities in the late stages of brain development 
during adolescence, when cognitive function, emotion 
regulation, and executive function normally mature.
Throughout development, neurons elaborate an 
excessively large number of synaptic connections. Gen-
erally, synapses are strengthened and preserved when 
they are utilized, while weak or inefficient synapses 
are eliminated through a process called pruning. The 
process of synaptic refinement, which involves both 
synaptogenesis and pruning, results in neural compu-
tations that are efficient and adapted to the environ-
ment. Experience-dependent synaptic refinement was 
first described in the visual cortex, where pruning of 
weak connections is necessary for the emergence of 
binocular vision (see Chapter 49). Synaptogenesis and 
pruning continue throughout life, making possible 
new learning and updating of older memories. How-
ever, superimposed on such local events are significant 
waves of synaptic pruning that are spatially specific 
and developmentally timed. The last such wave in 
human brain maturation occurs during adolescence 
and early adulthood, with pruning in the temporal and 
prefrontal association cortex. This late wave of prun-
ing is followed by myelination of many axons in these 
areas of cortex.
In the early 1980s, Irwin Feinberg hypothesized 
that schizophrenia might result from abnormal and 
excessive synaptic pruning during adolescence. Post-
mortem examination of the brains of persons with 
schizophrenia subsequently demonstrated a reduc-
tion of dendritic spines, and of synapses, in prefrontal 
and temporal cortices. Studies in nonhuman primates, 
taken together with human postmortem and neuro-
imaging studies, suggest that loss of dendritic arbors 
does not result from antipsychotic medications taken 
by many individuals with schizophrenia. The onset 
of cognitive impairment and negative symptoms dur-
ing this period is consistent with the idea that synaptic 
pruning somehow goes haywire, damaging the abil-
ity of the cerebral cortex to process information. When 
the overpruning hypothesis was first enunciated in the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1495
Figure 60–4  Deficits in the function of prefrontal cortex in 
schizophrenia. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
was used to test the hypothesis that in patients with schizo-
phrenia working memory engages circuits in the prefrontal 
cortex differently than in controls. Activity in the prefrontal cor-
tex of two groups—patients with schizophrenia (first-episode 
patients who had never been given antipsychotic drugs) and 
healthy controls—was examined while subjects performed 
a working memory task. Subjects were presented with a 
sequence of letters and instructed to respond to a particular 
letter (the “probe” letter) only if it immediately followed another 
specified letter (the “contextual cue” letter). Demands on work-
ing memory were increased by increasing the delay between 
the cue and the probe letters. The greater demand on working 
memory requires greater activation of prefrontal cortical cir-
cuits. (Adapted, with permission, from Barch et al. 2001.)
A. In both patients with schizophrenia and controls, normal 
increases in activation within inferior posterior regions of 
prefrontal cortex (IPPFC; Brodmann’s area 44/46) as a function 
of demand on working memory suggest that the function of 
these regions remains intact in schizophrenia. The plot shows 
the fMRI signal change that occurs in the right side of the 
prefrontal cortex in the long-delay and short-delay conditions 
in healthy controls and in patients with schizophrenia. Similar 
effects were observed for the left side.
B. There is less activity in Brodmann’s area 46/49, a region of 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), in patients with schizo-
phrenia relative to healthy controls. Unlike Brodmann’s area 
44/49 (shown in part A), Brodmann’s area 46/49 is not activated 
normally in subjects with schizophrenia, consistent with the 
deficit in working memory seen in patients with schizophrenia. 
Selective impairment of one region of prefrontal cortex along-
side other regions that appear to have normal function sug-
gests that the impairment is due to a regionally specific  
process rather than a diffuse and nonspecific pathological 
process.
A  Inferior posterior prefrontal cortex   
B  Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex    
Short
0
0.1
0
0.1
–0.1
0.2
Long
Healthy 
controls
Schizophrenic
subjects
Short
Delay
Delay
% fMRI signal change
% fMRI signal change
Long
Diminished
activity
DLPFC
IPPFC
Normal
activity
Brain activity in subjects with schizophrenia performing a
working memory task
Normal activity 
Diminished activity 


===== Page 5 =====
1496    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 60–5  Decreased functional connectivity in 
schizophrenia. Correlations in neural activity between 
72 defined brain regions were measured in patients 
with schizophrenia and in control subjects by resting 
state functional magnetic resonance imaging. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Lynall et al. 2010.)
A. Brain regions that showed statistically significant 
reductions in functional connectivity in patients com-
pared to controls are highlighted in red.
B. Mean (+/– standard error of the mean) functional 
connectivity between each brain region and the rest of 
the brain for patients and healthy controls.
Figure 60–6  Photomicrographs of pyramidal 
neurons from the cerebral cortex from human 
brains stained by the Golgi method. 
A. A layer III pyramidal neuron from a control 
brain, showing its morphology and its dendrites 
which are studded with spines.
B. A higher power view showing spines on a 
dendrite of a pyramidal neuron from a control 
brain. 
C. A segment of a dendrite devoid of spines 
from the cerebral cortex of a person who had 
schizophrenia. (Scale: A: 30 μm; B: 20 μm;  
C: 15 μm.)  Spine numbers are a rough proxy 
for the number of synaptic contacts onto the 
dendrite from other neurons; thus the paucity of 
spines in schizophrenia is consistent with fewer 
synaptic contacts than are found in the cerebral 
cortex of healthy brains.
(Reproduced, with permission, Garey et al. 1998. 
With permission from BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.)
0.6
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.4
Brain region
Connectivity
20
10
40
30
70
50
60
A
B
Controls > Patients
Controls
Patients
A
B
C


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1497
1980s, it lacked a plausible molecular or cellular mech-
anism that might explain how synaptic pruning might 
go awry in schizophrenia. Recent genetic analysis may 
have provided a solution.
Unbiased, large-scale genetic studies have found 
that the strongest association with risk for schizophre-
nia lies within the major histocompatibility (MHC) 
locus on chromosome 6. The MHC locus encodes 
many proteins involved in immune function. Fine 
mapping of the locus pinpointed the largest genetic 
association signal to the genes encoding complement 
factor C4, a component of the classic complement 
cascade that, outside the brain, is involved in tag-
ging microbes and damaged cells for engulfment and 
destruction by phagocytic cells. Subsequent analysis 
showed that the risk for schizophrenia is elevated as 
a function of increased expression in the brain of C4A 
(one of two isoforms). This finding adds support to the 
overpruning hypothesis because one function of the 
complement system in brain is to tag weak or ineffi-
cient synapses for removal by microglia (Figure 60–7).
Elevated expression of the complement factor C4A 
involved in synaptic pruning is certainly not the only 
mechanism leading to schizophrenia. As with any 
polygenic disorder, no one gene is necessary or suf-
ficient for the disease phenotype. Thus, not everyone 
with schizophrenia has a high-risk C4A genotype, and 
not everyone with a high-risk C4A genotype develops 
schizophrenia. Many other genes are implicated in the 
risk for schizophrenia. Several such risk factors other 
than C4 are involved in regulation of the complement 
cascade, but the vast majority are not. Many of the 
genes associated with schizophrenia that have been 
identified to date are involved in various aspects of 
the structure and function of synapses; several encode 
ion channels. Thus, it seems likely that the genetic risk 
for schizophrenia involves, at least in part, synaptic 
function, synaptic plasticity, and synaptic pruning, 
and overpruning of synapses during adolescence is 
one plausible mechanism that should be explored fur-
ther in studies of youth at high risk for schizophrenia. 
Nevertheless, other pathways, as yet less well charac-
terized, may also turn out to be important. We have a 
long way to go in understanding the pathogenesis of 
schizophrenia.
Antipsychotic Drugs Act on Dopaminergic 
Systems in the Brain
All current antipsychotic drugs produce their thera-
peutic effects by blocking D2 dopamine receptors in 
the forebrain. These drugs have many other effects at 
Development of schizophrenia symptoms
B  Microglial phagocytosis 
     of complement-tagged 
     synapses
A  High levels of C4A
C  Overpruning
C4
C3b
Microglial
cell
Figure 60–7  Complement factors and microglia have a 
role in synapse elimination. Maturation and plasticity of the 
nervous system involve both synaptogenesis and elimination 
of weak synapses. Complement factor 3b (C3b) is thought to 
serve as a “punishment signal” that identifies weak synapses 
for phagocytosis by microglia. Complement factor 4 (C4), a 
component of the complement cascade, is synthesized by 
neurons and astrocytes and recruits C3b to weak synapses. In 
humans, a complex genomic locus on chromosome 6 contains 
varying numbers of copies of the genes that encode the com-
plement factor C4 proteins, C4A and C4B. Variants within this 
locus that give rise to high levels of C4A expression in brain 
increase schizophrenia risk. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Christina Usher and Beth Stevens.)


===== Page 7 =====
1498    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 60–8  The potency of first-generation antipsychotic 
drugs in treating psychotic symptoms correlates strongly 
with their affinity for D2 dopamine receptors. On the 
horizontal axis is the average daily dose required to achieve 
similar levels of clinical efficacy. On the vertical axis is Ki, the 
concentration of drug required to bind 50% of D2 receptors in 
vitro. The higher the drug concentration required, the lower is 
the affinity of the drug for the receptor. One caveat is that the 
measurements on the two axes were not entirely independent 
of each other, as the ability of a drug to block D2 receptors in 
vitro was often used to help determine doses used in clinical 
trials. Clozapine, which does not fall on the line, has signifi-
cantly greater efficacy than the others. The mechanism of its 
greater efficacy is not understood. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Seeman et al. 1976.)
various neurotransmitter receptors and intracellular 
signaling pathways, but these other actions primarily 
influence their side effects, not their main therapeutic 
mechanisms (Figure 60–8).
The first effective antipsychotic drug, chlorproma-
zine, was developed for its antihistaminic and sedating 
effects and was first investigated as a surgical preanes-
thetic by Henry Laborit in 1952. Based on its sedating 
effects, it was tested in psychotic patients soon there-
after. These tests showed, surprisingly, reduced hal-
lucinations and delusions; indeed, the sedative effect 
of chlorpromazine is now considered a side effect. The 
success of chlorpromazine led to attempts to discover 
D2 dopamine
receptor
0.1
1
0.01
1000
Antipsychotic dose (mg/day)
KI (nmoles/l)
100
10
1
0.1
10
100
1000
SpiperoneBenperidol
Triﬂuperidol
Flupentixol-CIS
Pimozide
Fluphenazine
Droperidol
Haloperidol
(+)-Butaclamol
Thiothixene
Raclopride
Triﬂuoperazine
Moperone
Thioridazine
Molindone
Prochlorperazine
Clozapine
Remoxipride
S-sulpiride
Chlorpromazine
Dopamine 
transmission 
blocked
other antipsychotic drugs. Although many chemi-
cally diverse antipsychotic drugs are now in use, all 
share the same initial action of chlorpromazine in the 
brain, the ability to block the D2 dopamine receptor. As 
a class, these drugs ameliorate psychotic symptoms 
not only in schizophrenia, but also in bipolar disorder, 
severe depression, and various neurodegenerative dis-
orders. None of the antipsychotic drugs provide effec-
tive treatment for the cognitive impairments or deficit 
symptoms of schizophrenia.
Among their side effects, chlorpromazine and 
related drugs caused Parkinson-like motor symp-
toms. Because Parkinson disease is caused by the loss 
of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, the occur-
rence of Parkinson-like side effects suggested to 
Arvid Carlsson that these drugs acted by decreas-
ing dopaminergic transmission. Following up on this 
idea, Carlsson established that the antipsychotic drugs 
block dopamine receptors. Two families of dopamine 
receptors are known. The D1 family, which in humans 
includes D1 and D5, are coupled to stimulatory G pro-
teins that activate adenylyl cyclase. The D2 family, 
which includes D2, D3, and D4, are coupled to the inhib-
itory G protein (Gi) that inhibits the cyclase and acti-
vates a hyperpolarizing K+ channel. A second signaling 
pathway for D2 receptors is mediated by β-arrestin. 
The D1 receptor is expressed in the striatum and is the 
major class of dopamine receptor in the cerebral cortex 
and hippocampus. The D2 receptor is expressed most 
densely in the striatum, cerebral cortex, amygdala, and 
hippocampus. Correlations between receptor binding 
studies and clinical efficacy on psychotic symptoms 
indicated that the D2 family is the molecular target for 
the therapeutic actions of antipsychotic drugs.
Clozapine, an antipsychotic drug discovered in 
1959, had a low liability for causing Parkinson-like 
motor side effects. However, because it had some 
severe side effects, including a small chance of causing 
a potentially lethal loss of blood granulocytes, its use 
was discontinued until a clinical trial in the late 1980s 
clearly showed that it had greater efficacy than other 
antipsychotic drugs. Clozapine caused improvement 
in some individuals who had not responded to other 
antipsychotic drugs. It was reintroduced in conjunction 
with weekly monitoring of white cell counts; attempts 
to equal the efficacy of clozapine also motivated the 
development of second-generation antipsychotic drugs 
that mimicked some of its receptor binding properties, 
notably the ability to block serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, 
an action that appears to diminish motor side effects. 
Large-scale clinical trials of the second-generation 
antipsychotic drugs have shown that their efficacy is 
no greater than the first-generation drugs, with none 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1499
having efficacy equal to clozapine. The liability of 
second-generation drugs for causing Parkinson-like 
motor side effects is lower than that of the first genera-
tion, but they typically cause more severe weight gain 
and other metabolic problems.
Because drugs that reduce psychotic symptoms do 
so by blocking D2 receptors, investigators have asked: 
What is the role of dopamine in the symptoms of schiz-
ophrenia? Although some drugs that block D2 recep-
tors reduce psychotic symptoms, other drugs that 
increase dopamine at synapses, such as amphetamine 
and cocaine, can produce psychotic symptoms when 
taken chronically at high doses. Thus, Carlsson sug-
gested that dopaminergic systems are hyperactive in 
schizophrenia. Evidence for this hypothesis has been 
difficult to obtain. The most direct evidence for this 
idea comes from studies begun in the mid-1990s that 
found that amphetamine-induced increases in dopa-
mine release were greater in patients with schizophre-
nia than in healthy subjects. These studies suggest that 
abnormalities in amphetamine-sensitive processes—
such as dopamine storage, vesicular transport, dopa-
mine release, or dopamine reuptake by presynaptic 
neurons—may lead to hyperactivity in the subcortical 
dopaminergic systems and could contribute to the psy-
chotic symptoms of schizophrenia, the symptoms that 
respond to antipsychotic drugs.
Although dopamine activity may increase in sub-
cortical regions of the brain in schizophrenia, it may 
decrease in cortical regions; such a decrease might 
contribute to the cognitive impairments seen in schizo-
phrenia. In particular, there may be fewer D1 receptors 
in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia, which would 
be consistent with the observation that D1 receptors in 
the prefrontal cortex normally play a role in working 
memory and in executive functions.
Highlights
1.	 Schizophrenia is a chronic, profoundly disabling 
disorder characterized by dramatic psychotic 
symptoms as well as deficits in emotion, motiva-
tion, and cognition.
2.	 Risk for schizophrenia is an inherited, polygenic 
trait.
3.	 Antipsychotic drugs are effective in reducing hal-
lucinations, delusions, and thought disorder but 
do not benefit the cognitive and deficit symptoms 
of schizophrenia.
4.	 Cognitive impairments reduce the ability of peo-
ple with schizophrenia to regulate their behavior 
in accordance with their goals. As a result, people 
with schizophrenia are frequently unable to suc-
ceed in school or to hold down jobs, even at times 
when antipsychotic drugs effectively control their 
hallucinations and delusions.
5.	 Postmortem and neuroimaging studies document 
loss of gray matter in the prefrontal and temporal 
cerebral cortex in a pattern that is consistent with 
cognitive impairments, such as deficits in working 
memory.
6.	 The gray matter loss results from decreased den-
dritic arborization and decreased dendritic spines, 
which implies that synaptic connections are also 
reduced. One hypothesis consistent with these 
anatomic findings and with the typical age of onset 
in adolescence is that schizophrenia is triggered 
by excessive and inappropriate synaptic pruning 
in the prefrontal and temporal cerebral cortices 
during adolescence and young adulthood.
7.	 Progress in the genetic analysis of schizophrenia 
combined with the use of new tools to study systems-
level neuroscience promises to help attain the 
much needed advances in understanding disease 
mechanisms and in discovering new therapeutics.
 Steven E. Hyman 
 Joshua Gordon 
Selected Reading
Barch DM. 2005. The cognitive neuroscience of schizophre-
nia. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 1:321–353.
Nestler EJ, Hyman SE, Holtzman D, Malenka RJ. 2015. Molec-
ular Neuropharmacology: Foundation for Clinical Neurosci-
ence, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Owen MJ, Sawa A, Mortensen PB. 2016. Schizophrenia. Lancet 
388:86–97.
Stephan AH, Barres BA, Stevens B. 2012. The complement 
systems: an unexpected role in synaptic pruning during 
development and disease. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:369–389.
References
Addington J, Heinssen R. 2012. Prediction and prevention of 
psychosis in youth at clinical high risk. Annu Rev Clin 
Psychol 8:269–289.
Barch DM, Carter CS, Braver TS, et al. 2001. Selective deficits 
in prefrontal cortex function in medication-naïve patients 
with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58:280–288.
Brans RG, van Haren NE, van Baal GC, et al. 2008. Herit-
ability of changes in brain volume over time in twin 


===== Page 9 =====
1500    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
pairs discordant for schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
65:1259–1268.
Cannon TD, Thompson PM, van Erp TG, Toga AW. 2002. 
Cortex mapping reveals regionally specific patterns of 
genetic and disease-specific gray-matter deficits in twins 
discordant for schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
99:3228–3233.
Feinberg I. 1983. Schizophrenia: caused by a fault in pro-
grammed synaptic elimination during adolescence?  
J Psychiatr Res 17:319–324.
Fisher M, Loewy R, Hardy K, Schlosser D, Vinogradov S. 
2013. Cognitive interventions targeting brain plasticity in 
the prodromal and early phases of schizophrenia. Annu 
Rev Clin Psychol 9:435–463.
Fusar-Poli P, Borgwardt S, Bechdolf A, et al. 2013 The psy-
chosis high-risk state: a comprehensive state-of-the-art 
review. JAMA Psychiatry 70:107–120.
Garey LJ, Ong WY, Patel TS, et al. 1998. Reduced dendritic 
spine density on cerebral cortical pyramidal neurons 
in schizophrenia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 65: 
446–453.
Glantz LA, Lewis DA. 2000. Decreased dendritic spine density 
on prefrontal cortical pyramidal neurons in schizophrenia. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:65–73.
Gottesman II. 1991. Schizophrenia Genesis: The Origins of 
Madness. New York: Freeman.
Gur RE, Cowell PE, Latshaw A, et al. 2000. Reduced dorsal 
and orbital prefrontal gray matter volumes in schizophre-
nia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:761–768.
Kambeitz J, Abi-Dargham A, Kapur S, Howes OD. 2014. 
Alterations in cortical and extrastriatal subcortical dopa-
mine function in schizophrenia: systematic review and 
meta-analysis of imaging studies. Br J Psychiatry 204: 
420–429.
Kane J, Honigfeld G, Singer J, Meltzer H. 1988. Clozapine 
for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic. A double-blind 
comparison with chlorpromazine. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
45:789–796.
Kety SS, Rosenthal D, Wender PH, Schulsinger F. 1968. The 
types and prevalence of mental illness in the biological 
and adoptive families of adopted schizophrenics. J Psych 
Res 6:345–362.
Lesh TA, Niendam TA, Minzenberg MJ, Carter CS. 2011. 
Cognitive control deficits in schizophrenia. Mechanisms 
and meaning. Neuropsychopharmcology 36:316–338.
Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, et al. 2005. Effective-
ness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schiz-
ophrenia. N Engl J Med 353:1209–1223.
Lynall M-E, Bassett DS, Kerwin R, et al. 2010. Functional con-
nectivity and brain networks in schizophrenia. J Neurosci 
30:9477–9487.
McGrath J, Saha S, Welham J, El Saadi O, MacCauley C, 
Chant D. 2004. A systematic review of the incidence of 
schizophrenia: the distribution of rates and the influence 
of sex, urbanicity, migrant status, and methodology. BMC 
Med 2:13.
Mortensen PB, Pedersen CB, Westergaard T, et al. 1999. 
Effects of family history and place and season of birth on 
the risk of schizophrenia. N Engl J Med 340:603–608.
Rapoport JL, Giedd JN, Blumenthal J, et al. 1999. Progressive 
cortical change during adolescence in childhood-onset 
schizophrenia. A longitudinal magnetic resonance imag-
ing study. Arch Gen Psychiatry 56:649–654.
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genom-
ics Consortium. 2014. Biological insights from 108 
schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511:421–427.
Seeman P, Lee T, Chau-Wong M, Wong K. 1976. Antipsy-
chotic drug doses and neuroleptic/dopamine receptors 
Nature 261:717–9.
Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, et al. 2016. Schizophrenia 
risk from complex variation of complement component 4. 
Nature 530:177–183.
Suddath RL, Christison GW, Torrey EF, Casanova MF, 
Weinberger DR. 1990. Anatomical abnormalities in the 
brains of monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. 
N Engl J Med 322:789–794.
Thompson PM, Vidal C, Giedd JN, et al. 2001. Mapping ado-
lescent brain change reveals dynamic wave of accelerated 
gray matter loss in very early-onset schizophrenia. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 98:11650–11655.
Vidal CN, Rapoport JL, Hayashi KM, et al. 2006. Dynami-
cally spreading frontal and cingulate deficits mapped 
in adolescents with schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry 
63:25–34.


