===== Page 1 =====
556    Part IV / Perception
Figure 23–11  The aperture problem and barber-pole illusion.
A. Although an object moves in one direction, each component 
edge when viewed through a small aperture appears to move 
in a direction perpendicular to its orientation. The visual system 
must integrate such local motion signals into a unified percept 
of a moving object.
B. Gratings are used to test whether a neuron is sensitive to 
local or global motion signals. When the gratings are superim-
posed and moved independently in different directions, one 
does not see the two gratings sliding past each other but rather 
a plaid pattern moving in a single, intermediate direction. Neu-
rons in the middle temporal area of monkeys are responsive to 
such global motion rather than to local motion.
C. Motion perception is influenced by scene segmentation 
cues, as seen in the barber-pole illusion. Even though the pole 
rotates around its axis, one perceives the stripes as moving 
vertically, due to the global vertical rectangle surround of the 
barber pole enclosure.
B 
C 
+
=
Global / object direction
Local / component direction
Illusory direction 
A 
that illuminates them changes from natural to artificial 
light, from sunlight to shadow, or from dawn to mid-
day (Figure 23–12A).
As we move about or as the ambient illumination 
changes, the retinal image of an object—its size, shape, 
and brightness—also changes. Yet under most condi-
tions, we do not perceive the object itself to be chang-
ing. As we move from a brightly lit garden into a dimly 
lit room, the intensity of light reaching the retina may 
vary a thousandfold. Both in the room’s dim illumina-
tion and in the sun’s glare, we nevertheless see a white 
shirt as white and a red tie as red. Likewise, as a friend 
walks toward you, she is seen as coming closer; you do 
not perceive her to be growing larger even though the 
image on your retina does expand. Our ability to per-
ceive an object’s size and color as constant illustrates 
again a fundamental principle of the visual system: It 
does not record images passively, like a camera, but 
instead uses transient and variable stimulation of the 
retina to construct representations of a stable, three-
dimensional world.
Another example of contextual influence is color 
induction, whereby the appearance of a color in one 
region shifts toward that in an adjoining region. Shape 
also plays an important role in the perception of sur-
face brightness. Because the visual system assumes 
that illumination comes from above, gray patches on a 
folded surface appear very different when they lie on 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 23 / Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and Visual Primitives     557
Figure 23–12  Color and brightness perception depend on 
contextual cues.
A. Perceived surface colors remain relatively stable under dif-
ferent illumination conditions and the consequent changes in 
wavelength of the light reflected from the surface. The yellow 
squares on the left and right cubes appear similar despite the 
fact that the wavelengths of light coming from the two sets 
of surfaces are very different. In fact, if the blue squares on 
the top of the left cube and the yellow squares on the top of 
the right cube are isolated from their contextual squares, their 
colors appear identical. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
www.lottolab.org.)
B. Brightness perception is also influenced by three-dimensional 
shape. The four gray squares indicated by arrows all have the 
same luminance. The apparent brightnesses are similar in 
the left illustration but different in the right illustration. This is 
because the visual system has an inherent expectation that 
illumination comes from above (the position of the sun relative 
to us), and thus the perception that the surface below the fold 
in the illustration on the right is brighter than the surface of the 
same luminance that lies above. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Adelson 1993. Copyright © 1993 AAAS.)
Isolated
blue
patches
Isolated
yellow
patches
A
B


===== Page 3 =====
558    Part IV / Perception
the top or bottom of the surface, even when they are in 
fact the same shade of gray (Figure 23–12B).
The responses of some neurons in the visual cor-
tex correlate with perceived brightness. Most visual 
neurons respond to surface boundaries; the center-
surround structure of the receptive fields of retinal 
ganglion cells and geniculate neurons is suited to 
capturing boundaries. Most such cells do not respond 
to the interior parts of surfaces, for uniform interiors 
produce no contrast gradients across receptive fields. 
However, a small percentage of neurons do respond 
to the interiors of surfaces, signaling local brightness, 
texture, or color, and the responses of these neurons 
are influenced by context. The cell’s response changes 
as the brightness of surfaces outside a cell’s receptive 
field change, even when the brightness of the surface 
within the receptive field remains fixed.
Because most neurons respond to surface bound-
aries and not to areas of uniform brightness, the 
visual system calculates the brightness of surfaces 
from information about contrast at the edges of sur-
faces. The brain’s analysis of surface qualities from 
boundary information is known as perceptual fill-in. 
If one fixates the boundary between a dark disk and 
a surrounding bright area for a few seconds, the 
disk will “fill in” with the same brightness as the 
surrounding area. This occurs because the cells that 
respond to edges fire only when the eye or stimulus 
moves. They gradually cease to respond to a stabi-
lized image and no longer signal the presence of the 
boundary. Neurons with receptive fields within the 
disk gradually begin to respond in a fashion simi-
lar to those with receptive fields in the surrounding 
area, demonstrating short-term plasticity in their 
receptive-field properties.
An object’s color always appears more or less the 
same despite the fact that under different conditions 
of illumination the wavelength distribution of light 
reflected from the object varies widely. To identify 
an object, we must know the properties of its surface 
rather than those of the reflected light, which are con-
stantly changing. Computation of an object’s color is 
therefore more complex than analyzing the spectrum 
of reflected light. To determine a surface’s color, the 
wavelength distribution of the incident light must be 
determined. In the absence of that information, surface 
color can be estimated by determining the balance of 
wavelengths coming from different surfaces in a scene. 
Some neurons in V4 respond similarly to different illu-
mination wavelengths if the perceived color remains 
constant. By being responsive to the light across an 
extensive surface, these neurons are selective for sur-
face color rather than wavelength.
Receptive-Field Properties Depend on Context
The distinction between local and global effects—
between stimuli that occur within a receptive field and 
those beyond—poses the problem of how the receptive 
field itself is defined. Because the original characteri-
zation of the receptive fields of visual cortex neurons 
did not take into account contextual influences, some 
investigators now distinguish between “classical” and 
“nonclassical” receptive fields.
However, even the earliest description of the sen-
sory receptive field allowed for the possibility of influ-
ences from portions of the sensory surface outside the 
narrowly defined receptive field. In 1953, Steven Kuffler, 
in his pioneering observations on the receptive-field 
properties of retinal ganglion cells, noted that “not 
only the areas from which responses can actually be set 
up by retinal illumination may be included in a defini-
tion of the receptive field but also all areas which show 
a functional connection, by an inhibitory or excitatory 
effect on a ganglion cell. This may well involve areas 
which are somewhat remote from a ganglion cell and 
by themselves do not set up discharges.”
A more useful distinction contrasts the response 
of a neuron to a simple stimulus, such as a short line 
segment, with its response to a stimulus with multiple 
components. Even in the primary visual cortex, neu-
rons are highly nonlinear; their response to a complex 
stimulus cannot be predicted from their responses to a 
simple stimulus placed in different positions around 
the visual field. Their responses to local features are 
instead dependent on the global context within which 
the features are embedded. Contextual influences are 
pervasive in intermediate-level visual processing, 
including contour integration, scene segmentation, 
and the determination of object shape, object motion 
and surface properties.
Cortical Connections, Functional Architecture, 
and Perception Are Intimately Related
Intermediate-level visual processing requires shar-
ing of information from throughout the visual field. 
The relationship of interconnections within the pri-
mary visual cortex to the functional architecture of 
this area suggests that this circuitry mediates contour 
integration.
Cortical circuits include a plexus of long-range 
horizontal connections formed by the axons of pyram-
idal neurons running parallel to the cortical surface. 
Horizontal connections exist in every area of the cer-
ebral cortex, but their function varies from one area to 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 23 / Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and Visual Primitives     559
the next depending on the functional architecture of 
each area. In the visual cortex, these connections medi-
ate interactions between orientation columns of simi-
lar specificity, thus integrating information over a large 
area of visual cortex that represents a great expanse of 
the visual field (see Figure 21–16).
The fact that these horizontal connections link 
neurons similar in function but representing distant 
locations in the visual field suggests that these con-
nections have a role in contour integration. Contour 
integration and the related property of contour sali-
ency reflect the Gestalt principle of good continua-
tion. Both are mediated by the horizontal connections 
in V1 (see Figure 23–6).
A final feature of cortical connectivity important 
for visuospatial integration is feedback projections 
from higher-order cortical areas. Feedback connections 
are as extensive as the feedforward connections that 
originate in the thalamus or at earlier stages of cortical 
processing. Little is known about the function of these 
feedback projections. They likely play a role in mediat-
ing the top-down influences of attention, expectation, 
and perceptual task, all of which are known to affect 
early stages in cortical processing.
Perceptual Learning Requires Plasticity in  
Cortical Connections
The synaptic connections in ocular-dominance col-
umns are adaptable to experience only during a critical 
period in development (Chapter 49). This suggests that 
the functional properties of visual cortex neurons are 
fixed in adulthood. Nevertheless, many properties of 
cortical neurons remain mutable throughout life. For 
example, changes in the visual cortex can occur follow-
ing retinal lesions.
When focal lesions occur in corresponding posi-
tions on the two retinas, the corresponding part of the 
cortical map, referred to as the lesion projection zone, 
is initially deprived of visual input. Over a period of 
several months, however, the receptive fields of cells 
within this region shift from the lesioned part of the 
retina to the functioning area surrounding the lesion. 
As a result, the cortical representation of the lesioned 
part of the retina shrinks while that of the surrounding 
region expands (Figure 23–13).
The plasticity of cortical maps and connections 
did not evolve as a response to lesions but as a neural 
mechanism for improving our perceptual skills. Many 
of the attributes analyzed by the visual cortex, includ-
ing stereoscopic acuity, direction of movement, and 
orientation, become sharper with practice. Hermann 
von Helmholtz stated in 1866 that “the judgment of the 
senses may be modified by experience and by train-
ing derived under various circumstances, and may 
be adapted to the new conditions. Thus, persons may 
learn in some measure to utilize details of the sensation 
which otherwise would escape notice and not contrib-
ute to obtaining any idea of the object.” This percep-
tual learning is a variety of implicit learning that does 
not involve conscious processes (Chapter 52).
Perceptual learning involves repeating a discrimi-
nation task many times and does not require error 
feedback to improve performance. Improvement man-
ifests itself, for example, as a decrease in the threshold 
for discriminating small differences in the attributes of 
a target stimulus or in the ability to detect a target in 
a complex environment. Several areas of visual cortex, 
including the primary visual cortex, participate in per-
ceptual learning.
An important aspect of perceptual learning is its 
specificity: Training on one task does not transfer to 
other tasks. For example, in a three-line bisection task, 
the subject must determine whether the centermost of 
three parallel lines is closer to the line on the left or the 
one on the right. The amount of offset from the cen-
tral position required for accurate responses decreases 
substantially after repeated practice.
Learning of this task is specific to the location in 
the visual field and to the orientation of the lines. This 
specificity suggests that early stages of visual process-
ing are responsible, for in the early stages, receptive 
fields are smallest, visuotopic maps are most precise, 
and orientation tuning is sharpest. The learning is also 
specific for the stimulus configuration. Training on 
three-line bisection does not transfer to a vernier dis-
crimination task in which the context is a line that is 
collinear with the target line (Figure 23–14A).
The response properties of neurons in the primary 
visual cortex change during the course of perceptual 
learning in a way that tracks the perceptual improve-
ment. An example of this is seen in contour saliency. 
With practice, subjects can more easily detect con-
tours embedded in complex backgrounds. Detection 
improves with contour length, as do the responses of 
neurons in V1. With practice, subjects improve their 
ability to detect shorter contours and V1 neurons 
become correspondingly more sensitive to shorter con-
tours (Figure 23–14B).
Visual Search Relies on the Cortical Representation 
of Visual Attributes and Shapes
The detectability of features such as color, orientation, 
and shape is related to the process of visual search. In a 
complex image, certain objects stand out or “pop out” 


===== Page 5 =====
560    Part IV / Perception
Figure 23–13  Adult cortical plasticity. When corresponding 
positions in both eyes are lesioned, the cortical area receiving 
input from the lesioned areas—the lesion projection zone—is 
initially silenced. The receptive fields of neurons in the lesion 
projection zone eventually shift from the area of the lesion to 
the surrounding, intact retina. This occurs because neurons sur-
rounding the lesion projection zone sprout collaterals that form 
synaptic connections with neurons inside the zone. As a result, 
the cortical representation of the lesioned part of the retina 
shrinks while that of the surrounding retina expands.
Lesion
Cortex
Retina
2 months later
Lesion
because the visual system processes simultaneously, 
in parallel pathways, the features of the target and the 
surrounding distractors (Figure 23–15). When the fea-
tures of a target are complex, the target can be identi-
fied only through careful inspection of an entire image 
or scene.
The pop-out phenomenon can be influenced by 
training. A stimulus that initially cannot be found 
without effortful searching will pop out after training. 
The neuronal correlate of such a dramatic change is not 
certain. Parallel processing of the features of an object 
and its background is possible because feature infor-
mation is encoded in retinotopically mapped areas at 
multiple locations in the visual cortex. Pop-out prob-
ably occurs early in the visual cortex. The pop-out of 
complex shapes such as numerals supports the idea 
that early in visual processing neurons can represent, 
and be selective for, shapes more complex than line 
segments with a particular orientation.
Cognitive Processes Influence Visual Perception
Scene segmentation—the parsing of a scene into differ-
ent objects—involves a combination of bottom-up pro-
cesses that follow the Gestalt rule of good continuation 
and top-down processes that create object expectation.
One strong top-down influence is spatial atten-
tion, which can change focus without any movement 
of an observer’s eyes. Spatial attention can be object-
oriented in that the focus of attention is distributed 
over the area occupied by the attended object, allowing 
the visual cortex to analyze the shape and attributes of 
objects one at a time.
Attentional mechanisms can solve the superposition 
problem. Before we can recognize an object in a scene that 
includes many objects, we must determine which features 
correspond to which objects. Our sense that we identify 
all objects in the visual field simultaneously is illusory. 
Instead, we serially process objects in rapid succession by 


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 23–14  Perceptual learning. Perceptual learning is a 
form of implicit learning. With practice, one can learn to dis-
criminate smaller differences in orientation, position, depth, and 
direction of movement of objects.
A. The improvement is seen as a reduction in the amount of 
change required to reliably detect a tilted line or one posi-
tioned to the left or right of a nearly collinear line (vernier 
task). Perceptual learning is highly specific, so that training 
on a three-line bisection task leads to substantial improve-
ment in that task (left pair of bars in the bar graph) without 
affecting performance on the vernier discrimination task 
(central pair of bars). However, training specifically on vernier 
discrimination does enhance performance on that task (right 
pair of bars).
B. Subjects can detect collinear line segments embedded in a 
random background more easily as the number of collinear seg-
ments is increased. The responses of neurons in V1 grow cor-
respondingly stronger with the increase in the number of line 
segments. After practice, a line with fewer segments stands 
out more easily, and with this improvement, the responses in 
V1 also increase. (Reproduced, with permission, from Crist, Li, 
and Gilbert 2001; Li, Piech, and Gilbert 2008.)
5
4
3
2
1
0
Before 
training
After 
training
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1
9
7
5
3
Number of collinear lines
Perceived saliency 
Neuronal tuning
Perceived saliency 
Neuronal tuning 
Three-line bisection task
Contour detection task
Orientation discrimination
Vernier task
Threshold (min. of arc)
Contour detection probability
Wk 1–2
Wk 3–4
Training
Task
Task
Task
Performance
5 collinear 
lines
9 collinear 
lines
A  Perceptual learning is task-speciﬁc
B  Neuronal responsiveness changes during training


===== Page 7 =====
562    Part IV / Perception
Figure 23–15  One object in a complex image stands 
out under certain conditions.
A. A differently colored object pops out.
B. A differently oriented line also pops out.
C. More complex shapes can pop out when they are 
very familiar, such as the numeral 2 embedded in a 
field of 5s. Rotating the image by 90° renders the ele-
ments of the figure less recognizable, making it more 
difficult to find the one figure that differs from the rest. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Wang, Cavanagh, 
and Green 1994. Copyright © 1994 Springer Nature.)
A  Color
C  Familiar shapes
B  Orientation
shifting attention from one to the next. The results of each 
analysis build up the perception of a complex environ-
ment populated with many distinct objects. A dramatic 
demonstration of the importance of attention in object 
recognition is change blindness. If a subject rapidly shifts 
between two slightly different views of the same scene, 
he will not be able to detect the absence of an important 
component of the scene in one view without considerable 
scrutiny (see Figure 25–8).
Another top-down influence is perceptual task. At 
early stages in visual processing, the properties of the 
same neuron vary with the type of visual discrimina-
tion being performed. Object identification involves 
a process of hypothesis testing in which information 
arriving from the retina is compared with internal rep-
resentations of objects. This process is reflected in stud-
ies that have shown that early stages in processing, 
such as the primary visual cortex, are activated when 
scenes are imagined without visual input.
Highlights
1.	 Vision requires segregating objects from their 
backgrounds, a process involving contour integra-
tion and surface segmentation.
2.	 This process is simplified by relying on the sta-
tistical properties of natural forms. As recog-
nized by the Gestalt psychologists early in the 
20th century, we naturally link scene components 
based on grouping rules of similarity, proximity, 
and contour smoothness (referred to as “good 
continuation”).
3.	 Neurons in visual cortical areas have properties 
consonant with Gestalt grouping rules. They per-
form a local and global analysis of scene proper-
ties in parallel. The local properties are the visual 
primitives, which include orientation selectivity, 
direction selectivity, contrast sensitivity, disparity 
selectivity, and color selectivity. The correspond-
ing global properties include contour integration, 
object movement, border ownership, disparity 
capture, and color constancy.
4.	 Perception of visual features is dependent on 
context; similarly, neuronal responses are con-
text dependent. The principle underlying these 
interactions is the association field, a pattern of 
interactions between bits of information that are 
mapped across each cortical area. The association 
field mediates contour integration in visual cortex 
but is likely to be a general feature of processing 
throughout the cerebral cortex. The anatomical 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 23 / Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and Visual Primitives     563
substrate for the association field includes a network 
of long-range horizontal connections formed by the 
axons of cortical pyramidal cells, which extend for 
long distances parallel to the cortical surface.
5.	 Different visual cortical areas contribute to 
the various global properties, and interactions 
between areas, including top-down influences, 
are required for their development. Though there 
has been considerable emphasis on selectivity for 
increasing stimulus complexity as one ascends a 
hierarchy of cortical areas through feedforward 
connections extending from the primary visual 
cortex to areas in the temporal (ventral pathway) 
and parietal (dorsal pathway) cortex, feedback 
connections are of equal importance.
6.	 Future studies will elucidate the relative contri-
butions of intrinsic, feedforward, and feedback 
cortical connections, and the interactions between 
them, in cortical processing. Evidence is emerging 
that rather than having fixed functions, neurons 
are adaptive processors, taking on different func-
tional roles under different behavioral contexts. 
Neurons may mediate this functional diversity by 
input selection, expressing task-relevant inputs 
and suppressing task-irrelevant inputs. When 
operating abnormally, these functional and con-
nectivity dynamics may account for perceptual 
and behavioral phenomena associated with disor-
ders such as autism and schizophrenia.
 Charles D. Gilbert 
Selected Reading
Albright TD, Stoner GR. 2002. Contextual influences on visual 
processing. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:339–379.
Gilbert CD, Sigman M. 2007. Brain states: top-down influ-
ences in sensory processing. Neuron 54:677–696.
Gilbert CD, Sigman M, Crist R. 2001. The neural basis of 
perceptual learning. Neuron 31:681–697.
Li W, Piech V, Gilbert CD. 2004. Perceptual learning and top-
down influences in primary visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 
7:651–657.
Li W, Piech V, Gilbert CD. 2006. Contour saliency in primary 
visual cortex. Neuron 50:951–962.
Priebe NJ, Ferster D. 2008. Inhibition, spike threshold, and 
stimulus selectivity in primary visual cortex. Neuron 
57:482–497.
References
Adelson EH. 1993. Perceptual organization and the judg-
ment of brightness. Science 262:2042–2044.
Bakin JS, Nakayama K, Gilbert CD. 2000. Visual responses 
in monkey areas V1 and V2 to three-dimensional surface 
configurations. J Neurosci 20:8188–8198.
Crist RE, Li W, Gilbert CD. 2001. Learning to see: experi-
ence and attention in primary visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 
4:519–525.
Cumming BG, DeAngelis GC. 2001. The physiology of stere-
opsis. Annu Rev Neurosci 24:203–238.
Ferster D, Miller KD. 2000. Neural mechanisms of orienta-
tion selectivity in the visual cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 
23:441–471.
He ZJ, Nakayama K. 1994. Apparent motion determined by 
surface layout not by disparity or three-dimensional dis-
tance. Nature 367:173–175.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1968. Receptive fields and func-
tional architecture of monkey striate cortex. J Physiol 
195:215–243.
Li W, Gilbert CD. 2002. Global contour saliency and local 
colinear interations. J Neurophysiol 88:2846–2856.
Li W, Piech V, Gilbert CD. 2008. Learning to link visual 
contours. Neuron 57:442–451.
Movshon JA, Adelson EH, Gizzi MS, Newsome WT. 1985. 
The analysis of moving visual patterns. In: C Chagas, R 
Gattass, CG Gross (eds). Study Group on Pattern Recognition 
Mechanisms, pp. 67–86. Vatican City: Pontifica Academia 
Scientiarum.
Nakayama K. 1996. Binocular visual surface perception. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:634–639.
Nakayama K, Joseph JS. 2000. Attention, pattern recognition 
and popout in visual search. In: R Parasuraman (ed). The 
Attentive Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Poggio GE. 1995. Mechanisms of stereopsis in monkey visual 
cortex. Cereb Cortex 5:193–204.
Purves D, Lotto RB, Nundy S. 2002. Why we see what we do. 
Am Sci 90:236–243.
Wang Q, Cavanagh P, Green M. 1994. Familiarity and pop-out 
in visual search. Percept Psychophys 56:495–500.
Zhou H, Friedman HS, von der Heydt R. 2000. Coding of 
border ownership in monkey visual cortex. J Neurosci 
20:6594–6611.


===== Page 9 =====
24
High-Level Visual Processing:  
From Vision to Cognition
the identification of so-called visual primitives, such as 
contours and fields of motion, and the segregation of 
surfaces. High-level visual processing integrates infor-
mation from a variety of sources and is the final stage 
in the visual pathway leading to visual perception.
High-level visual processing is concerned with 
identifying behaviorally meaningful features of the 
environment and thus depends on descending sig-
nals that convey information from short-term working 
memory, long-term memory, and executive areas of 
cerebral cortex.
High-Level Visual Processing Is Concerned 
With Object Recognition
Our visual experience of the world is fundamentally 
object-centered. We can recognize the same object 
even when the patterns of light it casts onto the retina 
vary greatly with viewing conditions, such as lighting, 
angle, position, and distance. And this is the case even 
for visually complex objects, those that include a large 
number of conjoined visual features.
Moreover, objects are not mere visual entities, but 
are commonly associated with specific experiences, 
other remembered objects, and sensations—such as 
the hum of the coffee grinder or the aroma of a lover’s 
perfume—and a variety of emotions. It is the behav-
ioral significance of objects that guides our action 
based on visual information. In short, object recogni-
tion establishes a nexus between vision and cognition 
(Figure 24–1).
High-Level Visual Processing Is Concerned With  
Object Recognition
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is the Primary Center for 
Object Recognition
Clinical Evidence Identifies the Inferior Temporal Cortex 
as Essential for Object Recognition
Neurons in the Inferior Temporal Cortex Encode 
Complex Visual Stimuli and Are Organized in 
Functionally Specialized Columns
The Primate Brain Contains Dedicated Systems for  
Face Processing
The Inferior Temporal Cortex Is Part of a Network of 
Cortical Areas Involved in Object Recognition
Object Recognition Relies on Perceptual Constancy
Categorical Perception of Objects Simplifies Behavior
Visual Memory Is a Component of High-Level  
Visual Processing
Implicit Visual Learning Leads to Changes in the 
Selectivity of Neuronal Responses
The Visual System Interacts With Working Memory and 
Long-Term Memory Systems
Associative Recall of Visual Memories Depends on Top-Down 
Activation of the Cortical Neurons That Process Visual Stimuli
Highlights
A
s we have seen, low-level visual processing is 
responsible for detecting various types of con-
trasts in the patterns of light projected onto the 
retina. Intermediate-level processing is concerned with 


