===== Page 1 =====
404    Part IV / Perception
Direct, volitional control of the sensory information 
that reaches consciousness can be readily demon-
strated by suddenly directing your attention to a body 
part, such as the fingers of your left hand, to which you 
were initially oblivious as you were attending to this 
text. Sensations from the fingers flood consciousness 
until attention is redirected to the text. Neural record-
ings in somatosensory and visual cortex confirm that 
neurons change their sensitivity, as reflected in their 
firing rates, much more so than their selectivity for 
particular stimuli. At a more abstract level, for exam-
ple, we can switch our attention from the subject mat-
ter of a painting to the artist’s technique.
Each primary sensory area of cortex has exten-
sive projections back to its principal afferent relay 
nucleus in the thalamus. In fact, the number of feed-
back axons exceeds the number of afferent axons 
from the thalamus to the cortex. These projections 
have an important function that is not yet clear. One 
possibility is that they modulate the activity of cer-
tain neurons when attention and vigilance change or 
during motor tasks.
Centers in the brain are also able to modulate the 
responsiveness of sensory receptors. For example, 
neurons in the motor cortex can alter the sensitivity of 
sensory receptors in skeletal muscle that signal muscle 
length. Activation of gamma motor neurons by cor-
ticospinal pathways enhances the sensory responses 
of muscle spindle afferents to stretch. Neurons in the 
brain stem can directly modulate the frequency sen-
sitivity of hair cells in the cochlea. Thus, information 
about a stimulus sent from peripheral sensory neurons 
to the brain is conditioned by the entire organism.
Top-Down Learning Mechanisms Influence  
Sensory Processing
What we perceive is always some combination of the 
sensory stimulus itself and the memories it both evokes 
and builds upon. The relationship between perception 
and memory was originally developed by empiricists, 
particularly the associationist philosophers James 
and John Stuart Mill. Their idea was that sensory 
and perceptual experiences that occur together or in 
close succession, particularly those that do so repeat-
edly, become associated so that thereafter the one trig-
gers the other. Association is a powerful mechanism, 
and much of learning consists of forging associations 
through repetition.
Contemporary neuroscientists using multineu-
ronal recordings discovered that sensory events evoke 
sequences of neuronal activation. These patterns of neu-
ral activity are believed to trigger memories of previous 
experiences of such stimulation patterns. For example, 
as we hear a work of music over and over again, the 
circuits of our auditory system are modified by the 
experience, and we learn to anticipate what comes next, 
completing the phrase before it occurs. Familiarity with 
the phrasing and harmonies used by a composer allows 
us to distinguish the operas of Verdi from those of 
Mozart, and the symphonies of Bruckner from those of 
Brahms. Likewise, when we drive to an unknown des-
tination, our visual system is initially overwhelmed by 
new landmarks, as we assess which are important and 
which are not. With repeated trips, the journey becomes 
second nature and seems to take less time.
Percepts are uniquely subjective. When we look at 
a work of art, we superimpose our personal experience 
on the view; what we see is not just the image projected 
on the retina, but its contextual meaning to us as indi-
viduals. For example, when we view a historic photo-
graph of important events in our lives, or persons we 
admired or detested, we recall not only the event in the 
image but also the words spoken and our emotional 
reactions in the past. The emotional response is muted 
or absent if we did not experience a direct connection 
to the event or person illustrated.
How can a network of neurons “recognize” a spe-
cific pattern of inputs from a population of presynaptic 
neurons? One potential mechanism is called template 
matching. Each neuron in the target population has a 
pattern of excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic con-
nections. If the pattern of arriving action potentials 
fits the postsynaptic neuron’s pattern of synaptic con-
nections even approximately—activating many of its 
excitatory synapses but mostly avoiding activating 
its inhibitory synapses—the target neuron fires. The 
codes may also be combinatorial: the overall activity 
of a region remains the same with different stimuli, but 
the specific subset of neurons that are active when a 
particular input is presented constitute a “tag” specify-
ing that input.
Charles F. Stevens has identified these in very dif-
ferent sensory systems and noted that such maximum 
entropy codes are highly efficient, able to represent 
many different stimuli for a set number of neurons. 
Refining our understanding of efficient coding, the 
Carandini and Harris labs have recently shown that 
the neural code in mouse visual cortex is indeed effi-
cient and preserves fine detail, but in a manner that 
retains the ability to generalize by responding similarly 
to closely related visual stimuli. Such computational or 
algorithmic views have great promise for our under-
standing of sensory systems. Artificial neural networks, 
simulated using computers, can be trained on images 
and taught to “see.” Daniel L. Yamins and James J. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    405
DiCarlo have pointed out that as these artificial net-
works evolve the ability to recognize objects and faces, 
the properties of neuron-like “units” in particular 
layers begin to resemble the distribution of activity 
seen in corresponding cortical areas. Such artificial 
neural networks are trained by machine learning algo-
rithms that modify the connection strength between 
units, similar to neuronal learning with repetition and 
synapse modification.
Precisely how the brain solves the recognition 
problem is uncertain. There is currently much evi-
dence that the neural representation of a stimulus in 
the initial pathways of sensory systems is an isomor-
phic representation of the stimulus. Successive synap-
tic regions transform these initial representations into 
abstractions of our environment that we are beginning 
to decipher. In contrast, we barely understand the top-
down mechanisms by which incoming sensory infor-
mation invokes memories of past occurrences and 
activates our prejudices and opinions.
One view of these processes is Bayesian: Our 
experience and understanding of the world inform a 
top-down sensory prior that describes our likely envi-
ronment. The primary insight of Bayes’s rule is that 
decisions are made by the likelihood ratio of current 
evidence from a test stimulus and the subject’s previ-
ous experience of similar stimuli (priors), all modified 
by the task contingencies (rewards and hazards). Ongo-
ing sensory information contributes immediate data, 
and the two combine to form an up-to-the-moment 
posterior estimate of our surroundings and our place 
in them. When we do understand these neural codes 
and the algorithms and mechanisms that generate and 
interpret them, it is likely that we will be on the verge 
of understanding cognition, the way in which informa-
tion is coded in our memory and our understanding. 
That is what makes the study of neural coding so chal-
lenging and exciting.
Highlights
1.	 Our sensory systems provide the means by which 
we perceive the external world, remain alert, form 
a body image, and regulate our movements. Sen-
sations arise when external stimuli interact with 
some of the billion sensory receptors that inner-
vate every organ of the body. The information 
detected by these receptors is conveyed to the 
brain as trains of action potentials traveling along 
individual sensory axons.
2.	 All sensory systems respond to four elementary 
features of stimuli—modality, location, intensity, and 
duration. The diverse sensations we experience—
the sensory modalities—reflect different forms 
of energy that are transformed by receptors into 
depolarizing or hyperpolarizing electrical signals 
called receptor potentials. Receptors specialized 
for particular forms of energy, and sensitive to 
particular ranges of the energy bandwidth, allow 
humans to sense many kinds of mechanical, ther-
mal, chemical, and electromagnetic events.
3.	 The intensity and duration of stimulation are 
represented by the amplitude and time course of 
the receptor potential and by the total number of 
receptors activated. In order to transmit sensory 
information over long distances, the receptor 
potential is transformed into a digital pulse code, 
sequences of action potentials whose frequency of 
firing is proportional to the strength of the stimu-
lus. The pattern of action potentials in peripheral 
nerves and in the brain gives rise to sensations 
whose qualities can be measured directly using 
a variety of psychophysical paradigms such as 
magnitude estimation, signal detection methods, 
and discrimination tasks. The temporal features 
of a stimulus, such as its duration and changes in 
magnitude, are signaled by the dynamics of the 
spike train.
4.	 The location and spatial dimensions of a stimulus 
are conveyed through each receptor’s receptive 
field, the precise area in the sensory domain in 
which stimulation activates the receptor. The iden-
tity of the active sensory neurons therefore signals 
not only the modality of a stimulus but also the 
place where it occurs.
5.	 These messages are analyzed centrally by several 
million sensory neurons performing different, 
specific functions in parallel. Each sensory neu-
ron extracts highly specific and localized informa-
tion about the external or internal environment, 
and in turn has a specific effect on sensation and 
cognition because it projects to specific places 
in the brain that have specific sensory, motor, or 
cognitive functions. To maintain the specificity of 
each modality within the nervous system, recep-
tor axons are segregated into discrete anatomical 
pathways that terminate in unimodal nuclei.
6.	 Sensory information in the central nervous sys-
tem is processed in stages, in the sequential relay 
nuclei of the spinal cord, brain stem, thalamus, 
and cerebral cortex. Each nucleus integrates sen-
sory inputs from adjacent receptors and, using 
networks of inhibitory neurons, emphasizes the 
strongest signals. After about a dozen synap-
tic steps in each sensory system, neural activity 


===== Page 3 =====
406    Part IV / Perception
converges on neuronal groups whose function is 
multisensory and more directly cognitive.
7.	 Processing of sensory information in the cerebral 
cortex occurs in multiple cortical areas in parallel 
and is not strictly hierarchical. Feedback connec-
tions from areas of the brain involved in cognition, 
memory, and motor planning control the incom-
ing stream of sensory information, allowing us to 
interpret sensory stimulation in the context of past 
experience and current goals.
8.	 The richness of sensory experience—the com-
plexity of sounds in a Mahler symphony, the 
subtle layering of color and texture in views of 
the Grand Canyon, or the multiple flavors of a 
salsa—requires the activation of large ensembles 
of receptors acting in parallel, each one signaling 
a particular aspect of a stimulus. The neural activ-
ity in a set of thousands or millions of neurons 
should be thought of as coordinated activity that 
conveys a “neural image” of specific properties of 
the external world.
9.	 Our sensory systems are increasingly appreciated 
as computational and algorithmic encoders, pro-
cessors, and decoders of information. Insights from 
machine learning, information theory, artificial 
neural networks, and Bayesian inference continue 
to inform our understanding of what we perceive 
in our bodies and from the world around us.
 Esther P. Gardner 
  Daniel Gardner 
Selected Reading
Basbaum AI, Kaneko JH, Shepherd GM, Westheimer G 
(eds). 2008. The Senses: A Comprehensive Reference (6 vols). 
Oxford: Elsevier.
Dowling JE. 1987. The Retina: An Approachable Part of the Brain. 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Gerstein GL, Perkel DH, Dayhoff JE. 1985. Cooperative firing 
activity in simultaneously recorded populations of neu-
rons: detection and measurement. J Neurosci 5:881–889.
Green DM, Swets JA. 1966. Signal Detection Theory and Psycho-
physics. New York: Wiley. (Reprinted 1974, Huntington, NY: 
Robert E. Krieger.)
Kandel ER. 2016. Reductionism in Art and Brain Science: Bridging 
the Two Cultures. New York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Moore GP, Perkel DH, Segundo JP. 1966. Statistical analy-
sis and functional interpretation of neuronal spike data. 
Annu Rev Physiol 28:493–522.
Mountcastle VB. 1998. Perceptual Neuroscience: The Cerebral 
Cortex. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
Singer W. 1999. Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the 
definition of relations? Neuron 24:49–65.
Stevens SS. 1961. The psychophysics of sensory function. 
In: WA Rosenblith (ed). Sensory Communication, pp. 1–33. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stevens SS. 1975. Psychophysics: Introduction to Its Perceptual, 
Neural, and Social Prospects. New York: Wiley.
References
Adrian ED, Zotterman Y. 1926. The impulses produced by 
sensory nerve-endings. Part 2. The response of a single 
end-organ. J Physiol (Lond) 61:151–171.
Albright TD, Stoner GR. 2002. Contextual influences on vis-
ual processing. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:339–379.
Andres KH, von Düring M. 1973. Morphology of cutaneous 
receptors. In: Iggo A (ed). Handbook of Sensory Physiology,  
Vol. 2, Somatosensory System, pp. 3–28. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Barch DM, Burgess GC, Harms MP, et al. 2013. Function in 
the human connectome: task-fMRI and individual differ-
ences in behavior. Neuroimage 80:169–189.
Berkeley G. [1710] 1957. A Treatise Concerning the Princi-
ples of Human Knowledge. K Winkler (ed). Indianapolis: 
Bobbs-Merrill.
Britten KH, Shadlen MN, Newsome WT, Movshon JA. 
1992. The analysis of visual motion: a comparison of 
neuronal and psychophysical performance. J Neurosci 
12:4745–4768.
Carandini M, Heeger DJ. 2011. Normalization as a canonical 
neural computation. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:51–62.
Chang L, Tsao DY. 2017. The code for facial identity in the 
primate brain. Cell 169:1013–1028.
Colquhoun D. 2014. An investigation of the false discov-
ery rate and the misinterpretation of p-values. Royal Soc 
Open Sci 1:140216.
DiCarlo JJ, Zoccolan D, Rust NC. 2012. How does the brain 
solve visual object recognition? Neuron 73:415–434.
Dudel J. 1983. General sensory physiology. In: RF Schmitt, 
G Thews (eds). Human Physiology, pp. 177–192. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.
Gandhi SP, Heeger DJ, Boynton GM. 1999. Spatial attention 
affects brain activity in human primary visual cortex. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:3314–3319.
Gazzaniga MS (ed). 2009. The Cognitive Neurosciences, 4th ed. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Glasser MF, Coalson TS, Robinson EC, et al. 2016. A multi-
modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature 
536:171–178.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1968. Receptive fields and func-
tional architecture of monkey striate cortex. J Physiol 
195:215–243.
Hume D. [1739] 1984. A Treatise of Human Nature. EC Mossner 
(ed). New York: Penguin.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    407
Johansson RS, Vallbo AB. 1979. Detection of tactile stimuli. 
thresholds of afferent units related to psychophysical 
thresholds in the human hand. J Physiol 297:405–422.
Johnson KO, Hsiao SS, Yoshioka T. 2002. Neural coding and 
the basic law of psychophysics. Neuroscientist 8:111–121.
Kant I. [1781/1787] 1961. Critique of Pure Reason. NK Smith 
(transl.). London: Macmillan.
Kirkland KL, Gerstein GL. 1999. A feedback model of atten-
tion and context dependence in visual cortical networks.  
J Comput Neurosci 7:255–267.
LaMotte RH, Mountcastle VB. 1975. Capacities of humans 
and monkeys to discriminate between vibratory stim-
uli of different frequency and amplitude: a correlation 
between neural events and psychophysical measure-
ments. J Neurophysiol 38:539–559.
Li HH, Rankin J, Rinzel J, Carrasco M, Heeger DJ. 2017. 
Attention model of binocular rivalry. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 114:E6192-E6201.
Livingstone MS, Hubel DH. 1987. Psychophysical evidence 
for separate channels for the perception of form, color, 
movement, and depth. J Neurosci 7:3416–3468.
Locke J. 1690. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding: In 
Four Books, Book 2, Chapter 1. London.
Mountcastle VB, Talbot WH, Kornhuber HH. 1966. The neu-
ral transformation of mechanical stimuli delivered to the 
monkey’s hand. In: AVS de Reuck, J Knight (eds). Ciba 
Foundation Symposium: Touch, Heat and Pain, pp. 325–351. 
London: Churchill.
Ochoa J, Torebjörk E. 1983. Sensations evoked by intraneural 
microstimulation of single mechanoreceptor units inner-
vating the human hand. J Physiol 342:633–654.
Raichle ME. 2011. The restless brain. Brain Connect 1:3–12.
Roy A, Steinmetz PN, Hsiao SS, Johnson KO, Niebur E. 2007. 
Synchrony: a neural correlate of somatosensory attention. 
J Neurophysiol 98:1645–1661.
Shepherd GM. 1994. Neurobiology, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford 
Univ. Press.
Smith SM, Beckmann CF, Andersson J, et al. 2013. Resting-
state fMRI in the Human Connectome Project. Neuroim-
age 80:144–168.
Stevens CF. 2015. What the fly’s nose tells the fly’s brain. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:9460–9465.
Stevens CF. 2018. Conserved features of the primate face 
code. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115:584–588.
Stringer C, Pachitariu M, Steinmetz N, Carandini M,  
Harris KD. 2019. High-dimensional geometry of popula-
tion responses in visual cortex. Nature 571:361–365.
Swets JA. 1973. The relative operating characteristic in psy-
chology: a technique for isolating effects of response bias 
finds wide use in the study of perception and cognition. 
Science 182:990–1000.
Swets JA. 1986. Indices of discrimination or diagnostic 
accuracy: their ROCs and implied models. Psychol Bull 
99:100–117.
Talbot WH, Darian-Smith I, Kornhuber HH, Mountcastle 
VB. 1968. The sense of flutter-vibration: comparison of the 
human capacity with response patterns of mechanore-
ceptive afferents from the monkey hand. J Neurophysiol 
31:301–334.
Tanner WP, Swets JA. 1954. A decision-making theory of vis-
ual detection. Psychol Rev 61:401–409.
Thurstone LL. 1927. A law of comparative judgment. Psychol 
Rev 34:273–286.
Ungerleider LG, Mishkin M. 1982. Two cortical visual sys-
tems. In: DG Ingle, MA Goodale, RJW Mansfield (eds). 
Analysis of Visual Behavior, pp. 549–586. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Yamins DLK, DiCarlo JJ. 2016. Using goal-driven deep learn-
ing models to understand sensory cortex. Nat Neurosci 
19:356–365.


===== Page 5 =====
18
Receptors of the Somatosensory System
serves three major functions: proprioception, extero-
ception, and interoception.
Proprioception is the sense of oneself (Latin proprius, 
one’s own). Receptors in skeletal muscle, joint cap-
sules, and the skin enable us to have conscious aware-
ness of the posture and movements of our own body, 
particularly the four limbs and the head. Although one 
can move parts of the body without sensory feedback 
from proprioceptors, the movements are often clumsy, 
poorly coordinated, and inadequately adapted to com-
plex tasks, particularly if visual guidance is absent.
Exteroception is the sense of direct interaction with 
the external world as it impacts the body. The princi-
pal mode of exteroception is the sense of touch, which 
includes sensations of contact, pressure, stroking, 
motion, and vibration, and is used to identify objects. 
Some touch involves an active motor component—
stroking, tapping, grasping, or pressing—whereby a 
part of the body is moved against another surface or 
organism. The sensory and motor components of touch 
are intimately connected anatomically in the brain and 
are important in guiding behavior.
Exteroception also includes the thermal senses 
of heat and cold. Thermal sensations are important 
controllers of behavior and homeostatic mechanisms 
needed to maintain the body temperature near 37°C 
(98.6°F). Finally, exteroception includes the sense 
of pain, or nociception, a response to external events 
that damage or harm the body. Nociception is a prime 
motivator of actions necessary for survival, such as 
fight or flight.
The third component of somatic sensation, inter-
oception, is the sense of the function of the major 
organ systems of the body and its internal state.  
Dorsal Root Ganglion Neurons Are the Primary Sensory 
Receptor Cells of the Somatosensory System
Peripheral Somatosensory Nerve Fibers Conduct Action 
Potentials at Different Rates
A Variety of Specialized Receptors Are Employed by the 
Somatosensory System
Mechanoreceptors Mediate Touch and Proprioception
Specialized End Organs Contribute to Mechanosensation
Proprioceptors Measure Muscle Activity and Joint 
Positions
Thermal Receptors Detect Changes in Skin Temperature
Nociceptors Mediate Pain
Itch Is a Distinctive Cutaneous Sensation
Visceral Sensations Represent the Status of Internal 
Organs
Action Potential Codes Transmit Somatosensory Information 
to the Brain
Sensory Ganglia Provide a Snapshot of Population 
Responses to Somatic Stimuli
Somatosensory Information Enters the Central Nervous 
System Via Spinal or Cranial Nerves
Highlights
N
europhysiological studies of the individ-
ual  sensory modalities were first conducted 
in the somatosensory system (Greek soma, the 
body), the system that transmits information coded 
by receptors distributed throughout the body. Charles 
Sherrington, one of the earliest investigators of these 
bodily senses, noted that the somatosensory system 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    409
The information conveyed by receptors in the viscera 
is crucial for regulating autonomic functions, particu-
larly in the cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, and 
renal systems, although most of the stimuli registered 
by these receptors do not lead to conscious sensations. 
Interoceptors are primarily chemoreceptors that moni-
tor organ function through such indicators as blood 
gases and pH, and mechanoreceptors that sense tissue 
distention, which may be perceived as painful.
This diverse group of sensory functions may seem 
an unlikely combination to form a sensory system. 
We treat all of the somatic senses in one introductory 
chapter because they are mediated by one class of sen-
sory neurons, the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. 
Somatosensory information from the skin, muscles, 
joint capsules, and viscera is conveyed by DRG neu-
rons innervating the limbs and trunk or by trigeminal 
sensory neurons that innervate cranial structures (the 
face, lips, oral cavity, conjunctiva, and dura mater). 
These sensory neurons perform two major functions: 
the transduction and encoding of stimuli into electri-
cal signals and the transmission of those signals to the 
central nervous system.
The study of somatic sensation has been revo-
lutionized in the past 10 years by three important 
advances. First, the development of transgenic mice 
with fluorescent reporters of gene expression in DRG 
neurons has allowed neuroscientists to assess the 
physiological responses of specific receptor classes 
and their anatomical projections to sensory receptors 
in the body and in the central nervous system. Func-
tional imaging of individual DRG neurons expressing 
genetically encoded calcium sensors such as GCaMP6 
enables simultaneous optical recordings of activity 
from populations of receptor neurons innervating a 
specific region of the body, thereby providing a useful 
tool for analyzing ensemble responses to somatosen-
sory stimuli. Second, studies of isolated DRG neurons 
in vitro, or in reduced skin-nerve preparations, ena-
ble biophysical assessment of receptor responses and 
characterization of ion channels expressed in individ-
ual somatosensory neurons. Third, the identification of 
Piezo protein ion channels as the molecular transduc-
ers of touch and proprioception in mammalian mecha-
noreceptors has provided a novel system for assessing 
the role of these channels in the senses of touch, pro-
prioception, and visceral function.
In this chapter, we consider the principles com-
mon to all DRG neurons and those that distinguish 
their individual sensory function. We begin with a 
description of the peripheral nerves and their organi-
zation, followed by a survey of the receptor classes 
responsible for each of the major bodily senses. We 
also examine the sensory transduction mechanisms 
that convert various stimulus energies into electrical 
signals. We then describe the integration of informa-
tion by the parent axon from multiple receptors in its 
receptive field and conclude with a discussion of the 
central processing centers for each submodality in the 
spinal cord and brain stem. Higher-order processing of 
touch, pain, proprioception, and autonomic regulation 
of viscera is described in later chapters.
Dorsal Root Ganglion Neurons Are the Primary 
Sensory Receptor Cells of the Somatosensory 
System
The cell body of a DRG neuron lies in a ganglion on 
the dorsal root of a spinal or cranial nerve. Dorsal root 
ganglion neurons originate from the neural crest and 
are intimately associated with the nearby segment of 
the spinal cord. Individual neurons in a DRG respond 
selectively to specific types of stimuli because of 
morphological and molecular specializations of their 
peripheral terminals.
Dorsal root ganglion neurons are a type of bipo-
lar cell, called pseudo-unipolar cells. The axon of a 
DRG neuron has two branches, one projecting to the 
periphery and one projecting to the central nervous 
system (Figure 18–1). The peripheral terminals of indi-
vidual DRG neurons innervate the skin, muscle, joint 
capsules, or viscera and contain receptors special-
ized for particular kinds of stimuli. The region of the 
body innervated by these sensory endings is called a  
dermatome (see Figure 18-13). Sensory peripheral nerve 
endings differ in receptor morphology and stimulus 
selectivity, allowing them to detect mechanical, ther-
mal, or chemical events. The central branches termi-
nate in the spinal cord or brain stem, forming the first 
synapses in somatosensory pathways. Thus, the axon 
of each DRG cell serves as a single transmission line 
with one polarity between the receptor terminal and 
the central nervous system. This axon is called the 
primary afferent fiber.
Individual primary afferent fibers innervating a 
particular region of the body, such as the thumb or 
fingers, are grouped together into bundles or fasci-
cles of axons forming the peripheral nerves. They are 
guided during development to a specific location in 
the body by various trophic factors such as brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-3 
(NT3), neurotrophin-4 (NT4), or nerve growth fac-
tor (NGF). The peripheral nerves also include motor 
axons innervating nearby muscles, blood vessels, 
glands, or viscera.


===== Page 7 =====
410    Part IV / Perception
Figure 18–1  The dorsal root ganglion neuron is the primary 
sensory cell of the somatosensory system.  The cell  
body is located in a dorsal root ganglion (DRG) adjacent to the 
spinal cord. The axon has two branches, one projecting to the 
body, where its specialized terminal contains receptors for a 
particular form of stimulus energy, and one projecting to the 
spinal cord or brain stem, where the afferent signals are pro-
cessed. All DRG neurons contain five functional zones:  
1. The distal terminals in skin, muscle, or viscera contain spe-
cialized receptor-channels that convert specific types of stimu-
lus energy (mechanical, thermal, or chemical) into a depolarizing 
receptor potential. DRG neurons typically have multiple sensory 
endings. 2. The spike generation site contains voltage-gated 
Na+ and K+ channels (NaV and KV) that are located near the initial 
segment of the axon within the receptor capsule; they convert 
the receptor potential into a stream of action potentials. 3. The 
peripheral nerve fiber transmits action potentials from the spike 
initiation site to the DRG cell body. 4. The cell body of the DRG 
neuron is contained within a ganglion adjacent to the spinal 
cord or brain stem. 5. A spinal or cranial nerve connects the 
DRG or trigeminal neuron to the ipsilateral spinal cord or brain 
stem.
Dorsal root
ganglion cell
1
2
3
4
5
Peripheral
target (skin)
Damage to peripheral nerves or their targets in the 
brain may produce sensory deficits in more than one 
somatosensory submodality or motor deficits in spe-
cific muscle groups. Knowledge of where somatosen-
sory modalities overlap morphologically, and where 
they diverge, facilitates diagnosis of neurological dis-
orders and malfunction.
Each DRG neuron can be subdivided into five func-
tional zones: the receptive zone, the spike generation 
site, the peripheral nerve fiber, the DRG cell body, and 
the spinal or cranial nerve (Figure 18–1). The receptive 
zone, at the distal end of the DRG axon, contains spe-
cialized receptor proteins that sense mechanical force, 
thermal events, or chemicals in the local environment 
and translate these signals into a local depolarization 
of the axonal terminals, called the receptor potential (see 
Figure 3–9A). This local depolarization spreads pas-
sively toward the central axon where action potentials 
are generated, usually at the initial segment (distal 
to the first node of Ranvier in myelinated fibers) (see 
Figure 3–10A). Stimuli of sufficient strength produce 
action potentials that are transmitted along the periph-
eral nerve fiber, through the cell soma, and into the 
central branch that terminates in the spinal cord or 
brain stem.
The soma of a DRG neuron contains the cell 
nucleus. Sensory receptor proteins are expressed in 
the soma, providing a convenient expression system 
for characterizing their conductance properties in 
vitro. Isolated DRG neurons have been widely used in 
patch-clamp studies of sensory receptor currents and 
voltage-gated action potential channels.
DRG neurons differ in the size of their cell soma, 
gene expression profile, conduction velocity of their 
axons, sensory transduction molecule(s), innervation 
pattern in the body, and physiological function. For 
example, DRGs that innervate mechanoreceptors that 
sense touch and proprioception have the largest cell 
bodies and large myelinated axons; they express pro-
teins such as Npy2r or parvalbumin (PV) (Figure 18–2). 
In contrast, DRG neurons that sense temperature or 
irritant chemicals have small cell bodies and unmy-
elinated axons; they express calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) or the lectin IB4 (Figure 18–2C,D). 
As these fluorescent molecular labels extend through 
the axons to their peripheral endings in the body and 
in the central nervous system, David Ginty and col-
leagues were able to characterize the pattern of soma-
tosensory nerve endings in the body (Figure 18–2H) 
and trace their central projections to the spinal cord 
(Figure 18–2G) and brain stem.
Peripheral Somatosensory Nerve Fibers 
Conduct Action Potentials at Different Rates
The peripheral nerves that transmit spike trains from 
the site of spike generation to the central nervous sys-
tem have classically served as the primary recording 
sites for neurophysiological studies of somatosensory 
receptor mechanisms. Individual peripheral nerve fibers 
in animals are typically dissected from the main axon 
bundle and placed on fine wires that serve as record-
ing electrodes. Microelectrodes—manufactured from 
sharpened tungsten or platinum wires—have also been 
inserted through the skin into the peripheral nerves of 
humans (a technique known as microneurography) to 
measure sensory responses to various somatic stimuli 
(Chapter 19).
Peripheral nerve fibers are classified into functional 
groups based on properties related to axon diameter 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    411
Figure 18–2  Dorsal root ganglion neurons differ in size, gene 
expression, and skin innervation patterns. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Li et al. 2011. Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.)
Panels A–F show double immunostaining of histological sec-
tions through a thoracic dorsal root ganglion. Individual dorsal 
root ganglion (DRG) neurons in these sections express genetic 
markers for specific classes of somatosensory nerve fibers. 
The G protein–coupled receptor Npy2r-GFP (green) or Npy2r-
TOM (red) labels physiologically identified Aβ rapidly adapting 
low-threshold mechanoreceptors (Aβ RA-LTMRs). These fibers 
also express neurofilament heavy polypeptide (NFH), a marker 
of heavily myelinated axons (E), form longitudinal lanceolate 
(comb-like) endings surrounding individual guard hairs or awl/
auchene hairs in hairy skin (H), and terminate in laminae III to 
V of the dorsal horn (G). Double-labeled neurons or fibers are 
stained yellow.
A. Aβ RA-LTMRs express the receptor tyrosine kinase Ret early 
in development (named early Ret and stained red). A majority 
of these neurons also express Npy2r-GFP (green); neurons that 
express both markers are stained yellow. Aβ RA-LTMRs have 
medium-sized cell bodies.
B. Aβ RA-LTMRs (green) have smaller cell bodies than pro-
prioceptors such as muscle spindle afferents and Golgi tendon 
organs that express parvalbumin (PV, red).
C, D. Aβ RA-LTMRs (Npy2r-GFP, green) have larger cell bodies 
than unmyelinated purinergic C fibers that release ATP as co-
transmitters (IB4, red) and peptidergic Aδ LTMRs that express 
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP, red).
E. Heavily myelinated peripheral nerve fibers with large cell 
bodies express neurofilament heavy polypeptide (NFH, green). 
These include group Ia and Ib muscle afferents, Aβ SA-LTMRs, 
and Aβ RA-LTMRs (also labeled with Npy2r-tdTom [red]). Only 
Aβ RA-LTMRs express both markers and are stained yellow.
F–H. Double immunostaining with Npy2r-GFP (green) and 
Npy2r-tdTomato (red) of thoracic DRG neurons (F), their central 
processes in lamina III through V in the spinal cord dorsal horn 
(G), and their peripheral lanceolate endings at hair follicles in 
hairy skin sections (H) shows that the labeled peripheral and 
central Aβ RA-LTMR neurons largely overlap with each other 
(yellow) and that such genetic markers are useful for tracing 
sensory nerve endings.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Npy2r-GFP and cRet
Npy2r-GFP and PV
Npy2r-GFP and IB4
Npy2r-GFP and CGRP
Npy2r-TOM and NFH
Npy2r-TOM and Npy2r-GFP
and myelination, conduction velocity, and whether 
they are sensory or motor. The first nerve classification 
scheme was devised in 1894 by Charles Sherrington, 
who measured the diameter of myelin-stained axons 
in sensory nerves, and subsequently codified by David 
Lloyd (Table 18–1). They found two or three overlap-
ping groups of axonal diameters (Figure 18–3). It was 
later discovered that these anatomical groupings are 
functionally important. Group I axons in muscle nerves 
innervate muscle spindle receptors and Golgi tendon 


===== Page 9 =====
412    Part IV / Perception
Table 18–1  Classification of Sensory Fibers in Peripheral Nerves1
 
Muscle nerve
Cutaneous nerve2
Fiber diameter (μm)
Conduction velocity (m/s)
Myelinated
  Large diameter
I
Aα
12–20
72–120
  Medium diameter
II
Aβ
6–12
36–72
  Small diameter
III
Aδ
1–6
4–36
Unmyelinated
IV
C
0.2–1.5
0.4–2.0
1Sensory fibers from muscle are classified according to their diameter, whereas those from the skin are classified by conduction velocity.
2The types of receptors innervated by each type of fiber are listed in Table 18–2.
Figure 18–3  Classification of mammalian peripheral nerve 
fibers.  The histograms illustrate the distribution of axon 
diameter for four groups of sensory nerve fibers innervating 
skeletal muscle and the skin. Each group has a characteristic 
axon diameter and conduction velocity (see Table 18–1). Light 
blue lines mark the boundaries of fiber profiles in each group 
in the zones of overlap. The conduction velocity (m/s) of myeli-
nated peripheral nerve fibers is approximately six times the 
fiber diameter (μm). (Adapted, with permission, from Boyd 
and Davey 1968.)
Number of ﬁbers
Number of ﬁbers
IV (C)
III (Aδ)
II (Aβ)
Axon
diameter (µm)
Cutaneous nerve
72
30
1
Conduction
velocity (m/s)
IV (C)
III (Aδ)
II (Aβ)
I (Aα)
1
5
12
20
120
Muscle nerve
organs, which signal muscle length and contractile 
force. Group II fibers innervate secondary spindle end-
ings and receptors in joint capsules; these receptors 
also mediate proprioception. Group III fibers, the small-
est myelinated muscle afferents, and the unmyelinated 
group IV afferents signal trauma or injuries in muscles 
and joints that are sensed as painful.
Nerves that innervate the skin contain two sets of 
myelinated fibers: Group II fibers innervate cutaneous 
mechanoreceptors that respond to touch, and group III 
fibers mediate thermal and noxious stimuli, as well 
as light touch in hairy skin. Unmyelinated group IV 
cutaneous afferents, like those in muscle, also mediate 
thermal and noxious stimuli.
Another method for classifying peripheral nerve 
fibers is based on electrical stimulation of whole 
nerves. In this widely used diagnostic technique, 
nerve conduction velocities are measured between 
pairs of stimulating and recording electrodes placed 
on the skin above a peripheral nerve. When studying 
conduction in the median or ulnar nerve, for exam-
ple, the stimulation electrode might be placed at the 
wrist and the recording electrode on the upper arm. 
Brief electrical pulses applied through the stimulat-
ing electrode evoke action potentials in the nerve. The 
neural signal recorded a short time later in the arm 
represents the summed action potentials of all of the 
nerve fibers excited by the stimulus pulse and is called 
the compound action potential (Chapter 9). It increases 
in amplitude as more nerve fibers are stimulated; the 
summed activity is roughly proportional to the total 
number of active nerve fibers.
Electrical stimuli of increasing strength evoke 
action potentials first in the largest axons, because they 
have the lowest electrical resistance, and then progres-
sively in smaller axons (Figure 18–4). Large-diameter 
fibers conduct action potentials more rapidly because 


