===== Page 1 =====
260    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
current to charge or discharge the muscle membrane 
capacitance, and thus alter the membrane voltage, the 
EPSP lags behind the synaptic current (see Figure 9–10 
and the Postscript at the end of this chapter).
The Neurotransmitter Acetylcholine  
Is Released in Discrete Packets
During their first microelectrode recordings at frog 
motor end-plates in the 1950s, Fatt and Katz observed 
small spontaneous depolarizing potentials (0.5–1.0 mV) 
that occurred at an average rate of about 1/s. Such 
spontaneous potentials were restricted to the end-
plate, exhibited the same time course as stimulus-
evoked EPSPs, and were blocked by curare. Hence, 
they were named “miniature” end-plate potentials 
(mEPPs, or mEPSPs in our current terminology).
What could account for the small, fixed size of 
the miniature end-plate potential? Del Castillo and 
Katz tested the possibility that an mEPSP represents 
the action of a single ACh molecule. This hypothesis 
was quickly dismissed, because applying very small 
amounts of ACh to the end-plate could elicit depolariz-
ing responses that were much smaller than the 1.0-mV 
mEPSP. The low doses of ACh did produce an increase 
in baseline fluctuations or “noise.” Later analysis of 
the statistical components of this noise led to estimates 
that the underlying unitary postsynaptic response was 
a depolarization of 0.3 μV in amplitude and 1.0 ms  
in duration. This was the first hint of the electrical 
signaling properties of a single ACh receptor-channel 
(described later).
Del Castillo and Katz concluded that each mEPSP 
must represent the action of a multimolecular packet 
or “quantum” of transmitter. Further, they suggested 
that the large, stimulus-evoked EPSP was made up of 
an integral number of quanta. Evidence for this quan-
tal hypothesis is presented in Chapter 15.
Individual Acetylcholine Receptor-Channels 
Conduct All-or-None Currents
What are the properties of the ACh receptor-channels 
that produce the inward current that generates the 
depolarizing end-plate potential? Which ions move 
through the channels to produce this inward current? 
And what does the current carried by a single ACh 
receptor-channel look like?
In 1976, Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann obtained 
key insights into the biophysical nature of ACh recep-
tor-channel function from recordings of the current 
conducted by single ACh receptor-channels in skeletal 
muscle cells, the unitary or elementary current. They 
found that the opening of an individual channel gener-
ates a very small rectangular step of ionic current (Figure 
12–7A). At a given resting potential, each channel open-
ing generates the same-size current pulse. At −90 mV, the 
current steps are approximately −2.7 pA in amplitude. 
Although this is a very small current, it corresponds to a 
flow of approximately 17 million ions per second!
Whereas the amplitude of the current through 
a single ACh receptor-channel is constant for every 
opening, the duration of each opening and the time 
between openings vary considerably. These varia-
tions occur because channel openings and closings 
are stochastic; they obey the same statistical law that 
describes the exponential time course of radioactive 
decay. Because channels and ACh undergo random 
thermal motions and fluctuations, it is impossible to 
predict exactly how long it will take any one channel 
to bind ACh or how long that channel will stay open 
before the ACh dissociates and the channel closes. 
However, the average length of time a particular type 
of channel stays open is a well-defined property of that 
channel, just as the half-life of radioactive decay is an 
invariant property of a particular isotope. The mean 
open time for ACh receptor-channels is approximately 
1 ms. Thus, each channel opening permits the move-
ment of approximately 17,000 ions. Once a channel 
closes, the ACh molecules dissociate and the channel 
remains closed until it binds ACh again.
The Ion Channel at the End-Plate Is Permeable to 
Both Sodium and Potassium Ions
Once a receptor-channel opens, which ions flow 
through the channel, and how does this lead to depo-
larization of the muscle membrane? One important 
means of identifying the ion (or ions) responsible for 
the synaptic current is to measure the value of the 
chemical driving force (the chemical battery) propel-
ling ions through the channel. Remember, the current 
through a single open channel is given by the prod-
uct of the single-channel conductance and the electro-
chemical driving force on the ions conducted through 
the channel (Chapter 9). Thus, the current generated 
by a single ACh receptor-channel is given by:
	
IEPSP = γEPSP × (Vm − EEPSP),	
(12–1)
where IEPSP is the amplitude of current through one chan-
nel, γEPSP is the conductance of a single open channel, EEPSP is 
membrane potential at which the net flux of ions through 
the channel is zero, and Vm − EEPSP is the electrochemi-
cal driving force for ion flux. The current steps change in 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     261
Figure 12–7  Individual acetylcholine (ACh) receptor-channels 
conduct an all-or-none elementary current.
A. The patch-clamp technique is used to record currents from 
single ACh receptor-channels. The patch electrode is filled with 
salt solution that contains a low concentration of ACh and is 
then brought into close contact with the surface of the mus-
cle membrane (see Box 8–1). At a fixed membrane potential, 
each time a channel opens, it generates a relatively constant 
elementary current. At the resting potential of –90 mV, the 
current is approximately −2.7 pA (1 pA = 10–12 A). As the volt-
age across a patch of membrane is systematically varied, the 
resultant current varies in amplitude as a result of changes in 
driving force. The current is inward at voltages negative to 0 mV 
and outward at voltages positive to 0 mV, thus defining 0 mV as 
the reversal potential. The arrows on the right side of the traces 
illustrate the individual sodium and potassium fluxes and  
resultant net current as a function of voltage.
B. The linear relation between current through a single ACh 
receptor-channel and membrane voltage shows that the chan-
nel behaves as a simple resistor having a single-channel con-
ductance (f ) of about 30 pS.
Membrane
potential
Reversal
potential
A
B
+70 mV
–70 mV
100 ms
2 pA
+55 mV
–50 mV
0 mV
60
–40
–80
80
40
20
–20
–60
2.0
1.0
–1.0
–2.0
i (pA)
Vm (mV)
γ = 30 pS
ACh receptor-channels
INa + IK   =
Net
current
size as the membrane potential changes because of the 
change in driving force. For the ACh receptor-channels, 
the relationship between IEPSP and membrane voltage is 
linear, indicating that the single-channel conductance is 
constant and does not depend on membrane voltage; 
that is, the channel behaves as a simple ohmic resistor. 
From the slope of this relation, the channel is found to 
have a conductance of 30 pS (Figure 12–7B). As we saw in 
Chapter 9, the total conductance, g, due to the opening of 
a number of receptor-channels (n) is given by:
g = n × g.
The current–voltage relation for a single chan-
nel shows that the reversal potential for ionic current 
through ACh receptor-channels, obtained from the 
intercept of the membrane voltage axis, is 0 mV, which 
is not equal to the equilibrium potential for Na+ or any 
of the other major cations or anions. This is due to the 
fact that this chemical potential is produced not by a 
single ion species but by a combination of two species: 
The ligand-gated channels at the end-plate are almost 
equally permeable to both major cations, Na+ and K+. 
Thus, during the end-plate potential, Na+ flows into 
the cell and K+ flows out. The reversal potential is at 
0 mV because this is a weighted average of the equi-
librium potentials for Na+ and K+ (Box 12–1). At the 
reversal potential, the influx of Na+ is balanced by an 
equal efflux of K+ (Figure 12–7A).
The ACh receptor-channels at the end-plate are not 
selective for a single ion species, as are the voltage-gated 
Na+ or K+ channels, because the diameter of the pore of 
the ACh receptor-channel is substantially larger than 
that of the voltage-gated channels. Electrophysiological 
measurements suggest that it may be 0.6 nm in diam-
eter, an estimate based on the size of the largest organic 
cation that can permeate the channel. For example, 
tetramethylammonium (TMA) is approximately 0.6 nm 
in diameter and yet still permeates the channel. In con-
trast, the voltage-gated Na+ channel is only permeant 
to organic cations that are smaller than 0.5 × 0.3 nm in 
cross section, and voltage-gated K+ channels will only 
conduct ions less than 0.3 nm in diameter.
The relatively large diameter of the ACh receptor-
channel pore is thought to provide a water-filled 


===== Page 3 =====
262    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
The reversal potential of a membrane current carried 
by more than one ion species, such as the end-plate cur-
rent through the ACh receptor-channels, is determined 
by two factors: (1) the relative conductance for the per-
meant ions (gNa and gK in the case of the end-plate cur-
rent) and (2) the equilibrium potentials of the ions (ENa 
and EK).
At the reversal potential for the ACh receptor-
channel current, inward current carried by Na+ is 
balanced by outward current carried by K+:
	
INa + IK = 0.	
(12–2)
The individual Na+ and K+ currents can be obtained 
from
	
INa = gNa × (Vm − ENa)	
(12–3a)
and
	
IK = gK × (Vm − EK).	
(12–3b)
We can substitute Equations 12–3a and 12–3b for INa 
and IK in Equation 12–2, replacing Vm with EEPSP (because 
at the reversal potential Vm = EEPSP):
	
gNa × (EEPSP − ENa) + gK × (EEPSP − EK) = 0.	
(12–4)
Solving this equation for EEPSP yields
	
EEPSP = ( gNa × ENa) + (gK × EK) .
gNa + gK 
	
(12–5)
This equation can also be used to solve for the ratio 
gNa/gK if one knows EEPSP, EK, and ENa. Thus, rearranging 
Equation 12–5 yields
	
gNa = EEPSP − EK 
 
 .
gK 
ENa − EEPSP 	
(12–6)
At the neuromuscular junction, EEPSP = 0 mV, EK = 
−100 mV, and ENa = +55 mV. Thus, from Equation 12–6, 
gNa/gK has a value of approximately 1.8, indicating that 
the conductance of the ACh receptor-channel for Na+ is 
slightly higher than for K+. A comparable approach can 
be used to analyze the reversal potential and the move-
ment of ions during excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
potentials in central neurons (Chapter 13).
Box 12–1  Reversal Potential of the End-Plate Potential
environment that allows cations to diffuse through 
the channel relatively unimpeded, much as they 
would in free solution. This explains why the pore 
does not discriminate between Na+ and K+ and why 
even divalent cations, such as Ca2+, are able to pass 
through. Anions are excluded by the presence of fixed 
negative charges in the channel, as described later in 
this chapter. Recent X-ray crystallographic data have 
provided a direct view of the large pore of the ACh 
receptor-channel (see Figure 12–12).
Four Factors Determine the End-Plate Current
How do the rectangular current steps carried by sin-
gle ACh receptor-channels produce the large syn-
aptic current at the end-plate in response to motor 
nerve stimulation? Stimulation of a motor nerve 
releases a large quantity of ACh into the synap-
tic cleft. The ACh rapidly diffuses across the cleft 
and binds to the ACh receptors, causing more than 
200,000 receptor-channels to open almost simultane-
ously. (This number is obtained by comparing the 
total end-plate current, approximately −500 nA, 
with the current through a single channel, approxi-
mately −2.7 pA).
The rapid opening of so many channels causes 
a large increase in the total conductance of the end-
plate membrane, gEPSP , and produces the fast rising 
phase of the end-plate current. As the ACh in the cleft 
decreases rapidly to zero (in <1 ms), because of enzy-
matic hydrolysis and diffusion, the channels begin to 
close randomly. Although each closure produces only 
a small step-like decrease in end-plate current, the ran-
dom closing of large numbers of small unitary currents 
causes the total end-plate current to appear to decay 
smoothly (Figure 12–8).
The Acetylcholine Receptor-Channels Have 
Distinct Properties That Distinguish Them 
From the Voltage-Gated Channels That 
Generate the Muscle Action Potential
The ACh receptors that produce the end-plate poten-
tial differ in two important ways from the voltage-
gated channels that generate the action potential in 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     263
muscle. First, the action potential is generated by 
sequential activation of two distinct classes of voltage-
gated channels, one selective for Na+ and the other for 
K+. In contrast, a single type of ion channel, the ACh 
receptor-channel, generates the end-plate potential by 
allowing both Na+ and K+ to pass with nearly equal 
permeability.
Second, the Na+ flux through voltage-gated chan-
nels is regenerative: By increasing the depolarization 
of the cell, the Na+ influx opens more voltage-gated 
Figure 12–8  The time course of the total current at the end-
plate reflects the summation of contributions of many indi-
vidual acetylcholine receptor-channels. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Colquhoun 1981. Copyright © 1981 Elsevier.)
A. Individual ACh receptor-channels open in response to a brief 
pulse of ACh. In this idealized example, the membrane contains 
six ACh receptor-channels, all of which open rapidly and nearly 
simultaneously. The channels remain open for varying times 
and close independently.
B. The stepped trace shows the sum of the six single-channel 
current records in part A. It represents the current during the 
sequential closing of each channel (the number indicates which 
channel has closed). In the final period of current, only chan-
nel one is open. In a current record from a whole muscle fiber, 
with thousands of channels, individual channel closings are not 
detectable because the scale needed to display the total end-
plate current (hundreds of nanoamperes) is so large that the 
contributions of individual channels cannot be resolved. As a 
result, the total end-plate current appears to decay smoothly.
2
6
4
3
5
1
Open
Closed
Channel 1
2
3
4
5
6
ACh
pulse
2 ms
3 pA
A  Idealized time course of opening of six ion channels
B  Total current of the six channels
2 ms
3 pA
Na+ channels. This regenerative feature is responsible 
for the all-or-none property of the action potential. In 
contrast, the number of ACh receptor-channels opened 
during the synaptic potential is fixed by the amount 
of ACh available. The depolarization produced by Na+ 
influx through the ACh-gated channels does not lead 
to the opening of more ACh receptor-channels and can-
not produce an action potential. To trigger an action 
potential, a synaptic potential must recruit neighbor-
ing voltage-gated Na+ channels (Figure 12–9).
As might be expected from these two differences 
in physiological properties, the ACh receptor-channels 
and voltage-gated channels are formed by different 
macromolecules that exhibit different sensitivities 
to drugs and toxins. Tetrodotoxin, which blocks the 
voltage-gated Na+ channel, does not block the influx 
of Na+ through the nicotinic ACh receptor-channels. 
Similarly, α-bungarotoxin binds tightly to the nicotinic 
receptors and blocks the action of ACh but does not 
interfere with voltage-gated Na+ or K+ channels.
Transmitter Binding Produces a Series of State 
Changes in the Acetylcholine Receptor-Channel
Each ACh receptor has two binding sites for ACh; both 
must be occupied by transmitter for the channel to 
open efficiently. However, during prolonged applica-
tions of ACh, the channel enters a desensitized state 
where it no longer conducts. The time course of desen-
sitization of the muscle nicotinic receptor is too slow to 
contribute to the time course of the EPSP under normal 
conditions, where ACh is present in the synaptic cleft 
for only a very brief period of time. However, desensi-
tization can play a more important role in determining 
the time course of the postsynaptic response at certain 
neuronal synapses, where the transmitter may per-
sist in the synaptic cleft for more prolonged times or 
where the postsynaptic receptors undergo more rapid 
desensitization.
For example, the persistence of ACh in the synap-
tic cleft at cholinergic synapses in the brain may lead 
to significant desensitization of certain subtypes of 
neuronal nicotinic receptors. Heavy smokers can build 
up sufficient levels of nicotine to desensitize recep-
tors in the brain. Desensitization also plays a role in 
the action of the drug succinylcholine, a dimer of ACh 
that is resistant to acetylcholinesterase and is used dur-
ing general anesthesia to produce muscle relaxation. 
Succinylcholine does so through its ability to produce 
both receptor desensitization and prolonged depolari-
zation, which blocks muscle action potentials by inac-
tivating voltage-gated Na+ channels.


===== Page 5 =====
264    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
A minimal reaction model, first proposed by Katz 
and his colleagues, captures many (but not all) of the 
key steps of ACh receptor-channel function, in which a 
closed receptor-channel (R) successively binds two mol-
ecules of ACh (A) prior to undergoing a rapid confor-
mational change to an open state (R*). This is followed 
by a slower conformational change to the nonconduct-
ing desensitized state (D). The model also incorporates 
the finding that there is a small probability that an indi-
vidual receptor may enter the desensitized state even in 
the absence of ACh. These binding and gating reactions 
can be summarized by the following scheme:
A + R
AR + A
A2R
A2R* 
A + D
AD + A
A2D
A2D* 
X-ray crystal structure models have now been 
obtained for all three states of the ACh receptor 
(described later).
The Low-Resolution Structure of the Acetylcholine 
Receptor Is Revealed by Molecular and  
Biophysical Studies
The nicotinic ACh receptor at the nerve-muscle syn-
apse is part of a single macromolecule that includes the 
pore in the membrane through which ions flow. Where 
in the molecule is the binding site located? How is the 
Figure 12–9  The end-plate 
potential resulting from the 
opening of acetylcholine 
receptor-channels opens 
voltage-gated sodium chan-
nels. The end-plate potential 
is normally large enough to 
open a sufficient number of 
voltage-gated Na+ channels to 
exceed the threshold for an 
action potential. (Adapted from 
Alberts et al. 1989.)
ACh binding to 
receptor-channel
molecule
Na+ inﬂow
K+ outﬂow
Channel opening
Depolarization
(end-plate
potential)
Opening of
voltage-gated
Na+ channels
Na+ inﬂow
Depolarization
Action potential
Voltage-gated
Na+ channel
Na+
ACh
Na+
ACh
receptor-
channel
K+
pore of the channel formed? How is ACh binding cou-
pled to channel gating?
Insights into these questions have been obtained 
from molecular and biophysical studies of the ACh 
receptor proteins and their genes, beginning with the 
purification of the macromolecule from the electric ray 
Torpedo marmorata (Figure 12–2). Using different bio-
chemical approaches, Arthur Karlin and Jean Pierre 
Changeux purified the receptor from electroplaques, 
specialized muscle-like cells whose stack-like packing 
enables their individual EPSPs to summate in series to 
generate the large voltages (>100 V) used by the elec-
tric ray to stun its prey. Their studies indicate that the 
mature nicotinic ACh receptor is a membrane glyco-
protein formed from five subunits of similar molecu-
lar weight: two α-subunits and one β-, one γ-, and one 
δ-subunit (Figure 12–10).
Karlin and his colleagues identified two extracel-
lular binding sites for ACh on each receptor protein 
in the clefts between each α-subunit and its neighbor-
ing γ- or δ-subunit. One molecule of ACh must bind at 
each of the two sites for the channel to open efficiently 
(Figure 12–10). Because α-bungarotoxin binds remark-
ably tightly to the same binding site on the α-subunit 
as does ACh, the toxin acts as an irreversible transmit-
ter antagonist.
Further insights into the structure of the ACh 
receptor-channel come from the analysis of the primary 
amino acid sequence of the receptor’s four different 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     265
subunits and from biophysical studies. Molecular 
cloning by Shosaku Numa and colleagues demon-
strated that the four subunits are encoded by dis-
tinct but related genes. Sequence comparison of the 
subunits shows a high degree of similarity—one-half 
of the amino acid residues are identical or conserva-
tively substituted—which suggests that all subunits 
have a similar structure. Furthermore, all four of the 
genes for the subunits are homologous; that is, they 
are derived from a common ancestral gene. Nicotinic 
ACh receptors in neurons are encoded by a set of 
distinct but related genes. All of these receptors are 
pentamers; however, their subunit composition and 
stoichiometry vary. Whereas most neuronal receptors 
are composed of two α-subunits and three β-subunits, 
some neuronal receptors are composed of five identi-
cal α-subunits (the α7 isoform) and so can bind five 
molecules of ACh.
All nicotinic ACh receptor subunits contain a 
highly conserved sequence near the extracellular bind-
ing site for ACh consisting of two disulfide-bonded 
cysteine (cys) residues with 13 intervening amino 
acids. The resultant 15-amino acid loop forms a sig-
nature sequence both for nicotinic ACh receptor sub-
units and for related receptors for other transmitters 
in neurons. The cys-loop receptor family, also known as 
pentameric ligand-gated ion channels (pLGIC), includes 
Figure 12–10  The nicotinic ACh receptor-channel is a 
pentameric macromolecule. The receptor and channel are 
components of a single macromolecule consisting of five 
subunits: two identical α-subunits and one each of β-, γ-, and 
δ-subunits. The subunits form a pore through the cell mem-
brane. When two molecules of ACh bind to the extracellular 
binding sites—formed at the interfaces of the two α-subunits 
and their neighboring γ- and δ-subunits—the conformation of 
the receptor-channel molecule changes (see Figure 12–12). This 
change opens the pore through which K+ and Na+ flow down 
their electrochemical gradients.
Na+
K+
β
α
α
γ
δ
γ
ACh
No ACh bound: Channel closed
Two ACh molecules bound:
Channel open
α
γ
α
α
α
α
ACh binding sites
receptors for the neurotransmitters γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), glycine, and serotonin.
The distribution of the polar and nonpolar amino 
acids of the subunits provided the first clues as to 
how the subunits are threaded through the mem-
brane bilayer. Each subunit contains four hydrophobic 
regions of approximately 20 amino acids called M1 
to M4, each of which forms an α-helix that spans the 
membrane (Figure 12–11A). The amino acid sequences 
of the subunits suggest that the subunits are arranged 
such that they create a central pore through the mem-
brane (Figure 12–11B).
The walls of the channel pore are formed by the 
M2 membrane-spanning segment and by the loop con-
necting M2 to M3. Three rings of negative charges that 
flank the external and internal boundaries of the M2 
segment play an important role in the channel’s selec-
tivity for cations. Certain local anesthetic drugs block 
the channel by interacting with one ring of polar ser-
ine residues and two rings of hydrophobic residues in 
the central region of the M2 helix, midway through the 
membrane.
Three-dimensional models of the entire receptor-
channel complex were initially proposed by Karlin 
based on low-resolution neutron scattering and by 
Nigel Unwin based on electron diffraction images. 
The complex is divided into three regions: a large 


===== Page 7 =====
266    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 12–11  The ACh receptor subunits are homologous 
membrane-spanning proteins.
A. Each subunit contains a large extracellular N-terminus, four 
membrane-spanning α-helixes (M1–M4), and a short extracel-
lular C-terminus. The N-terminus contains the ACh-binding site, 
and the membrane helixes form the pore.
B. The five subunits are arranged such that they form a central 
aqueous channel, with the M2 segment of each subunit form-
ing the lining of the pore. The γ-subunit lies between the two 
α-subunits. (Dimensions are not to scale.)
C. Negatively charged amino acids on each subunit form three 
rings of negative charge around the pore. As an ion traverses 
the channel, it encounters these rings of charge. The rings 
at the external and internal surfaces of the cell membrane 
(1, 3) may serve as prefilters that help repel anions and form 
divalent cation blocking sites. The central ring near the cyto-
plasmic side of the membrane bilayer (2) may contribute more 
importantly to establishing the specific cation selectivity of 
the selectivity filter, which is the narrowest region of the pore.
D. A high-resolution X-ray crystal structure model of a 
human neuronal nicotinic ACh receptor-channel. Right:  
A top-down view of the open channel, which is composed 
of two a4-subunits and three b2-subunits arranged around 
the central pore. These subunits are closely related  
variants of the α- and β-subunits of the muscle receptor. 
Two molecules of nicotine (atoms shown as red spheres) 
are bound to the receptor. A permeating cation is shown as 
a pink sphere.Center: A side view of the receptor showing 
the location of the phospholipid bilayer of the membrane 
and bound nicotine. Left: A side view of a single α4-subunit 
in the plane of the membrane. The amino-terminus of the 
subunit consists of a large extracellular domain. Loop C 
helps form the ligand-binding site. The β1-β2 and cys-loops 
at the interface between the extracellular domain and the 
M1–M4 membrane-spanning α-helixes transmit a confor-
mational change from the ligand-binding site to the pore 
to open the channel. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Morales-Perez et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Springer 
Nature.)
A  A single subunit in the
 
ACh receptor-channel
D
NH2
COOH
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
δ
α
α γ
β
M1
M2
M4 M3
M3
M1
M4
M2
C  Functional model of 
 
ACh receptor-channel
Extracellular
side
Funnel shaped
entrance region
Exit region
Ion selective pore
Nicotine
Cytoplasmic
side
δ
α
β
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
1
2
3
B  Arrangement of subunits
    surrounding the channel
    pore
β2
β2
β1-β2 loop
M1
M4
M2
M2-M3 loop
Loop C 
Cys-loop
M3
C
β2
α4
α4
N
α4


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     267
extracellular portion that contains the ACh binding 
site, a narrow transmembrane pore selective for cati-
ons, and a large exit region at the internal membrane 
surface (Figure 12–11C). The extracellular region is sur-
prisingly large, approximately 6 nm in length. In addi-
tion, the extracellular end of the pore has a wide mouth 
approximately 2.5 nm in diameter. Within the bilayer 
of the membrane, the pore gradually narrows.
The autoimmune disorder myasthenia gravis 
results from the production of antibodies that bind to the 
extracellular domain of the ACh receptor, leading to a 
decrease in the number or function of the nicotinic ACh 
receptors at the neuromuscular junction. If the change 
is severe enough, this can decrease the EPSP below 
the threshold for triggering an action potential, result-
ing in debilitating weakness. Several congenital forms 
of myasthenia result from mutations in nicotinic ACh 
receptor subunits that can also alter receptor number or 
channel function. For example, a mutation in an amino 
acid residue in the M2 segment leads to a prolonged 
channel open time, termed the slow channel syndrome, 
which results in excessive postsynaptic excitation that 
leads to degeneration of the end-plate (Chapter 57).
The High-Resolution Structure of the Acetylcholine 
Receptor-Channel Is Revealed by X-Ray Crystal Studies
A deeper understanding of the fine details of the ACh 
binding site initially came from high-resolution X-ray 
crystallographic studies of a molluscan ACh-binding 
protein, which is homologous to the extracellular amino 
terminus of nicotinic ACh receptor subunits. Remarkably, 
unlike typical ACh receptors, the molluscan ACh-binding 
protein is a soluble protein secreted by glial cells into the 
extracellular space. At cholinergic synapses in snails, it 
acts to reduce the size of the EPSP, perhaps by buffering 
the free concentration of ACh in the synaptic cleft.
Further insights into the structure of the complete 
receptor-channel have come from X-ray crystal struc-
tures of related pentameric ligand-gated channels from 
bacteria and multicellular animals, culminating with 
a recent X-ray crystal structure of a human neuronal 
nicotinic ACh receptor in complex with nicotine. Com-
bined with knowledge of structures of related proteins, 
we now have a remarkably detailed knowledge of the 
structure and mechanisms underlying ligand binding, 
channel gating, and ion permeation of the ACh receptor-
channel and related ligand-gated channels.
In the neuronal ACh receptor, two α-subunits 
combine with three β-subunits to form the pentamer 
(Figure 12–11D). The large extracellular domain of 
the receptor contains two ACh binding sites and 
forms a pentameric ring that surrounds a large central 
vestibule, which presumably funnels ions toward the 
narrow transmembrane domain of the receptor. Each 
α-subunit binds one molecule of nicotine at a site 
located at the interface with a neighboring β-subunit. 
Electron diffraction data from Nigel Unwin’s higher-
resolution structures of related cys-loop receptors and 
from the high-resolution structure of the desensitized 
state of the neuronal nicotinic receptor show that the 
four transmembrane segments of each subunit are 
indeed α-helixes that traverse the 3-nm length of the lipid 
bilayer (Figure 12–12). In the desensitized state, the M2 
segments from the five subunits form a narrow con-
striction near the intracellular side of the membrane, 
preventing ion permeation.
Our picture of the transmembrane region of the 
nicotinic ACh receptor-channel in the open and closed 
state is still incomplete. However, by comparison with 
structures of related pLGICs, a coherent picture of the 
receptor is beginning to emerge. In the closed state, 
the pore-lining M2 segments lie roughly parallel to 
each other, forming a narrow central pore. The pore is 
further constricted to a diameter of 0.3 to 0.4 nm by a 
ring of highly conserved hydrophobic leucine residues 
near the middle of the M2 segment (Figure 12–12). This 
hydrophobic constriction is thought to provide a high-
energy barrier that restricts the passage of hydrated 
cations whose diameter is greater than the constriction 
in the pore. At present the discrepancy in pore diam-
eter inferred from electrophysiological measuements 
(0.6 nm) and the narrower value from the crystal struc-
ture remains unresolved.
In the open state, the M2 segments are thought to 
tilt outward and rotate, widening the constriction of 
the leucine residues in the middle of M2, thus enabling 
ion permeation. The narrowest constriction in the open 
pore lies near the intracellular mouth of the channel, 
where the electronegative hydroxyl side chains from 
one ring of threonine residues (serine and threonine 
residues in the muscle ACh receptor) and a second ring 
of negatively charged glutamate residues are thought 
to form the selectivity filter. In the desensitized state 
the M2 segments tilt further, causing the selectivity fil-
ter to constrict even more, preventing ion permeation.
A detailed picture of how ligand binding leads to 
channel opening is now emerging based on various 
structural and functional studies. Binding of ligand 
is thought to promote the closure of the cleft between 
neighboring subunits, leading to the tightening of 
the extracellular domain of the pentamer, similar to 
the closing of the petals of a flower. This results in a 
twisting motion that causes the bottom of the extracel-
lular domain of the receptor to push on the M1 seg-
ment and extracellular loop connecting the M2 and 


===== Page 9 =====
268    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 12–12  A high-resolution three-dimensional 
structural model of a neuronal nicotinic ACh receptor-
channel. High-resolution models of the pentameric family of 
ligand-gated channels are shown for the closed, open, and 
desensitized states of the receptor-channel. Two out of five of 
the M2 α-helixes are shown. The desensitized structure is from 
the human neuronal ACh receptor. The closed and open states 
are based on structures of neuronal glycine receptors, which 
are closely related in amino acid sequence to ACh receptor sub-
units. Key amino acid side chains are illustrated for the desen-
sitized ACh receptor with position numbering on the right and 
amino acid abbreviations on the left. According to convention, 
position 0 is near the intracellular surface of the phospholipid 
bilayer; other positions are labeled according to relative position 
in the primary amino acid sequence. A conserved leucine in 
the middle of the M2 segment (position 9) forms a gate that 
constricts the pore in the closed state. Ligand binding causes 
the subunits to tilt outward and twist, opening up the leucine 
gate. A further conformational change during desensitization 
causes the subunits to tilt inward near the bottom, constricting 
the pore near the intracellular side of the channel and thereby 
producing a nonconducting state. The negatively charged glu-
tamates at positions 20, –1, and –4 correspond to the external 
(1), middle (2), and internal (3) rings of charge in Figure 12–11C. 
The negatively charged glutamate at position –1 and the elec-
tronegative threonine at position 2 form the selectivity filter 
of the channel. (Reproduced, with permission, from Morales-
Perez et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature.)
2
–1
–4
20
9
Glu
Leu
Leu
Leu
Thr
Glu
Glu
Open 
Desensitized 
Closed 
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
M3 transmembrane segments. This motion exerts a 
force on the M2 segment that leads to its rotation and 
tilting, thereby opening up the hydrophobic leucine 
gate in the middle of the pore and allowing ion per-
meation. Although future studies will no doubt refine 
our understanding of the structural bases for nicotinic 
receptor-channel and function, these recent advances 
give us an unprecedented molecular understanding 
of one of the most fundamental processes in the nerv-
ous system: synaptic transmission and, specifically, the 
signaling of information from nerve to muscle.
Highlights
1.	 The terminals of motor neurons form synapses 
with muscle fibers at specialized regions in the 
muscle membrane called end-plates. When an 
action potential reaches the terminals of a presyn-
aptic motor neuron, it causes the release of ACh.
2.	 ACh diffuses across the narrow (100-nm) synaptic 
cleft in a matter of microseconds and binds to nic-
otinic ACh receptors in the end-plate membrane. 
The energy of binding is translated into a con-
formational change that opens a cation-selective 
channel in the protein, allowing Na+, K+, and Ca2+ 
to flow across the postsynaptic membrane. The 
net effect, due largely to the influx of Na+ ions, 
produces a depolarizing synaptic potential called 
the end-plate potential.
3.	 Because the ACh receptor-channels are concen-
trated at the end-plate, the opening of these chan-
nels produces a local depolarization. This local 
depolarization is large enough (75 mV) to exceed 
the threshold for action potential generation by a 
factor of three to four.
4.	 It is important that the safety factor of nerve-
muscle transmission be at a high level, as it deter-
mines our ability to move, breath, and escape from 
danger. Decreases in ACh receptor number or func-
tion as a result of autoimmune disease or genetic 
mutations can contribute to neurological disorders.
5.	 Patch-clamp recordings have revealed the step-
like increase and decrease in current in response 
to the opening and closing of single ACh receptor-
channels. A typical excitatory postsynaptic current 


