===== Page 1 =====
1092    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
These studies suggest that in each stage of sleep 
the cerebral cortex undergoes synaptic reorganiza-
tion to consolidate the memory of specific types of 
salient information. Conversely, this memory consoli-
dation is lost when subjects are deprived of sleep or 
have fragmented sleep. A related theory, proposed 
by Giulio Tononi and Chiara Cirelli, is that rebalanc-
ing of synaptic strengths based on recent experience 
(synaptic homeostasis) occurs during sleep. The size 
of many excitatory synapses is increased during learn-
ing, requiring that some excitatory inputs be reduced 
to avoid overexciting the target neuron. Tononi and 
Cirelli found that the size of smaller synapses in motor 
and sensory cortex is reduced during sleep, resulting 
in strong inputs being strengthened while competing 
weaker ones are removed.
Diseases that cause sleep loss or that wake people 
from sleep can impair cognition. For example, obstructive 
sleep apnea can severely fragment sleep, resulting in 
daytime sleepiness, inattention, and other cognitive 
impairments. Fragmented sleep is also common in 
Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer patients tend to have 
fewer neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, 
and the extent of neuronal loss correlates with their 
degree of sleep fragmentation. Whether treating sleep 
fragmentation can improve cognition in Alzheimer 
patients remains to be determined.
Sleep Changes With Age
Sleep changes with age in striking and characteristic 
ways. As every new parent quickly learns, the lengthy 
sleep time of a newborn is distributed almost ran-
domly throughout the day. Although the EEG rhythms 
in newborns are not as well formed as those of older 
children or adults, more than 50% (8–9 hours per day) 
of that sleep is spent in a state much like REM sleep.
Sleep recordings from a premature infant exhibit 
an even higher percentage of REM-like sleep, indicat-
ing that in utero the fetus spends a large fraction of 
the day in a brain-activated but movement-inhibited 
state. As neuronal activity influences the development 
of functional circuits in the brain (Chapters 48 and 49), 
it is reasonable to think that the spontaneous activity of 
the immature brain during sleep facilitates the devel-
opment of neural circuits.
By approximately 4 months of age, the average 
baby begins to show diurnal rhythms that are synchro-
nized with day and night, much to the relief of weary 
parents. The total duration of sleep gradually declines, 
and by 5 years of age, the child may sleep 11 hours 
each night plus a nap, and 10 hours of sleep is typical 
around age 10. At these early ages, sleep is deep; stage 
N3 is prominent, with an abundance of delta waves in 
the EEG. As a result, children are not easily wakened 
by environmental stimuli.
With age, sleep becomes lighter and more frag-
mented. The percentage of time spent in stage N3 
sleep drops across adulthood, and by the age of 50 to 
60, it is not unusual for N3 to fade entirely, especially in 
men. This shift toward lighter stages of non-REM sleep 
results in two to three times as many spontaneous 
awakenings and more easily disrupted sleep. Many 
sleep disorders, including insomnia and sleep apnea, 
become more prevalent with age, and insomnia is com-
mon, often due to waking in response to neural signals 
to empty the bladder or due to discomfort from meno-
pausal symptoms or from arthritis and other diseases. 
Why this change occurs with age is unclear; homeo-
static sleep pressure appears normal, but the neural 
mechanisms for producing deep non-REM sleep may 
be less effective.
Disruptions in Sleep Circuitry Contribute to 
Many Sleep Disorders
Insomnia May Be Caused by Incomplete Inhibition 
of the Arousal System
Insomnia is one of the most common problems in all 
of medicine, yet the underlying neurobiology remains 
a mystery. Insomnia is defined as difficulty falling 
asleep or trouble staying asleep, so that function the 
next day is impaired. Positron emission tomography 
studies in patients with chronic insomnia demonstrate 
unusual activation of brain arousal systems during 
sleep, and the EEG often shows persistence of high-
frequency activity (15–30 Hz) that is usually seen only 
during wake.
In addition, rats exposed to acute stress show 
high-frequency EEG activity during sleep, as well as 
simultaneous activity in neurons of the ventrolateral 
preoptic nucleus and components of the arousal sys-
tem, such as the locus ceruleus and histamine neurons. 
This simultaneous activation can produce a unique 
state in which the EEG shows slow waves consistent 
with sleep along with high-frequency activity consist-
ent with the awake state; this may explain why some 
patients appear asleep on the polysomnogram record-
ing but they may feel awake.
Clinically, insomnia is often treated with cogni-
tive behavioral therapy that is aimed at reducing 
the hyperarousal and improving sleep habits. Some 
patients may be treated with benzodiazepines and 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1093
Figure 44–8  An episode of sleep apnea. At the start of this 
polysomnogram, an individual is in stage N2 sleep. Some 
snoring is detected, but nasal airflow is good and oxygen 
saturation is normal. The individual then experiences an 
obstructive apnea with no nasal airflow; nevertheless, res-
piratory effort persists (shown by the abdominal movement). 
The apnea is terminated by a brief awakening (low-voltage 
fast electroencephalogram [EEG]), accompanied by a  
loud snore, increased electromyographic activity, intensified 
respiratory effort, and opening of the airway. Oxygen satura-
tion drops by about 3%, reaching its nadir about 15 seconds 
after the apnea finishes, as it takes time for blood to get 
from the lungs to the fingertip where oxygen saturation is 
measured.
related drugs that potentiate GABA transmission and, 
therefore, may help reduce activity in arousal-promoting 
brain regions. Other patients derive benefit from drugs 
that block the arousal system more directly, such as 
antihistamines.
Sleep Apnea Fragments Sleep and Impairs Cognition
Sleep apnea is one of the most common sleep dis-
orders, affecting about 5% of adults and children. 
Patients with obstructive sleep apnea have repeated epi-
sodes of airway obstruction that force the individual to 
briefly awaken from sleep to resume breathing. During 
sleep, muscle tone falls, and in people with small air-
ways, relaxation of airway dilator muscles such as the 
genioglossus (which normally acts to pull the tongue 
forward) results in collapse of the airway. This causes 
a brief period of no air flow, and consequently, blood 
levels of carbon dioxide rise while oxygen levels fall, 
activating chemosensory systems in the medulla that 
increase respiratory effort.
These chemosensory systems also activate neu-
rons in the parabrachial nucleus that promote awaken-
ing, which results in a further increase in muscle tone 
that reopens the airway. These airway obstructions can 
occur hundreds of times per night, but the arousals are 
usually so brief that the individual may not remem-
ber them in the morning. Many people with obstruc-
tive sleep apnea do not feel rested in the morning; they 
feel sleepy all day and they have difficulty with a wide 
variety of cognitive tasks, especially those that require 
vigilance or learning.
Clinicians often treat sleep apnea with a continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) device that delivers mildly 
pressurized air via the nose to inflate and open the air-
way during sleep. Sleep apnea can also be treated with 
upper airway surgery to remove obstructions such as 
large tonsils, a dental device to move the tongue for-
ward, or weight loss to reduce adipose tissue in the 
neck. Treated patients often feel more alert and have 
better cognitive function, although there may be some 
residual cognitive impairment, possibly due to neu-
ronal injury from repeated episodes of low oxygen 
saturation or hypoxia (Figure 44–8).
Narcolepsy Is Caused by a Loss of  
Orexinergic Neurons
Narcolepsy was first described in the late 1800s, 
but the underlying cause, a deficiency in a single 
Arousal
EEG
Stage N2
Stage N2
Chin EMG
Snore
microphone
Snoring
Nasal
airﬂow
Apnea
Chest
movement
Abdominal
movement
Oxygen
saturation
97
96
94
94
5 sec


===== Page 3 =====
1094    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 44–9  Narcolepsy is associated with a loss of hypo-
thalamic neurons that produce the orexin neuropeptides. A 
dramatic loss of orexinergic neurons (green dots) is evident in 
these drawings of sections through the brain at the level of the 
mammillary bodies in an individual with narcolepsy (right) com-
pared to a normal brain (left). (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Crocker et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 American Academy 
of Neurology.)
neurotransmitter, has become clear only in the last two 
decades. Narcolepsy typically begins in the teen years 
as moderate to severe sleepiness every day, even with 
ample amounts of sleep at night. People with narco-
lepsy can easily fall asleep in class, while driving, or 
during other activities when sleep might be embar-
rassing or dangerous. Unlike sleep apnea, their sleep is 
restorative, and they often feel much more alert after a 
15- to 20-minute nap.
In addition, in people with narcolepsy, elements of 
REM sleep often occur during wakefulness. For exam-
ple, at night, while falling asleep or waking up, an 
individual with narcolepsy might find himself unable 
to move (sleep paralysis) or may have vivid dream-like 
hallucinations (hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations) 
superimposed on wakefulness. Even more mysteri-
ously, during the day, when surprised with a good 
joke or by unexpectedly seeing a friend, a person with 
narcolepsy can develop cataplexy, emotionally trig-
gered muscle weakness that is similar to the paralysis 
of REM sleep. Mild cataplexy can cause weakness of 
the face and neck, but when severe, the individual can 
lose all muscle control, collapse to the ground, and be 
unable to move for 1 to 2 minutes.
Narcolepsy remained mysterious until the late 
1990s when a new family of peptide neurotransmitters, 
Control
Internal
capsule
Internal
capsule
Fornix
Fornix
3rd
ventricle
3rd
ventricle
Medial
mammillary
nucleus
Medial
mammillary
nucleus
Narcolepsy
orexins (also known as hypocretins), was discovered. 
There are two orexin peptides, derived from the same 
mRNA precursor, and they are found only in cells in 
the posterior lateral hypothalamus. It was soon found 
that loss of orexin signaling in animals or humans 
could reproduce the entire narcolepsy phenotype. 
People with narcolepsy show a highly selective loss 
of more than 90% of their orexin neurons, while other 
types of hypothalamic neurons are spared. This cell 
loss is probably due to an autoimmune attack as it is 
linked to genes that affect immune function and has 
been triggered by seasonal influenza epidemics and 
use of a certain influenza vaccine. Recently, researchers 
discovered that people with narcolepsy have immune 
cells (T lymphocytes) that target the orexin neuropep-
tides (Figure 44–9).
Orexinergic neurons promote wakefulness and 
suppress REM sleep, in part by activating monoamin-
ergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and dorsal raphe as 
well as REM-off GABAergic neurons in the periaque-
ductal gray matter, all of which inhibit the REM sleep 
generating neurons in the pons. Thus, people and ani-
mals with loss of orexinergic neurons have great dif-
ficulty remaining awake for long periods, and REM 
sleep is disinhibited, such that REM sleep (or com-
ponents of REM sleep, such as motor atonia during 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1095
wakefulness, or cataplexy) breaks through at inappro-
priate times during the day.
In terms of sleep circuitry, loss of orexinergic neu-
rons can be considered to destabilize both the wake–
sleep and the REM/non-REM switches in the brain. 
Thus, patients with narcolepsy can easily doze off dur-
ing the day but also spontaneously wake from sleep 
more frequently at night. The dysregulation of REM 
sleep is also apparent on the Multiple Sleep Latency 
Test; healthy individuals almost never experience 
REM sleep during the day as it is under tight circadian 
control, but patients with narcolepsy often experience 
REM sleep during daytime naps.
The absence of orexin signaling also explains the 
mysterious symptom of cataplexy. Evidence from mice 
lacking orexins suggests that pleasant experiences turn 
on neurons in the prefrontal cortex and amygdala that 
can activate the brain stem pathways that trigger REM 
sleep paralysis. This influence is normally opposed by 
the orexin system, so that one may feel slightly “weak 
with laughter.” When orexin signaling is absent, full-
blown paralysis can occur.
Narcolepsy is treated with medications and 
behavioral approaches. Sleepiness can be substantially 
attenuated with wake-promoting medications such 
as amphetamine and modafinil. One to two strategi-
cally timed naps during the day are often helpful and 
can improve alertness for a couple of hours. Cataplexy 
often responds well to antidepressants such as sero-
tonin or norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, as these 
drugs strongly suppress REM sleep. Sodium oxy-
bate taken during the night enhances deep sleep, and 
through an unknown mechanism, it helps consolidate 
wakefulness and reduce cataplexy during the day.
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Is Caused by Failure 
of REM Sleep Paralysis Circuits
REM sleep behavior disorder—the loss of paralysis 
during REM sleep in some older adults—is the direct 
opposite of cataplexy. The lack of paralytic inhibition 
permits the patients to act out their dreams. The indi-
vidual often calls out and may grab or violently punch 
or kick; injuries from hitting nearby furniture or the 
bed partner are not unusual. These dramatic move-
ments typically awaken the patient, who can then 
recall a dream about fighting off an attacker in a way 
that closely matches the actual movements.
REM sleep behavior disorder was first identi-
fied in 1986 by Mahowald and Schenck. Ten years 
later, they reported that 40% of their original cohort 
of 19 patients had developed Parkinson disease or a 
related neurodegenerative disorder with deposition of 
alpha-synuclein, such as Lewy body dementia or mul-
tiple system atrophy. Subsequent studies have shown 
that about half of patients with REM sleep behavior 
disorder develop a synucleinopathy by 12 to 14 years 
after onset, and nearly all by 25 years. It is now thought 
that the synucleinopathy begins in the brain stem and 
early on damages the subceruleus neurons that nor-
mally drive REM sleep paralysis. If this relationship is 
confirmed, the diagnosis of REM sleep behavior dis-
order may identify individuals with nascent synucle-
inopathies who could be treated with drugs, not yet 
developed, that slow the neurodegeneration.
Restless Legs Syndrome and Periodic Limb 
Movement Disorder Disrupt Sleep
Restless legs syndrome occurs in about 10% of the pop-
ulation and is characterized by an irresistible urge to 
move the legs, usually accompanied by an annoying 
internal discomfort like “ants in the pants.” This rest-
less sensation typically occurs in the evening and first 
half of the night and often makes it hard to fall asleep. 
The sensation is much worse with rest and improves 
by moving the legs in bed or walking about.
Many people suffering from restless legs syndrome 
also experience periodic limb movement disorder, in which 
the legs and sometimes arms flex in a stereotyped way 
every 20 to 40 seconds during non-REM sleep. These 
leg movements fragment sleep and can produce day-
time sleepiness. Iron deficiency is a common cause 
of restless legs, and treatment with iron can be very 
helpful. Genome-wide association studies have found 
genes common to both conditions, but the underlying 
pathophysiology is not yet understood. Patients with 
both disorders often improve with low doses of a D2 
dopamine agonist, the antiepileptic drug pregabalin, 
or an opiate drug.
Non-REM Parasomnias Include Sleepwalking, 
Sleep Talking, and Night Terrors
Parasomnias are unusual behaviors that occur during 
either REM or non-REM sleep. Non-REM parasomnias 
are common in children and include sleepwalking, 
sleep talking, confusional arousals, bed-wetting, and 
night terrors. About 15% of young adolescents have 
some sleepwalking, but this usually fades over time, 
so only about 1% of adults regularly sleepwalk.
The non-REM parasomnias typically begin with a 
sudden arousal from stage N3 sleep, which can occur 
spontaneously or be triggered by a noise or airway 
obstruction from sleep apnea. These are not full arous-
als, as for the first minute or two, the EEG still shows 


===== Page 5 =====
1096    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
the slow EEG delta waves typical of stage N3 sleep 
even as the child walks, dresses, or eats. Over time, 
the EEG changes to the pattern typical of wakefulness 
and eventually the individual wakes up. Sleepwalkers 
or talkers often have no memory of these events, so 
that reports from the family are necessary to make the 
diagnosis. Bed-wetting (enuresis) may also occur dur-
ing deep non-REM sleep in some children.
Night terrors also occur in stage N3 sleep and are 
common in children age 2 to 5. The child often sits up 
and cries as if in great fear, sometimes with dilated 
pupils and a fast heart rate. During the episode, the 
child is inconsolable; attempts to calm or wake the 
child may only cause the screams and fearful behavior 
to worsen. Like sleep walking, but in contrast to ordi-
nary nightmares, the child usually does not remem-
ber the night terror, and the events are typically much 
more difficult for the parent than the child.
The underlying cause of non-REM parasomnias 
is unknown. They are usually managed by ensuring 
adequate sleep to reduce pressure for deep non-REM 
sleep, reducing stress, and treating underlying sleep 
disorders such as sleep apnea that might trigger arous-
als from sleep. Fluid restriction in the evening may 
help with enuresis. Most children outgrow non-REM 
parasomnias as their N3 sleep decreases in late ado-
lescence. Drugs that reduce the amount of N3 sleep, 
such as tricyclic antidepressants, are sometimes used 
as well. As with REM sleep behavior disorder, people 
can be seriously hurt sleepwalking if they fall down 
stairs or trip over furniture, and it is important to make 
the bedroom layout safe. The amount of time spent in 
stage N3 sleep is high in individuals with high homeo-
static sleep pressure, so getting adequate sleep is also 
helpful.
Sleep Has Many Functions
Although there has been remarkable progress in our 
understanding of the brain circuitry that regulates 
sleep and wakefulness, we still understand relatively 
little about the actual functions of sleep. For an activ-
ity that occupies one-third of the life of humans, and 
much more in some other species, we have very little 
understanding of sleep’s purposes. Allan Rechtschaffen, 
who first systematized the stages of sleep (and was an 
author of this chapter in earlier editions of this book), 
once said that if sleep did not have a vital function 
it would be the biggest mistake that evolution ever 
made. He found that rats would die of overwhelm-
ing infection and hypothermia if chronically deprived 
of sleep. However, the methods for keeping animals 
continuously awake were stressful, and it is unclear 
whether the consequences observed were due to loss 
of sleep or continuous stress. Indeed, it is not clear if 
prolonged sleep loss and stress can be dissociated.
One proposed function of sleep suggests that a 
period of brain inactivity is needed to permit metabolic 
recovery of the brain. The role of adenosine as a sleep-
promoting humoral factor is based on the rundown 
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) stores to adenosine 
during the awake period. Another idea is that sleep 
may permit the body to reconstitute injured tissue and 
replenish energy stores, but there is little evidence that 
sleep deprivation impairs any of these processes.
A recent hypothesis has been raised by the obser-
vation that during sleep the extracellular space in the 
brain expands, thus permitting the cerebrospinal fluid 
to “clean out” undesirable molecules that should not be 
allowed to build up extracellularly. The waking brain 
has very little extracellular space, largely due to ion 
fluxes to and from neurons during synaptic communi-
cation. These fluxes establish an osmotic gradient that 
drives most fluid in the brain into cells. During sleep, 
neurons and glia may shrink as that fluid moves back 
into the extracellular space. Among the molecules that 
may be washed out from the extracellular space during 
sleep are beta-amyloid peptides. In mice engineered 
to produce high levels of human beta-amyloid, sleep 
deprivation reduces the clearance of beta-amyloid 
from the extracellular space in the brain, thus acceler-
ating its deposition in the plaques that are characteris-
tic of Alzheimer disease (Chapter 64). Because buildup 
of beta-amyloid peptide in the brain is thought to be 
an early step in Alzheimer disease, work is now under-
way to determine whether poor sleep may predispose 
people to this disease.
In addition to these biochemical functions, sleep 
also promotes memory formation. As described earlier, 
the synaptic homeostasis model suggests that synapses 
are rebalanced during sleep, although it is not clear 
why this process would require sleep. A more basic 
need may be to provide a time for synapses to con-
solidate new memory traces. During the waking state, 
experience can modify synaptic strength on the fly by 
such processes as protein phosphorylation, insertion 
of premade receptors into the postsynaptic membrane, 
or translation of mRNA in the dendrites into new pro-
tein. But some portion of the synaptic remodeling that 
underlies memory formation requires nuclear-dependent 
transcription of new mRNA. Because synaptic sites 
on dendrites may be a millimeter from the nucleus or 
even more in some neurons, time is required for mes-
senger molecules that are produced at the synapse to 
reach the nucleus and alter transcription and then for 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1097
the resulting mRNA to be transported back to the den-
drite where it can result in new protein synthesis. This 
process may require a time when these messengers are 
not competing with new incoming signals to complete 
their work in stabilizing memories.
One thing about sleep is certain: It is required 
for normal brain function, and inadequate sleep, as 
defined by an increased tendency to fall asleep during 
the day, is associated with impaired cognitive function. 
Medical training programs are now being redesigned 
to reduce the risk of interns and residents making criti-
cal medical decisions while sleep deprived. Similar 
approaches to school start times, drowsy driving, and 
other aspects of our society could potentially improve 
productivity and save many lives.
Highlights
  1.  Sleep involves distinct changes in the electro-
encephalogram (EEG), electromyogram (EMG), 
and electro-oculogram (EOG) that are recorded 
on a polysomnogram. These changes can be used 
to divide sleep into rapid eye movement (REM) 
sleep—during which the EEG is similar to wake, 
but the body has such low muscle tone that it is 
essentially paralyzed—and three stages of non-
REM sleep (N1–N3), with low to high amounts 
of slow waves in the EEG.
  2.  During the night, sleep alternates between 
periods of non-REM sleep followed by bouts of 
REM sleep, with the entire cycle taking about 
90 minutes. Over the course of a night, non-REM 
sleep becomes progressively lighter, while REM 
sleep bouts become longer.
  3.  The waking state is actively produced by an 
ascending arousal network. The key neurons 
required to drive wakefulness are glutamatergic 
neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopon-
tine tegmental nuclei, dopaminergic neurons 
in the midbrain, glutamatergic neurons in the 
supramammillary nucleus, and GABAergic and 
cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain that 
directly innervate the cerebral cortex. Modula-
tory cell groups, using mainly monoamines such 
as norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine 
as neurotransmitters, can drive arousal under 
appropriate conditions, but unlike the main path-
ways, lesions of these cell groups do not impair 
baseline wakefulness.
  4.  During sleep, the ascending arousal system is 
inhibited by GABAergic neurons in the ventro-
lateral preoptic nuclei and the parafacial zone. 
Conversely, during wake, the ventrolateral 
preoptic neurons are inhibited by neurons in 
the ascending arousal system. These mutually 
antagonistic pathways produce a neural circuit 
resembling an electrical flip-flop switch, which 
favors rapid and complete transitions between 
sleep and wakefulness. Similarly, populations of 
mutually inhibitory neurons in the caudal mid-
brain and pons govern transitions between REM 
and non-REM sleep. Monoamine neurotrans-
mitters, such as serotonin and norepinephrine, 
also act on these switching neurons and prevent 
transitions into REM sleep during wakefulness. 
Orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus acti-
vate REM sleep-suppressing neurons, preventing 
transitions from wake into REM sleep.
  5.  Sleep is regulated by a homeostatic drive to sleep, 
so that the longer one is awake, the more intense 
the drive, and the more sleep is required to satisfy 
the need to sleep. There is also a circadian influ-
ence on sleep that inhibits sleep during the day 
but promotes it at night, especially during the 
latter part of the night, when homeostatic sleep 
drive wanes. The circadian cycle is synchronized 
with the outside world by light signals from the 
retina to the brain’s master circadian clock in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus. The suprachiasmatic 
nucleus then activates hypothalamic pathways 
that regulate wake–sleep states, as well as many 
other behaviors, hormonal cycles, and physiolog-
ical adjustments.
  6.  Sleep needs change throughout development, 
from about 16 hours per day in a newborn to 
about 8 hours per day in a healthy young adult. 
However, sleep-promoting mechanisms weaken 
with aging, and so individuals over 70 years old 
have more fragmented sleep and sleep about an 
hour less per day.
  7.  Sleep apnea is a condition in which the airway 
collapses due to reduced muscle tone during 
sleep. This impaired breathing causes frequent 
awakenings and can impair cognition. Restoring 
airway patency with continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) can overcome this problem.
  8.  Insomnia may be caused by hyperactivation of 
the arousal system, and it is best treated with 
cognitive behavioral therapy.
  9.  Narcolepsy is caused by selective loss of the 
orexin (also called hypocretin) neurons in the 
hypothalamus. The orexin neuropeptides nor-
mally promote wake and regulate REM sleep, 
and loss of orexin signaling results in chronic 
daytime sleepiness and poor control of REM sleep. 


===== Page 7 =====
1098    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Specifically, people with narcolepsy may quickly 
transition into REM sleep after dozing off, and 
they can have fragments of REM sleep, such as 
cataplexy and hypnogogic hallucinations, during 
wake. Narcolepsy is usually treated with medi-
cations that promote wake and suppress REM 
sleep.
10.  REM sleep behavior disorder is due to loss of 
atonia during REM sleep, causing patients to act 
out their dreams. REM sleep behavior disorder is 
usually an early manifestation of either Parkin-
son disease or Lewy body dementia.
11.  Restless legs syndrome is a genetically influenced 
disorder in which people feel that they have to 
move their legs. This makes them very uncom-
fortable when awake, and they can have periodic 
leg movements during sleep that disrupt sleep.
12.  Sleepwalking and related parasomnias usually 
occur in young children during deep (stage N3) 
non-REM sleep. They are best managed by ensur-
ing adequate, good-quality sleep.
13.  Sleep loss impairs the ability to maintain sus-
tained attention and clouds judgment. The 
reasons for this are not understood. Theories 
about the brain requiring down time to recharge 
its metabolic status or to allow it to flush out 
unwanted products from the extracellular space 
have received attention, but it is unclear whether 
this accounts for the penalty paid due to lack 
of sleep. One attractive theory for the function 
of sleep is that it may be required for synaptic 
remodeling that is necessary for certain types of 
learning.
 Clifford B. Saper 
  Thomas E. Scammell 
Selected Reading
Buhr ED, Takahashi JS. 2013. Molecular components of 
the mammalian circadian clock. Handb Exp Pharmacol 
217:3–27.
Kryger MH, Roth T, Dement WC. 2017. Principles and Practice 
of Sleep Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
Saper CB. 2013. The central circadian timing system. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 23:747–751.
Saper CB, Fuller PM, Pedersen NP, Lu J, Scammell TE. 2010. 
Sleep state switches. Neuron 68:1023–1042.
Scammell TE, Arrigoni E, Lipton JO. 2017. Neural circuitry of 
wakefulness and sleep. Neuron 93:747–765.
References
Achermann P, Borbely AA. 2003. Mathematical models of 
sleep regulation. Front Biosci 8:683–693.
Anaclet C, Pedersen NP, Ferrari LL, et al. 2015. Basal fore-
brain control of wakefulness and cortical rhythms. Nat 
Commun 6:8744.
Aschoff J. 1965. Circadian rhythms in man. Science 148: 
1427–1432.
Aserinsky E, Kleitman N. 1953. Regularly occurring periods 
of eye motility and concomitant phenomena during sleep. 
Science 118:273–274.
Bal T, von Krosigk M, McCormick DA. 1995. Synaptic and 
membrane mechanisms underlying synchronized oscil-
lations in the ferret lateral geniculate nucleus in vitro. J 
Physiol 483:641–663.
Boeve BF. 2013. Idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder in 
the development of Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol 
12:469–482.
Buyssee DJ, Germain A, Hall M, Monk TH, Nofzinger EA. 
2011. A neurobiological model of insomnia. Drug Discov 
Today Dis Models 8:124–137.
Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton CM, et al. 1999. Narcolepsy in 
orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics of sleep regula-
tion. Cell 98:437–451.
Crocker A, Espana RA, Papadopoulou M, et al. 2005. Con-
comitant loss of dynorphin, NARP, and orexin in narco-
lepsy. Neurology 65:1184–1188.
Dement W, Kleitman N. 1957. Cyclic variations in EEG dur-
ing sleep and their relation to eye movements, body motil-
ity, and dreaming. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
Suppl 9:673–690.
de Vivo L, Bellesi M, Marshall W, et al. 2017. Ultrastructural 
evidence for synaptic scaling across the wake/sleep cycle. 
Science 355:507–510.
Dijk DJ, Czeisler CA. 1995. Contribution of circadian pace-
maker and sleep homeostat to sleep propensity, sleep 
structure, electroencephalographic slow waves, and sleep 
spindle activity in humans. J Neurosci 15:3526–3538.
Fuller PM, Sherman D, Pedersen NP, Saper CB, Lu J. 2011. 
Reassessment of the structural basis of the ascending 
arousal system. J Comp Neurol 519:933–956.
Lim AS, Ellison BA, Wang JL, et al. 2014. Sleep is related to 
neuron numbers in the ventrolateral preoptic/intermedi-
ate nucleus in older adults with and without Alzheimer’s 
disease. Brain 137:2847–2861.
Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, et al. 1999. The sleep disorder canine 
narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin 
(orexin) receptor 2 gene. Cell 98:365–376.
Lu J, Sherman D, Devor M, Saper CB. 2006. A putative flip-
flop switch for control of REM sleep. Nature 41:589–594.
Mahowald MW, Schenck CH. 2005. Insights from studying 
human sleep disorders. Nature 437:1279–1285.
McCormick DA, Bal T. 1997. Sleep and arousal: thalamocorti-
cal mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:185–215.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1099
Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. 1949. Brain stem reticular forma-
tion and activation of the EEG. Electroencephalogr Clin 
Neurophysiol Suppl 1:455–473.
Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, et al. 2000. A mutation in a 
case of early onset narcolepsy and a generalized absence 
of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains. Nat 
Med 6:991–997.
Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J. 2005. Hypothalamic regulation 
of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature 437:1257–1263.
Stickgold R. 2005. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation. 
Nature 437:1272–1278.
Tononi G, Cirelli C. 2014. Sleep and the price of plasticity: 
from synaptic and cellular homeostasis to memory con-
solidation and integration. Neuron 81:12–34.
Xie L, Kang H, Xu Q, et al. 2013. Sleep drives metabolite 
clearance from the adult brain. Science 342:373–377.
Xu M, Chung S, Zhang S, et al. 2015 Basal forebrain circuit for 
sleep-wake control. Nat Neurosci 18:1641–1647.


===== Page 9 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


