===== Page 1 =====
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Time (min)
0
100
200
0
30
60
90
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Path (cm)
Wild type
Transgenic
Day
Day
Transgene off
Transgene on
Time (min)
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
0
100
200
0
30
60
90
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
0
15
Time (min)
Control
Wild type
Mutant gene on
Wild type
Mutant gene off
APV
1 Hz stimulation
EPSP (percent of baseline)
30
45
50
100
75
1 Hz
1 Hz
Hidden 
platform 1
Hidden 
platform 2
Hidden 
platform 1
Hidden 
platform 2
125
B   Protein phosphatase 2A is required for LTD
C   LTD contributes to behavioral ﬂexibility
A   NMDA receptors are required for long-term depression
CA1
NMDA 
receptor
AMPA 
receptor
Low-frequency
stimulation
Long-term 
depression
Figure 54–10  Long-term depression of synaptic transmis-
sion requires N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and 
phosphatase activity.
A. Prolonged low-frequency stimulation (1 Hz for 15 minutes) of 
Schaffer collateral fibers produces a long-term decrease in the 
size of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) in the 
hippocampal CA1 region, a decrease that outlasts the period 
of stimulation (control). Long-term depression (LTD) occurs 
when α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA) receptors are removed from the postsynaptic mem-
brane by endocytosis; it is blocked when the NMDA receptors 
are blocked by the drug 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV). 
(Adapted from Dudek and Bear 1992.)
B. LTD requires protein dephosphorylation. The plots compare 
LTD in the hippocampal CA1 region of wild type mice and trans-
genic mice that express a protein that inhibits phosphoprotein 
phosphatase 2A. Transgene expression is under control of the 
tTA system. In the absence of doxycycline, the phosphatase 
inhibitor is expressed, and induction of LTD is inhibited (left 
plot). When expression of the phosphatase inhibitor is turned 
off by administering doxycycline, a normal-sized LTD is induced 
(right plot).
C. Inhibition of phosphatase 2A reduces behavioral flexibility. 
Transgenic mice expressing the phosphatase inhibitor learn the 
location of a submerged platform in the Morris maze at the same 
rate as wild-type mice (days 1–10). Thus, LTD is not necessary for 
learning the initial platform location. At the end of day 10, the plat-
form is moved to a new hidden location and the mice are retested 
(days 11–15). Now the transgenic mice travel significantly longer 
paths to find the platform on the first day of retesting (day 11), indi-
cating an impaired learning (reduced flexibility). When transgene 
expression is turned off with doxycycline, the transgenic mice 
display normal learning on all phases of the test. (Panels B and C 
reproduced, with permission, from Nicholls et al. 2008.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1357
Long-term depression may also depend on a sur-
prising metabotropic action of the ionotropic NMDA 
receptor-channels. Glutamate binding, in addition 
to opening the receptor pore, is thought to trigger a 
conformational change in a cytoplasmic domain of the 
receptor that directly activates a downstream signaling 
cascade that increases the activity of phosphoprotein 
phosphatase 1 (PP1). Activation of PP1 or calcineurin 
eventually leads to changes in protein phosphorylation 
that promote endocytosis of AMPA receptors, resulting 
in a decrease in the size of an EPSP.
Distinctly different forms of LTD can be induced 
through the activation of G protein–coupled metabo-
tropic glutamate receptors. Such forms of LTD depend 
on activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase signaling pathways (Chapter 14) rather than 
activation of phosphatases. These types of LTD lead 
to a reduction in synaptic transmission through a 
decrease in glutamate release from presynaptic termi-
nals as well as through alterations in the trafficking of 
AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic cells.
Much less is known about the behavioral role 
of LTD compared to that of LTP, but some insight 
has come from studies with mice using a transgene 
that expresses an inhibitor of protein phosphatase. 
LTD that depends on NMDA receptors is inhibited 
when the transgene is expressed but is normal when 
transgene expression is suppressed (Figure 54–10B). 
Transgene expression does not affect LTP or forms of 
LTD that involve metabotropic glutamate receptors. 
Mice that express the transgene show normal learning 
the first time they are tested in the Morris maze. How-
ever, when the same mice are retested after the hidden 
platform has been moved to a new location, they show 
a decreased ability to learn the new location and tend 
to persevere in searching for the platform near the pre-
viously learned location (Figure 54–10C). Thus, LTD 
may be necessary not only to prevent LTP saturation 
but also to enhance flexibility in memory storage and 
specificity in memory recall. Studies on fear condition-
ing suggest that LTD in the amygdala may be impor-
tant for reversing learned fear.
Memory Is Stored in Cell Assemblies
While the cumulative evidence for a relationship 
between long-term synaptic plasticity and memory 
formation is strong, we know less about how specific 
cellular processes such as LTP enable memory forma-
tion. This reflects limitations in our knowledge of how 
neural circuits operate and how memories might be 
embedded in them. Theoretical models for memory 
storage in neural circuits can be traced to Hebb’s con-
cept of a cell assembly—a network of neurons that is 
activated whenever a function is executed; for exam-
ple, each time a memory is recalled. Cells within an 
assembly are bound together by excitatory synaptic 
connections strengthened at the time the memory was 
formed.
Today, more than half a century later, Hebb’s 
thoughts still form the framework for how the hip-
pocampus mediates the storage and recall of memory, 
although experimental proof has been difficult to obtain. 
A proper test requires recording the activity of thou-
sands of neurons simultaneously, in combination with 
the experimental excitation or inactivation of selected 
cell groups. Technological advances are now enabling 
such experiments. By and large, the results obtained so 
far confirm Hebb’s cell assembly model and implicitly 
point to LTP as the mechanism for their formation.
In a telling study with mice, Susumu Tonegawa 
and his colleagues tested whether reactivation of neu-
rons that participated in the storage of a specific mem-
ory is sufficient to trigger recall of that memory. The 
researchers first applied an electric shock to an animal 
as it explored a novel environment. Reexposure of the 
animal to the same environment a day or more later 
elicited a freezing response, indicating that the ani-
mal associated the environment or context (the con-
ditioned stimulus) with the shock (the unconditioned 
stimulus). Using a genetic strategy, Tonegawa caused 
a subset of dentate gyrus granule neurons that were 
active during the fear conditioning to express the light-
activated cation channel channelrhodopsin-2 (Figure 
54–11). The conditioned animals were subsequently 
placed in a novel environment that did not resemble 
the conditioned environment and so did not elicit a 
fear response. However, light activation of the subset 
of granule cells that were active during fear condition-
ing was able to elicit a strong freezing response, even 
though the animals were in a nonthreatening environ-
ment. This supports the idea that memories are stored 
in cell assemblies and, more importantly, demonstrates 
that reactivation of these assemblies is sufficient to 
induce recall of an experience.
In a complementary experimental approach, a 
light-activated inhibitory Cl– transporter was expressed 
in CA1 cells active at the time of fear conditioning. 
Later, the labeled cells were inactivated and the ani-
mals were placed again in the environment in which 
they received the shock. Under these conditions, the 
normal freezing behavior (ie, recall of the memory of 
fear conditioning) was blocked, suggesting that activ-
ity in the labeled CA1 cell population was necessary 
for memory retrieval. Taken together, these findings 


===== Page 3 =====
1358    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A  An engram can be labeled with a light-sensitive switch
B  A memory can be recalled when the engram is activated by light
Environment 1
Environment 2
Environment 1
Shock
Doxycycline
Doxycycline
No doxycycline
1  Fear memory encoding
2  Fear memory reactivation
ChR2-EYFP
TRE
ChR2-EYFP
Ca2+
CaMK
c-Fos
tTA
tTA
tTA
TRE
1
2
3
ChR2-EYFP allows identiﬁcation 
and reactivation of a memory
4
tTA
P
P
CREB
CRE
c-Fos
Remove
doxycycline
c-Fos
Doxycycline prevents expression
Light off
Light on
Light off
Light on
Habituation
Conditioning
Freezing (%)
After fear
conditioning
Before fear
conditioning
0
10
20
30
suggest that reactivation of the specific cell assembly 
pattern that occurred during encoding is both neces-
sary and sufficient for memory retrieval.
Perhaps the most direct test of the ensemble model 
is the creation of a false memory. Tonegawa and col-
leagues expressed channelrhodopsin in cells that were 
active during exploration of a novel environment  
(context A), except that no shock was delivered this 
time. At a later time, the labeled cells were reactivated 
using light stimulation as the mice explored a second 
novel environment (context B), this time in combina-
tion with an electric shock. When the animals were 
returned to the neutral context A, they froze, although 
they had never been shocked in this environment. 
This result indicates that the reactivation of the origi-
nal engram of context A when paired with an aversive 
experience in context B is able to create a false memory, 
causing the animals to fear context A. Thus, it is pos-
sible to modify the behavioral significance of a neural 
representation (a pattern of neural firing in response to 
a given stimulus) by pairing the assembly with a new 
experience unrelated to the original experience.
Different Aspects of Explicit Memory  
Are Processed in Different Subregions  
of the Hippocampus
Explicit memory stores knowledge of facts (semantic 
memory), places (spatial memory), other individuals 
(social memory), and events (episodic memory). As dis-
cussed above, successful storage and recall of explicit 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1359
Figure 54–11  (Opposite) Stimulating a neuronal assembly 
associated with a stored memory of fear conditioning elic-
its fear behavior.  (Panels reproduced or redrawn, with permis-
sion, from Liu et al. 2012. Copyright © 2012 Springer Nature.)
A. Experimental protocol. 1. Exposure of a mouse to a new 
environment increases activity in a group of hippocampal neu-
rons (cell assembly) that codes for the environment. The activ-
ity increases intracellular Ca2+, which activates a CaM kinase 
signaling cascade, resulting in phosphorylation of the transcrip-
tion factor CREB. Phosphorylated CREB increases expression 
of immediate early genes, including the c-Fos transcription fac-
tor. In the c-fos-tTA transgenic mouse line, c-Fos binds to the 
c-fos promoter of the transgene and thereby initiates expres-
sion of the transcription factor tTA. The antibiotic doxycycline is 
fed to mice, which binds to and inhibits tTA, until the day of the 
experiment. 2. The dentate gyrus of the same transgenic mice 
was previously injected with an adeno-associated virus that 
contains a DNA sequence encoding ChR2 fused to the fluores-
cent marker protein EYFP (ChR2-EYFP). The transcription of this 
sequence is under control of the TRE promoter, which requires 
tTA (without doxycycline) for expression. 3. Exposure of the 
mice to a novel environment (after removing doxycycline from 
the feed) leads to expression of tTA and subsequent expression 
of ChR2-EYFP in a subset of active dentate gyrus neurons. 4. 
The ChR2-EYFP remains expressed for several days in the neu-
rons, as seen by the EYFP fluorescence signal in dentate gyrus 
granule cells in a hippocampal slice. (ChR2-EYPF in green, den-
tate gyrus cell body layer in blue.)
B. Recall of a fear memory. An optical fiber is implanted 
above the dentate gyrus. 1. During fear memory encoding, 
mice were first habituated in one environment while being 
fed doxycycline (which prevents expression of ChR2-EYFP). 
The mice were then taken off doxycycline and exposed to a 
new environment for a few minutes. This turns on gene tran-
scription in the assembly of neurons that are active in the 
new environment, leading to prolonged expression of ChR2-
EYFP in these cells. The mice were then given a series of 
footshocks while in the new environment to induce fear con-
ditioning: The mice learn to associate the new environment 
with a fearful stimulus. The mice were then returned to their 
cage and put back on doxycycline. 2. During fear memory 
reactivation 5 days after conditioning, mice show a normal 
defensive freezing behavior when reintroduced to the envi-
ronment where they received footshocks (not shown). How-
ever, when mice are exposed to the environment to which 
they were initially habituated (no associated foot shock), they 
normally recognize this as a neutral environment and do not 
exhibit defensive freezing. However, as the mice explore the 
neutral environment, delivery of blue light to activate ChR2-
expressing neurons in the dentate gyrus causes the mice 
to freeze. This indicates that activation of the ensemble of 
ChR2-expressing neurons initially activated in the condition-
ing environment is sufficient to recall the fear memory  
associated with that environment. The experimental data 
show the freezing response in the neutral environment is 
much greater when light pulses are turned on compared 
to when the light is off (red plot; light delivery indicated in 
cartoon on top). Delivery of light pulses to an animal that 
had not undergone fear conditioning does not elicit freezing 
(blue plot).
memory requires that patterns of activity be formed 
within local cell assemblies to avoid mix-up between 
memories. At the same time, an important psychologi-
cal feature of hippocampal-dependent memory is that 
a few cues are usually enough to trigger the recall of 
a complex memory. How does the hippocampus per-
form all of these diverse functions? Do its subregions 
have specialized roles, or is memory a unitary function 
of the hippocampus? In at least some instances, it has 
been possible to assign key functions to specific areas 
of the hippocampus.
The Dentate Gyrus Is Important for  
Pattern Separation
How does the hippocampus store a different pattern 
of neural activity in response to every experience that 
needs to be remembered, including patterns that dis-
tinguish between two closely related environments? 
Contemporary ideas about how neural circuits accom-
plish this task, often referred to as pattern separation, 
dates to the theoretical work of David Marr in the late 
1960s and early 1970s. In a landmark paper on the cer-
ebellum, Marr suggested that the extensive divergence 
of mossy-fiber inputs onto an extraordinarily large 
number of cerebellar granule cells might allow for pat-
tern separation in this system.
This idea of “expansion recoding,” in which dis-
tinct firing patterns are formed through the projection 
of a limited number of inputs onto a larger population 
of synaptic target cells, was later applied by others 
to the hippocampus. They proposed that hippocam-
pal pattern separation results from the divergence 
of entorhinal inputs onto a larger number of granule 
cells in the dentate gyrus. The findings of subsequent 
experimental studies are broadly in line with these the-
oretical suggestions: Neural activity patterns recorded 
in different environments differ more extensively in 
the dentate gyrus and CA3 than they do one synapse 
upstream in the entorhinal cortex. The dentate gyrus 
is also implicated in pattern separation by the fact 
that lesions or genetic manipulations targeted to this 
area impair the ability of rats and mice to discriminate 
between similar locations and contexts.
The dentate gyrus is the site of one of the most 
unexpected findings in neuroscience, the discovery 
that the birth of new neurons, or neurogenesis, is not 
limited to early stages of development. New neurons 


===== Page 5 =====
1360    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
continue to be born from precursor stem cells through-
out adulthood and become incorporated into neural 
circuits. Nevertheless, adult neurogenesis is limited to 
granule neurons in two brain regions: inhibitory gran-
ule cells in the olfactory bulb and the excitatory gran-
ule neurons of the dentate gyrus. Recent experimental 
findings raise the possibility that newly born granule 
neurons in the adult are particularly important for 
pattern separation, even though they represent only a 
minor fraction of the total number of granule cells. Pro-
cedures that stimulate neurogenesis enhance the ability 
of a mouse to discriminate between closely related envi-
ronments. Experimental silencing of all dentate gyrus 
granule neurons except those newly born in the adult 
does not seem to impair pattern separation, implying 
that it is the newborn neurons that are most essential to 
pattern separation. Although some uncertainties remain 
on the role of neurogenesis in pattern separation and 
memory encoding, methods that enhance neurogenesis 
are currently being explored as a means of treating dif-
ferent types of age-related memory loss.
The CA3 Region Is Important for Pattern 
Completion
A key feature of explicit memory is that a few cues 
are often sufficient to retrieve a complex stored mem-
ory. Marr suggested in a second landmark paper in 
1971 that the recurrent excitatory connections of CA3 
pyramidal cells might underlie this phenomenon. He 
proposed that when a memory is encoded, neuronal 
activity patterns are stored as changes in connections 
between active CA3 cells. During subsequent retrieval 
of the memory, the reactivation of a subset of this 
stored cell assembly would be sufficient to activate 
the entire original neural ensemble that encodes the 
memory because of the strong recurrent connections 
between the cells of the ensemble. This restoration is 
referred to as pattern completion.
The importance of LTP for pattern completion in 
the CA3 network is seen in studies with mice in which 
the NMDA glutamate receptor is selectively deleted 
from the CA3 neurons. These mice experience a selec-
tive loss of LTP at the recurrent synapses between 
CA3 neurons, with no change in LTP at the synapses 
between mossy fibers and CA3 neurons or at the 
Schaffer collateral synapses between CA3 and CA1 
neurons. Despite this deficit, the mice show normal 
learning and memory for finding a submerged plat-
form in a water maze using a complete set of spatial 
cues. However, when the mice are asked to find the 
platform with fewer spatial cues, their performance 
is impaired, indicating that LTP at the recurrent 
synapses between CA3 neurons is important for pat-
tern completion.
The CA2 Region Encodes Social Memory
Studies comparing neuronal representations in the den-
tate gyrus and CA3 and CA1 areas have indicated that 
each region has a unique function in the storage and 
retrieval of hippocampal memory. Recent evidence sug-
gests that the CA2 region plays a crucial role in social 
memory, the ability of an individual to recognize and 
remember other members of its own species (conspe-
cifics). Genetic silencing of CA2 disrupts the ability of 
a mouse to remember encounters with other mice, but 
does not impair other forms of hippocampal-dependent 
memory, including memory of objects and places.
The CA2 region is also unique among hippocampal 
regions in having very high levels of receptors for the 
hormones oxytocin and vasopressin, important regu-
lators of social behaviors. Selective stimulation of the 
vasopressin inputs to CA2 neurons can greatly prolong 
the duration of a social memory. Social memory also 
depends on CA1 neurons in the ventral region of the 
hippocampus, an area linked to emotional behavior, 
which receives important input from CA2.
A Spatial Map of the External World Is Formed 
in the Hippocampus
How do hippocampal neurons encode features of the 
external environment to form a memory of spatial 
locale, enabling an animal to navigate to a remembered 
goal? At the end of the 1940s, the cognitive psycholo-
gist Edward Tolman proposed that somewhere in the 
brain there must be representations of one’s environ-
ment. He referred to these neural representations as 
cognitive maps. They were thought to form not only 
an internal map of space but also a mental database in 
which information is stored in relation to an animal’s 
position in the environment, similar to the GPS coordi-
nates of a photograph.
Tolman did not have the opportunity to determine 
whether a cognitive map actually existed in the brain, 
but in 1971, John O’Keefe and John Dostrovsky dis-
covered that many cells in the CA1 and CA3 areas of 
the rat hippocampus fire selectively when an animal is 
located at a specific position in a specific environment. 
They called these cells “place cells” and the spatial loca-
tion in the environment where the cells preferentially 
fired “place fields“ (Figure 54–12A,B). When the animal 
enters a new environment, new place fields are formed 
within minutes and are stable for weeks to months.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1361
Different place cells have different place fields, 
and collectively, they provide a map of the environ-
ment, in the sense that the combination of currently 
active cells is sufficient to read out precisely where the 
animal is in the environment. A place-cell map is not 
egocentric in its organization, like the neural maps for 
touch or vision on the surface of the cerebral cortex. 
Rather, it is allocentric (or geocentric); it is fixed with 
respect to a point in the outside world. Based on these 
properties, John O’Keefe and Lynn Nadel suggested in 
1978 that place cells are part of the cognitive map that 
Tolman had in mind. The discovery of place cells pro-
vided the first evidence for an internal representation 
of the environment that allows an animal to navigate 
purposefully around the world.
Entorhinal Cortex Neurons Provide a Distinct 
Representation of Space
How is the hippocampal spatial map formed? What type 
of spatial information is carried by afferent connections 
from the entorhinal cortex to the hippocampal place 
cells? In 2005, a surprising discovery was made about 
the spatial representation formed by certain neurons 
in the medial entorhinal cortex, whose axons provide a 
major part of the perforant pathway input to the hip-
pocampus. These neurons represent space in a manner 
very different from the hippocampal place cells. Instead 
of firing when the animal is in a unique location, like the 
place cells, these entorhinal neurons, termed grid cells, 
fire whenever the animal is at any of several regularly 
spaced positions forming a hexagonal grid-like array 
(Figure 54–12C). When the animal moves about in the 
environment, different grid cells become activated, such 
that the activity in the entire population of grid cells 
always represents the animal’s current position.
The grid allows the animal to locate itself within 
a Cartesian-like external coordinate system that is 
independent of context, landmarks, or specific mark-
ings. A grid cell’s firing pattern is expressed in all 
environments that an animal visits, including during 
complete darkness. The independence of grid-cell fir-
ing from visual input implies that intrinsic networks, 
as well as self-motion cues, may serve as sources of 
information to ensure that grid cells are activated sys-
tematically throughout the environment. The gridded 
spatial information conveyed by the entorhinal inputs 
is then transformed within the hippocampus into 
unique spatial locations represented by the firing of 
ensembles of place cells, but how this transformation 
occurs remains to be determined. Since grid cells were 
discovered in the medial entorhinal cortex of rats in 
2005, they have been identified in mice, bats, monkeys, 
and humans. Recordings from flying bats have shown 
that grid cells and place cells represent locations in 
three-dimensional space, suggesting the generality of 
the cortico-hippocampal spatial navigation system. 
Finally, it has been proposed that grid cells in primates 
may encode positions in multiple sensory coordinate 
systems, including eye fixation coordinates.
Grid cells display a characteristic relation between 
their firing fields and anatomical organization (Figure 
54–13). The x,y coordinates of a cell’s grid fields—often 
called the phase of the grid—differ among cells at the 
same location of the medial entorhinal cortex. The x,y 
coordinates of two neighboring cells are often as differ-
ent as those of widely separated grid cells. In contrast, 
the size of the individual grid fields and the spacing 
between them generally increase topographically from 
the dorsal to the ventral part of the medial entorhinal 
cortex, expanding from a typical grid spacing of 30 to 
40 cm at the dorsal pole to several meters in some cells 
at the ventral pole (Figure 54–13A). The expansion is 
not linear but step-like, suggesting that the grid-cell 
network is modular.
Interestingly, a gradual expansion is seen also in 
the size of the place fields of hippocampal place cells 
along the dorsal to ventral axis of the hippocampus 
(Figure 54–13B). This is consistent with the known 
pattern of synaptic connectivity: Dorsal entorhinal 
cortex innervates dorsal hippocampus, whereas ven-
tral entorhinal cortex innervates ventral hippocampus. 
The finding that place fields are larger in the ventral 
hippocampus is in accord with results suggesting that 
the dorsal hippocampus is more important for spatial 
memory, whereas the ventral hippocampus is more 
important for nonspatial memory, including social 
memory and emotional behavior.
Grid cells are not the only medial entorhinal cells 
with projections to the hippocampus. Others include 
head direction cells, which respond primarily to the direc-
tion that the animal is facing (Figure 54–14A). Such cells 
were originally discovered in the presubiculum, another 
region of the parahippocampal cortex, but they exist also 
in the medial entorhinal cortex. Many entorhinal head 
direction cells also have grid-like firing properties. Like 
grid cells, such head direction cells are active when an 
animal traverses the vertices of a triangular grid in a two-
dimensional environment. However, within each grid 
field, these cells fire only if the animal is facing a certain 
direction. Head direction cells and conjunctive grid and 
head direction cells are thought to provide directional 
information to the entorhinal spatial map.
Intermingled among grid cells and head direction 
cells is yet another type of spatially modulated cell, the 
border cell (Figure 54–14B). The firing rate of a border 


===== Page 7 =====
1362    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
To mouse tracker
TV
Camera
To spike discriminator
Cue card
min
max
A  Experimental setup
B  Hippocampal place-cell ﬁring pattern
C  Entorhinal grid-cell ﬁring pattern
Figure 54–12  The firing patterns of cells in the hippocam-
pus and medial entorhinal cortex signal the animal’s  
location in its surroundings.
A. Electrodes implanted in the hippocampus of a mouse are 
attached to a recording cable, which is connected to an amplifier 
attached to a computer-based spike-discrimination program. The 
mouse is placed in an enclosure with an overhead TV camera 
that transmits to a device that detects the position of the mouse. 
The enclosure also contains a visual cue to orient the animal. 
Spikes in individual hippocampal pyramidal neurons (“place 
cells”) are detected by a spike discrimination program. The firing 
rate of each cell is then plotted as a function of the animal’s  
location in the cylinder. This information is visualized as a two-
dimensional activity map for the cell, from which the cell’s firing 
fields can be determined (shown in part B). (Adapted, with  
permission, from Muller, Kubie, and Ranck 1987. Copyright © 
1987 Society for Neuroscience.)
B. Location-specific firing of a hippocampal place cell. A rat 
is running in a cylindrical enclosure similar to the one shown 
in part A. Left: The animal’s path in the enclosure is shown in 
gray; firing locations of individual spikes are shown for a single 
place cell as red dots. Right: The firing rate of the same cell is 
color-coded (blue = low rate, red = high rate). In larger environ-
ments, place cells usually have more than one firing field but 
the fields have no apparent spatial relationship.
C. Spatial pattern of firing of an entorhinal grid cell in a rat  
during 30 minutes of foraging in a square enclosure 220 cm 
wide. The pattern shows typical periodic grid firing fields.  
Left: The trajectory of the rat is shown in gray; individual spike 
locations are shown as red dots. Right: Color-coded firing  
rate map for the grid cell to the left. Color coding as for  
the place cell in part B. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Stensola et al. 2012.)
cell increases whenever the animal approaches a local 
border of the environment, such as an edge or a wall. 
Border cells may help align the phase and orientation 
of grid cell firing to the local geometry of the environ-
ment. A similar role may be played by recently dis-
covered object-vector cells—cells in medial entorhinal 
cortex that encode the animal’s distance and direction 
relative to salient landmarks. A final entorhinal cell 
type is the speed cell. Speed cells fire proportionally to 
the running speed of the animal, irrespective of the ani-
mal’s location or direction (Figure 54–14C). Together 
with head direction cells, speed cells can provide grid 
cells with information about the animal’s instantane-
ous velocity, allowing the ensemble of active grid cells 
to be updated dynamically in accordance with a mov-
ing animal’s changing location.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1363
A  Entorhinal cortex
B  Hippocampus
1
2
3
1
3
2
Grid spacing (cm)
Position
along 
dorsoventral 
axis 
100
80
60
40
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal
Ventral
1
3
4
2
min
max
1
2
3
4
Figure 54–13  Grid fields and place fields expand in size as a 
function of neuronal location along the dorsoventral axis of 
the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.
A. Topographical organization of grid scale in the entorhinal 
cortex. Grid spacing (distance between grid fields) was deter-
mined for 49 grid cells (colored dots) recorded in the same rat 
at successive dorsal to ventral levels in the medial entorhinal 
cortex (green area in the sagittal brain section on the right). 
Dashed lines indicate mean grid-spacing values, indicating 
that grid-spacing falls in one of four discrete modules, with 
points colored according to module. Firing rate maps for four 
of the cells are shown in the middle (similar to those of Figure 
54–12C). Recording locations for these cells are indicated by 
numbers 1 to 4 to the right. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Stensola et al. 2012.)
B. Place fields from three different locations along the dors-
oventral axis of the hippocampus. Right: Recording positions 
(numbers) in the hippocampal formation are shown at right. 
Left: Color-coded maps show the firing fields of each place cell 
at the recording locations. The field size expands in cells along 
the dorsoventral axis of the hippocampus. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Kjelstrup et al. 2008.)


===== Page 9 =====
1364    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A  Head direction cell
B  Border cells
C  Speed cells
Maximum ﬁring rate [Hz]: 
Maximum speed [cm/s]:
0
5
90
52
0
2
65
30
0
5
11
54
90°
0°
Normalized ﬁring rate
and speed
Moderate
ﬁring 
Powerful
ﬁring 
Rate (Hz) 
180°
Head 
direction
(degrees) 
Figure 54–14  The medial entorhinal cortex contains several 
functional cell types tuned to distinct representations of an 
animal’s navigation.
A. On the left is the trajectory of a rat exploring a 100-cm-wide 
square enclosure (red dots indicate firing locations). A color-
coded firing rate map is also shown (color scale as in previous 
figures). Note that the cell’s firing is scattered across the enclo-
sure. The plot on the right shows the same cell’s firing rate as 
a function of head direction, in polar coordinates. The cell fires 
selectively when the rat faces south, anywhere in the box. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Sargolini et al. 2006.)
B. Firing rate maps for a representative border cell in enclosures 
with different geometric shapes (red = high rate; blue = low rate).  
Top row: The firing field map follows the walls when the enclo-
sure is stretched from a square (left and middle maps) to a 
rectangle (right map). Bottom row: The firing field of the same 
border cell in another environment. Introduction of a discrete 
wall (white pixels, right map) inside the square enclosure 
causes a new border field to appear to the right of the wall. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Solstad et al. 2008.)
C. Speed cells. Traces show normalized firing rate (colored traces) 
and speed (gray) for seven representative entorhinal speed cells 
during 2 minutes of free foraging. Maximum values of firing rate 
and speed are indicated (left and right, respectively). Note high 
correspondence between speed and firing rate in these cells. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Kropff et al. 2015.)


