===== Page 1 =====
92    Part I / Overall Perspective
nuclei in the brain stem contain neurons that synthe-
size and release the modulatory neurotransmitter nor-
epinephrine (the locus coeruleus) and serotonin (the 
dorsal raphe nucleus). Such neurons set the general 
arousal level of an animal through their widespread 
connections with forebrain structures. A group of 
cholinergic modulatory neurons, the basal nucleus of 
Meynert, is involved in arousal or attention (Chapter 40). 
This nucleus is located beneath the basal ganglia in the 
basal forebrain portion of the telencephalon. The axons 
of its neurons project to essentially all portions of the 
neocortex.
If a predator finds potential prey, a variety of cor-
tical and subcortical systems determine whether the 
prey is edible. Once food is recognized, other cortical 
and subcortical systems initiate a comprehensive vol-
untary motor program to bring the animal into contact 
with the prey, capture it and place it in the mouth, and 
chew and swallow.
Finally, the physiological satisfaction the animal 
experiences in eating reinforces the behaviors that led 
to the successful predation. A group of dopaminergic 
neurons in the midbrain are important for monitoring 
reinforcements and rewards. The power of the dopa-
minergic modulatory systems has been demonstrated 
by experiments in which electrodes were implanted 
into the reward regions of rats and the animals were 
freely allowed to press a lever to electrically stimu-
late their brains. They preferred this self-stimulation 
to obtaining food or water, engaging in sexual behav-
ior, or any other naturally rewarding activity. The 
role of the dopaminergic modulatory system in learn-
ing through reinforcement of exploratory behavior is 
described in Chapter 38.
How the brain’s modulatory systems, concerned 
with reward, attention and motivation, interact with 
the sensory and motor systems is one of the most 
interesting questions in neuroscience, one that is also 
fundamental to our understanding of learning and 
memory storage (Chapter 40).
The Peripheral Nervous System Is 
Anatomically Distinct From the Central 
Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system supplies the central 
nervous system with a continuous stream of infor-
mation about both the external environment and the 
internal environment of the body. It has somatic and 
autonomic divisions (Figure 4–16).
The somatic division includes the sensory neurons 
that receive information from the skin, muscles, and 
Figure 4–16  The peripheral nervous system has somatic 
and autonomic divisions. The somatic division carries infor-
mation from the skin to the brain and from the brain to mus-
cles. The autonomic division regulates involuntary functions, 
including activity of the heart and smooth muscles in the gut 
and glands.
Peripheral Nervous System
Somatic
Autonomic


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    93
joints. The cell bodies of these sensory neurons lie in 
the dorsal root ganglia and cranial ganglia. Receptors 
associated with these cells provide information about 
muscle and limb position and about touch and pressure 
at the body surface. In Part IV (Perception), we shall 
see how remarkably specialized these receptors are in 
transducing one or another type of physical energy (eg, 
deep pressure or heat) into the electrical signals used 
by the nervous system. In Part V (Movement), we shall 
see that sensory receptors in the muscles and joints are 
crucial to shaping coherent movement of the body.
The autonomic division of the peripheral nervous 
system mediates visceral sensation as well as motor 
control of the viscera, vascular system, and exocrine 
glands. It consists of the sympathetic, parasympathetic, 
and enteric systems. The sympathetic system partici-
pates in the body’s response to stress, whereas the para-
sympathetic system acts to conserve body resources and 
restore homeostasis. The enteric nervous system, with 
neuronal cell bodies located in or adjacent to the viscera, 
controls the function of smooth muscle and secretions 
of the gut. The functional organization of the autonomic 
nervous system is described in Chapter 41 and its role in 
emotion and motivation in Chapter 42.
Memory Is a Complex Behavior Mediated by 
Structures Distinct From Those That Carry Out 
Sensation or Movement
Research over the past 50 years has provided a sophis-
ticated view of memory systems in the brain. We now 
know that different forms of memory (eg, fear memory 
versus skill memory) are mediated by different brain 
regions. Here we contrast the organization of the sys-
tem responsible for coding and storing our experiences 
of other individuals, places, facts, and episodes, a pro-
cess called explicit memory.
We know that a structure called the hippocampus 
(or more properly the hippocampal formation, since 
it is several cortical regions) is a key component of a 
medial temporal lobe memory system that encodes 
and stores memories of our lives (Figure 4–17). This 
understanding is based largely on the analysis of the 
Figure 4–17  Coronal section of the human hippocam-
pal formation stained by the Nissl methods to demon-
strate cell bodies. The main cytoarchitectonic fields are 
shown in this section of the human hippocampal formation. 
(Abbreviations: CA3 and CA1, subdivisions of the hippocampus; 
DG, dentate gyrus; EC, entorhinal cortex; F, fimbria;  
Sub, subiculum.)
F
Sub
EC
CA3
CA1
DG


===== Page 3 =====
94    Part I / Overall Perspective
famous patient Henry Molaison (referred to as HM by 
the scientists who studied him during his life), who in 
the early 1950s had bilateral temporal lobe surgery to 
reduce his life-threatening epilepsy. In contrast to the 
six-layered neocortex, the hippocampus, along with 
olfactory cortex (piriform cortex), is a three-layered 
cortical structure referred to as archicortex, one of the 
phylogenetically older areas of cortex.
The reason we briefly describe the hippocampal 
formation in this chapter is to emphasize that not all 
brain circuits are alike. In fact, whether one talks about 
the olfactory bulb, where the sense of smell begins to be 
processed, or the cerebellum, where fine motor move-
ments are refined, the general principle is that the struc-
ture of a circuit is specific to the function that it mediates. 
And the hippocampal circuit is as different from the cir-
cuits that mediate sensory perception or motor move-
ment as one could imagine. Hippocampal circuitry of 
the brain will be dealt with in much more detail in later 
chapters. Chapter 5 introduces the idea that the hip-
pocampus encodes information about an animal’s spa-
tial location in its environment and that the encoding 
of explicit memory (including spatial memory) requires 
plastic changes in synaptic function. Chapters 52 and 54 
explore human memory function and the cellular and 
molecular bases of explicit memory and spatial repre-
sentation, respectively.
The Hippocampal System Is Interconnected With 
the Highest-Level Polysensory Cortical Regions
Sensory systems are hierarchical and process progres-
sively more complex stimuli at higher levels, particu-
larly of the neocortex. Moreover, from the highest levels 
of each modality, circuits connect with polysensory 
cortical regions located at various places around the 
cortex, where information from many sensory modali-
ties converges onto single neurons. The hippocampal 
system receives most of its input, the raw material with 
which it makes memories, from a few specific polysen-
sory regions. These include the perirhinal and para-
hippocampal cortices, located in the medial temporal 
lobe, as well as the retrosplenial cortex, located in the 
caudal portion of the cingulate gyrus. These polysen-
sory regions converge on the entry structure to the hip-
pocampal system, the entorhinal cortex (Figure 4–18). 
The polysensory information that enters the entorhinal 
cortex can be thought of as providing summaries of 
immediate experience.
The Hippocampal Formation Comprises Several 
Different but Highly Integrated Circuits
The hippocampal formation is made up of a number of 
distinct cortical regions that are simpler in organization 
than the neocortex—at least they have fewer layers. The 
regions include the dentate gyrus, hippocampus, subicu-
lum, and entorhinal cortex. Each of these regions is made 
up of subregions containing many neuronal cell types. 
The simplest subregion of the hippocampal formation is 
the dentate gyrus, which has a single principal neuron 
called the granule cell. The subregions of the hippocam-
pus termed CA1, CA2, and CA3, consist of a single layer 
of pyramidal cells whose dendrites extend above and 
below the cell body layer and receive inputs from several 
regions. The subiculum (divided into subiculum, presub-
iculum and parasubiculum) is another region made up 
largely of pyramidal cells. Finally, the most complex part 
of the hippocampal formation is the entorhinal cortex, 
which has multiple layers but still has an organization 
distinctly different from the neocortex. For example, it 
lacks a layer IV and has a much more prominent layer II.
Figure 4–18  Hierarchical organization of connections to 
the hippocampal formation. The hippocampal formation 
receives highly processed sensory information, primarily 
through the entorhinal cortex, from multimodal association 
regions such as the perirhinal, parahippocampal, and  
retrosplenial cortices.
Entorhinal 
cortex
Perirhinal
cortex
Parahippocampal
cortex
Hippocampus
Retrosplenial
cortex
Unimodal
association
areas
Polymodal
association
areas
Hippocampal formation
Subiculum
Dentate
gyrus


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    95
The Hippocampal Formation Is Made Up Mainly of 
Unidirectional Connections
Here we describe the fundamental circuitry of the hip-
pocampal formation. The circuitry is described in more 
detail in Chapter 54. The simplified version of the hip-
pocampal circuit shown in Figure 4–19 emphasizes 
its stepwise serial processing of multimodal sensory 
information, with each hippocampal region contribut-
ing to the formation of explicit memories. This serial 
processing implies that damage to any one of the com-
ponents of this system would lead to memory impair-
ment. And, in fact, another famous patient, known by 
the initials R.B., did suffer profound memory impair-
ment due to loss of cells in the CA1 region after an 
ischemic episode.
As it turns out, while the hippocampal formation 
is essential for the initial formation of memories of our 
lives, these memories are ultimately stored elsewhere in 
the brain. In patients such as HM, in whom the entorhi-
nal cortex and much of the rest of the hippocampal sys-
tem was removed, memories prior to the surgery were 
largely intact. Thus, to achieve creation and long-term 
storage of the memories of our lives, the hippocampus 
and entorhinal cortex must communicate with circuits 
Figure 4–19  Simplified diagram on internal connections 
within the hippocampal formation. The circuit begins from 
cells in layer II of the entorhinal cortex to the dentate gyrus, 
which then projects to the CA3 region of the hippocampus. The 
CA3 portion of the hippocampus projects to CA1, and CA1 then 
projects to the subiculum. The hippocampal circuit is closed 
when the subiculum projects to the deep layers of the entorhi-
nal cortex. Not shown are the feedback pathways from entorhi-
nal cortex to the same multimodal areas from which it receives 
sensory information.
Hippocampal formation
CA1
Entorhinal
cortex
Neocortex
II
III
V / VI
Dentate
gyrus
Subiculum
CA3
in the cerebral cortex. Where and precisely how that 
happens remain a mystery.
Highlights
1.	 Individual neurons are not able to carry out 
behavior. They must be incorporated into circuits 
that comprise different types of neurons that are 
interconnected by excitatory, inhibitory, and mod-
ulatory connections.
2.	 Sensory and motor information is processed in the 
brain in a variety of discrete brain regions that are 
active simultaneously.
3.	 A functional pathway is formed by the serial con-
nection of identifiable brain regions, and each brain 
region’s circuits process more complex or specific 
information than the preceding brain region.
4.	 The sensations of touch and pain are mediated by 
pathways that run between different circuits in the 
spinal cord, brain stem, thalamus, and neocortex.
5.	 All sensory and motor systems follow the pat-
tern of hierarchical and reciprocal processing of 
information, whereas the hippocampal memory 
system is organized largely for serial processing 
of very complex, polysensory information. A gen-
eral principle is that circuits in the brain have an 
organizational structure that is suited for the func-
tions that they are carrying out.
6.	 Contrary to an intuitive analysis of our personal 
experience, perceptions are not precise copies of 
the world around us. Sensation is an abstraction, 
not a replication, of reality. The brain’s circuits con-
struct an internal representation of external physi-
cal events after first analyzing various features of 
those events. When we hold an object in the hand, 
the shape, movement, and texture of the object are 
simultaneously analyzed in different brain regions 
according to the brain’s own rules, and the results 
are integrated in a conscious experience.
7.	 How sensation is integrated in a conscious 
experience—the binding problem—and how con-
scious experience emerges from the brain’s analy-
sis of incoming sensory information are two of the 
most intriguing questions in cognitive neurosci-
ence (Chapter 56). An even more complex issue is 
how these conscious impressions are encoded into 
memories that are stored for decades.
David G. Amaral


===== Page 5 =====
96    Part I / Overall Perspective
Selected Reading
Brodal A. 1981. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical 
Medicine, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Carpenter MB. 1991. Core Text of Neuroanatomy, 4th ed.  
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins.
England MA, Wakely J. 1991. Color Atlas of the Brain and 
Spinal Cord: An Introduction to Normal Neuroanatomy.  
St. Louis: Mosby Year Book.
Martin JH. 2012. Neuroanatomy: Text and Atlas, 4th ed.  
New York: McGraw Hill.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human 
Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd rev. ed. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Peters A, Jones EG (eds). 1984. Cerebral Cortex. Vol. 1, Cellular 
Components of the Cerebral Cortex. New York: Plenum.
Peters A, Palay S, Webster H de F. 1991. The Fine Structure of 
the Nervous System, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
References
Brodmann K. 1909. Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Gross-
hirnrinde in ihren Prinzipien dargestellt auf Grund des  
Zellenbaues. Leipzig: Barth.
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical 
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 1: 
1–47.
Heimer L. 1994. The Human Brain and Spinal Cord: Functional 
Neuroanatomy and Dissection Guide, 2nd ed. New York: 
Springer.
Jones EG. 1988. The nervous tissue. In: Cell and Tissue Biology: 
A Textbook of Histology, 6th ed., pp. 305–341. Baltimore: 
Urban & Schwarzenberg.
Jones EG. 1986. Connectivity of the primate sensory-motor 
cortex. In: EG Jones, A Peters (eds), Cerebral Cortex, Vol. 5, 
Chapter 4: Sensory-Motor Areas and Aspects of Cortical 
Connectivity, pp. 113–183. New York/London: Plenum.
Kaas JH. 2006. Evolution of the neocortex. Curr Biol 16: 
R910–914.
Kaas JH, Qi HX, Burish MJ, Gharbawie OA, Onifer SM, 
Massey JM. 2008. Cortical and subcortical plasticity in 
the brains of humans, primates, and rats after damage to 
sensory afferents in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord. 
Exp Neurol 209:407–416.
McKenzie AL, Nagarajan SS, Roberts TP, Merzenich MM, Byl 
NN. 2003. Somatosensory representation of the digits and 
clinical performance in patients with focal hand dystonia. 
Am J Phys Med Rehabil 82:737–749.
Penfield W, Boldrey E. 1937. Somatic motor and sensory rep-
resentation in the cerebral cortex of man as studied by 
electrical stimulation. Brain 60:389–443.
Penfield W, Rasmussen T. 1950. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: 
A Clinical Study of Localization of Function. New York: 
Macmillan.
Ramón y Cajal S. 1995. Histology of the Nervous System of Man 
and Vertebrates. 2 vols. N Swanson, LW Swanson (transl). 
New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Rockland KS, Ichinohe N. 2004. Some thoughts on cortical 
minicolumns. Exp Brain Res 158:265–277.
Zola-Morgan S, Squire LR, Amaral DG. 1986. Human amne-
sia and the medial temporal region: enduring memory 
impairment following a bilateral lesion limited to field 
CA1 of the hippocampus. J Neurosci 6:2950–2967.


===== Page 6 =====
5
The Computational Bases of Neural Circuits  
That Mediate Behavior
Although much has been learned by recording 
from just one or a few neurons at a time, advances in 
miniaturization and electronics technology now make 
it possible to record action potentials simultaneously 
from many hundreds of individual neurons across 
multiple brain areas, often in the context of a sensory, 
motor, or cognitive task (Box 5–1). Such advances, 
together with computational approaches for managing 
and making sense of large data sets, promise to revolu-
tionize our understanding of neural function.
At the same time, modern genetic approaches 
based on mRNA sequencing from individual neurons 
are revealing the numerous types of cells that contrib-
ute to population activity. Genetic-based approaches 
also allow defined types of neurons to be activated 
or silenced during an experiment, supporting tests of 
causality (Box 5–2).
High-throughput anatomical methods, at the scales 
of both light and electron microscopy, are providing 
information about circuit wiring at an unprecedented 
level of detail and completeness. The complexity of 
neural circuits and the large data sets collected from 
them has motivated the development and application 
of statistical, computational, and theoretical methods 
for extracting, analyzing, modeling, and interpreting 
results. These methods are used to study a broad range 
of issues: experimental design, the extraction of signals 
from raw data, the analysis of large complex data sets, 
the construction and analysis of models simulating the 
data, and, finally and most importantly, building some 
form of understanding from the results.
Signal extraction is often done on the basis of a 
Bayesian approach, inferring the most likely signal 
Neural Firing Patterns Provide a Code for Information
Sensory Information Is Encoded by Neural Activity
Information Can Be Decoded From Neural Activity
Hippocampal Spatial Cognitive Maps Can Be Decoded to 
Infer Location
Neural Circuit Motifs Provide a Basic Logic for Information 
Processing
Visual Processing and Object Recognition Depend on a 
Hierarchy of Feed-Forward Representations
Diverse Neuronal Representations in the Cerebellum 
Provide a Basis for Learning
Recurrent Circuitry Underlies Sustained Activity and 
Integration
Learning and Memory Depend on Synaptic Plasticity
Dominant Patterns of Synaptic Input Can Be Identified 
by Hebbian Plasticity
Synaptic Plasticity in the Cerebellum Plays a Key Role in 
Motor Learning
Highlights
T
he previous chapter focused on the neuroanat-
omy of the brain and the connections between 
different brain regions. An understanding of how 
these connections mediate behavior requires insight 
into how the information represented by the activity of 
different populations of neurons is communicated and 
processed. Much of this understanding has come from 
recordings of the minute electrical signals generated 
by individual neurons.


===== Page 7 =====
98    Part I / Overall Perspective
Box 5–1  Optical Neuroimaging
Optical imaging methods are a rapidly advancing field 
of technology for large-scale monitoring of neural cir-
cuit dynamics. Most of these approaches use fluorescent 
sensors—synthetic dyes or genetically engineered and 
encoded proteins—that signal changes in neural activity 
via changes in the magnitude or the wavelength of their 
emitted light following excitation. Various florescence 
imaging approaches have been developed, depending 
on the source of fluorescence excitation, including single-
photon, multiphoton, and super-resolution fluorescent 
microscopic imaging.
The most commonly used fluorescence indicators 
signal changes in intracellular calcium levels as a proxy 
for the electrical activity of neurons. While the temporal 
resolution of fluorescence calcium imaging is generally 
lower than that of electrophysiology, fluorescent imag-
ing with genetically encoded calcium indicators enables 
simultaneous monitoring of many thousands of indi-
vidually identified neurons in the behaving animal over 
several days to weeks and months.
In addition to calcium imaging, synthetic and 
genetically encoded fluorescent indicators of electri-
cal activity (eg, genetically encoded voltage indicators 
[GEVIs]), neurotransmitter concentration reporters (eg, 
glutamate-sensing fluorescent reporter [GluSnFR]), 
activity states of intracellular signaling molecules, and 
gene expression provide rapidly expanding and versa-
tile techniques for monitoring neural activity on multi-
ple spatial and temporal scales.
present in a noisy recording. Data analysis often con-
sists of reducing the dimensionality of a large data set, 
not simply to make it more compact but to identify the 
essential components from which it is built.
Models of neural systems range from detailed 
simulations of the morphology and electrophysiology 
of individual neurons to more abstract models of large 
populations of neurons. Whatever the level of detail, 
the aim of models is to reveal how the measured fea-
tures of a neuron or network of neurons contribute to 
the function of the neuron or neural circuit.
In addition, at the highest levels of functionality, 
such as identifying images, playing games, or perform-
ing tasks at human levels, ideas from machine learning 
are increasingly impacting neuroscience research.
In this chapter, we introduce ideas, techniques, 
and approaches that are used to characterize and inter-
pret the activity of neural populations and circuits, 
with examples drawn from a number of areas of brain 
research. Many of these topics are covered in greater 
detail later in the book.
Neural Firing Patterns Provide a Code for 
Information
Sensory Information Is Encoded by Neural Activity
Animals and humans continually accumulate infor-
mation about the world through their senses, make 
decisions on the basis of that information, and, when 
necessary, take action. In order for sensory information 
to be processed for decision making and action, it must 
be transformed into electrical signals that produce 
patterns of neural activity in the brain. Studying such 
neural representations and their relationship to exter-
nal sensory cues, known collectively as neural coding, 
is a major area of neuroscience research. The process 
through which features of a stimulus are represented 
by neural activity is called encoding.
The structure of a neural representation plays an 
important role in how information is further processed 
by the nervous system. For example, visual informa-
tion is initially encoded in the retina by photorecep-
tor responses to the color and light intensity over a 
small region of the visual field. This information is 
then transformed in the brain within the primary vis-
ual cortex to encode a visual scene on the basis of the 
edges and shapes that define the scene as well as on 
where these features are located. Further transforma-
tions occur in higher-order visual areas that extract 
complex shapes and further structure from the scene, 
including the identification of objects and even indi-
vidual faces. In other brain areas, auditory encoding 
reflects the frequency spectrum of sounds, and touch 
is encoded in maps that represent the surface of the 
body. The sequence of action potentials fired by a 
neuron in response to a sensory stimulus represents 
how that stimulus changes over time. Research on 
neural coding aims to understand both the stimulus 
features that drive a neuron to respond and the tem-
poral structure of the response and its relationship to 
changes in the external world.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 5 / The Computational Bases of Neural Circuits That Mediate Behavior     99
Information Can Be Decoded From Neural Activity
Sensory neurons encode information by firing action 
potentials in response to sensory features. Other brain 
areas, such as those that lead to decisions or generate 
motor actions, must correctly interpret the meaning 
of action potential sequences that they receive from 
sensory areas in order to respond appropriately. The 
process by which information is extracted from neural 
activity is called decoding.
The decoding of neural signals can be done experi-
mentally and in clinical contexts by neuroscientists. 
Such decoding can infer what an animal or a human 
is seeing or hearing from recordings of visual or audi-
tory neurons, for example. In practice, only certain fea-
tures of the stimulus are likely to be inferred, but the 
results can nevertheless be impressive. A large number 
of decoding procedures have been developed, ranging 
from simple weighted sums of neuronal firing rates to 
sophisticated statistical methods.
Decoding methods are central to the development 
of neuroprosthetics for people with various nervous 
system impairments that result in extensive paralysis 
(Chapter 39). To accomplish this, neurons are recorded 
in the parietal or motor cortices through implanted elec-
trodes, and online decoding procedures are used to inter-
pret the movement intentions that are represented by the 
recorded neural activity. The inferred intentions are then 
used to control a computer cursor or drive a robotic limb.
Decoding recorded neural activity also gives us 
a remarkable view of what is going on in a neural 
circuit, which in turn provides insight into memory 
Box 5–2  Optogenetic and Chemogenetic Manipulation of Neuronal Activity
Functional analysis of neural circuits relies on the ability 
to accurately manipulate identified circuit elements to 
elucidate their roles in physiology and behavior. Geneti-
cally encoded neural perturbation tools have been 
developed for remotely controlling neuron function 
using light (optogenetics) or small molecules (chemoge-
netics) that activate engineered receptors.
Genetically encoded foreign proteins can be 
expressed in molecularly, genetically, or spatially speci-
fied subsets of neurons using viruses or transgenic ani-
mals for subsequent selective perturbations of these 
cell populations. Optogenetic approaches involve the 
expression of light-sensitive proteins and subsequent 
light delivery to the resulting photosensitized neurons. 
Depending on the type of optogenetic actuator, light acti-
vation will then enhance neural activity (eg, light-gated 
ion channels like channelrhodopsin) or suppress it (eg, 
light-gated ion pumps like halorhodopsin and archaer-
hodopsin) by depolarizing or hyperpolarizing the cell’s 
membrane, respectively.
Alternatively, selected neuronal populations can 
be remotely activated or silenced using chemogenetic 
actuators, which are genetically engineered receptors 
that are targeted to defined neuronal populations using 
genetic methods; they can be activated via small-
molecule synthetic ligands that selectively interact with 
these receptors upon delivery (eg, DREADDs [designer 
receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs]).
These optogenetic and chemogenetic tools offer 
precise spatiotemporal control over neuronal activity 
to probe the causal relationship between neuronal cell 
types, circuit physiology, and behavior.
storage and retrieval, planning and decision making, 
and other cognitive functions. The following section 
illustrates these insights using a particularly interest-
ing neural representation, the encoding of spatial loca-
tion in the rodent hippocampus.
Hippocampal Spatial Cognitive Maps Can Be 
Decoded to Infer Location
One of the most complex cognitive challenges an ani-
mal faces is identifying and remembering its location in 
an environment relative to the location of other salient 
objects. For example, seed-caching birds can remem-
ber the location of hundreds of different places where 
they have stored food over a period of several months. 
The neural circuitry involved in formation of explicit 
memory—the memory of people, places, things, and 
events—was briefly introduced in the previous chap-
ter. This form of memory requires the hippocampus, 
entorhinal cortex, and related structures in the tempo-
ral lobe. In 1971, John O’Keefe discovered physiologi-
cal evidence of a neural representation of the spatial 
environment in the hippocampus. In 2014, he was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 
together with May-Britt Moser and Edvard Moser, for 
their discoveries concerning the neuronal representa-
tion of space.
O’Keefe discovered that individual cells in the 
rat hippocampus, termed place cells, fire only when 
the animal traverses a particular area of the environ-
ment, termed the cell’s place field (Figure 5–1). Sub-
sequent research uncovered place cell–like activity in 


===== Page 9 =====
100    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 5–1  Hippocampal place cells and place cell maps.
A. Input–output transformations occur in the trisynaptic  
circuitry of the mammalian hippocampus, proceeding  
from the dentate gyrus input region, to the CA3 area, and to 
the CA1 output region, with principal excitatory neurons (red) 
in each region as primary processing units. Activity of  
principal cells is modulated by local circuit GABAergic  
interneurons (gray).
B. Place cell firing in the hippocampus. The path taken by a rat 
is shown in black as it traverses a square arena. Electrodes 
were implanted within the hippocampus to record from indi-
vidual cells. Above: A single place cell increases firing (each 
action potential represented by a red dot) at discrete locations 
in the environment. Below: A color-coded heat map of firing 
frequency of the schematic place cell. Lower wavelength colors 
(yellow and red) represent higher firing rates on a background 
of no activity (dark blue).
C. Color-coded heat maps showing the firing of 25 different 
place cells recorded simultaneously in the hippocampal CA1 
region as the rat explores a square box.
Cortex
B
A
C
CA3
Dentate 
region
CA1
the hippocampus of several other mammalian species, 
including bats, monkeys, and humans. Distinct sets of 
place cells are activated by distinct locations in a given 
environment. Consequently, although individual place 
cells represent relatively small spatial areas, the full 
diverse population of place cells in the hippocampus 
tiles the entire environment, and any given location is 
encoded by a unique ensemble of cells. The hippocam-
pal place coding network provides an example of a 
cognitive map, initially postulated by the psychologist 
Edward Tolman, that enables an animal to successfully 
remember and then navigate its environment. The role 
of the hippocampus in memory formation and the 
mechanisms by which the hippocampal spatial map is 
encoded are explored in detail in Chapters 52 and 54.
The electrophysiological methods available to 
O’Keefe in 1971 were limited to recording one place 
cell at a time, but subsequent advances allowed inves-
tigators to record dozens, and more recently hundreds, 
of place cells simultaneously. Critically, while single 
place cells encode only specific parts of the environ-
ment and are prone to occasional noisy firing out-
side of their place fields, entire populations of place 
cells provide more complete spatial coverage and the 


