===== Page 1 =====
Preceding Page
Fresco of dancing Peucetian women from the Tomb of the Dancers in the Corso 
Cotugno necropolis of Ruvo di Puglia, 4th–5th century BC. The tomb has a semicham-
ber design. Its six painted panels depict 30 dancing women, moving from left to right 
with arms interlocked as though they were dancing in a circle around the interior of the 
tomb. The skeletal remains of the deceased in the tomb clearly belonged to a distin-
guished male warrior. The tomb is named after the dancing women that appear on the 
frescoes in the tomb. The panels with the frescoes are now exhibited in the Naples 
National Archaeological Museum, inv. 9353. (Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Tomb_of_the_Dancers.)


===== Page 2 =====
V
Movement
T
he capacity for movement, as many dictionaries remind us, 
is a defining feature of animal life. As Sherrington, who pio-
neered the study of the motor system pointed out, “to move 
things is all that mankind can do, for such the sole executant is mus-
cle, whether in whispering a syllable or in felling a forest.”*
The immense repertoire of motions that humans are capable 
of stems from the activity of some 640 skeletal muscles—all under 
the control of the central nervous system. After processing sensory 
information about the body and its surroundings, the motor centers 
of the brain and spinal cord issue neural commands that effect coor-
dinated, purposeful movements. 
The task of the motor systems is the reverse of the task of the 
sensory systems. Sensory processing generates an internal represen-
tation in the brain of the outside world or of the state of the body. 
Motor processing begins with an internal representation: the desired 
purpose of movement. Critically, however, this internal represen-
tation needs to be continuously updated by internally generated 
information (efference copy) and external sensory information to 
maintain accuracy as the movement unfolds. 
Just as psychophysical analysis of sensory processing tells us 
about the capabilities and limitations of the sensory systems, psy-
chophysical analyses of motor performance reveal the control rules 
used by the motor system. 
Because many of the motor acts of daily life are unconscious, 
we are often unaware of their complexity. Simply standing upright, 
for example, requires continual adjustments of numerous postural 
muscles in response to the vestibular signals evoked by miniscule 
swaying. Walking, running, and other forms of locomotion involve 
the combined action of central pattern generators, gated sensory 
information, and descending commands, which together generate 
the complex patterns of alternating excitation and inhibition to the 
appropriate sets of muscles. Many actions, such as serving a tennis 
*Sherrington CS. 1979. 1924 Linacre lecture. In: JC Eccles, WC Gibson (eds). Sherrington: His Life 
and Thought, p. 59. New York: Springer-Verlag.


===== Page 3 =====
ball or executing an arpeggio on a piano, occur far too quickly to be 
shaped by sensory feedback. Instead, centers, such as the cerebel-
lum, make use of predictive models that simulate the consequences 
of the outgoing commands and allow very short latency corrections. 
Motor learning provides one of the most fruitful subjects for studies 
of neural plasticity. 
Motor systems are organized in a functional hierarchy, with 
each level concerned with a different decision. The highest and most 
abstract level, likely requiring the prefrontal cortex, deals with the 
purpose of a movement or series of motor actions. The next level, 
which is concerned with the formation of a motor plan, involves 
interactions between the posterior parietal and premotor areas of 
the cerebral cortex. The premotor cortex specifies the spatiotemporal 
characteristics of a movement based on sensory information from 
the posterior parietal cortex about the environment and about the 
position of the body in space. The lowest level of the hierarchy coor-
dinates the spatiotemporal details of the muscle contractions needed 
to execute the planned movement. This coordination is executed by 
the primary motor cortex, brain stem, and spinal cord. This serial 
view has heuristic value, but evidence suggests that many of these 
processes can occur in parallel. 
Some functions of the motor systems and their disturbance by 
disease have now been described at the level of the biochemistry of 
specific transmitter systems. In fact, the discovery that neurons in 
the basal ganglia of parkinsonian patients are deficient in dopamine 
was the first important clue that neurological disorders in the central 
nervous system can result from altered chemical transmission. Neu-
rophysiological studies have provided information as to how such 
transmitters play a critical role in action selection and the reinforce-
ment of successful movements.
Understanding the functional properties of the motor system is 
not only fundamental in its own right, but it is of further importance 
in helping us to understand disorders of this system and explore the 
possibilities for treatment and recovery. As would be expected for 
such a complex apparatus, the motor system is subject to various 
malfunctions. Disruptions at different levels in the motor hierarchy 
produce distinctive symptoms, including the movement-slowing 
characteristic of disorders of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson 
disease, the incoordination seen with cerebellar disease, and the 
spasticity and weakness typical of spinal cord damage. For this rea-
son, the neurological examination of a patient inevitably includes 
tests of reflexes, gait, and dexterity, all of which provide information 
about the status of the nervous system. In addition to pharmacologi-
cal therapies, the treatment of motor system disorders has been aug-
mented by two new approaches. First, focal stimulation of the basal 
ganglia has been shown to restore motility to certain patients with 
Parkinson disease; such deep-brain stimulation is also being tested 
in the context of other neurological and psychiatric conditions. And 


===== Page 4 =====
second, the motor systems have become a target for the application 
of neural prosthetics; neural signals are decoded and used to drive 
devices that aid patients with paralysis caused by spinal cord injury 
and stroke.
Part Editors: Daniel M. Wolpert and Thomas M. Jessell
Part V
Chapter 30	
Principles of Sensorimotor Control
Chapter 31	
The Motor Unit and Muscle Action
Chapter 32	
Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord
Chapter 33	
Locomotion
Chapter 34	
Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices
Chapter 35	
The Control of Gaze
Chapter 36	
Posture
Chapter 37	
The Cerebellum
Chapter 38	
The Basal Ganglia
Chapter 39	
Brain–Machine Interfaces


===== Page 5 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 6 =====
30
Principles of Sensorimotor Control
T
he preceding chapters in this book consider 
how the brain constructs internal representa-
tions of the world around us. These representa-
tions are behaviorally meaningful when used to guide 
movement. Thus, an important function of the sensory 
representations is to shape the actions of the motor sys-
tems. This chapter describes the principles that govern 
the neural control of movement using concepts derived 
from behavioral studies and computational models of 
the brain and musculoskeletal system.
We start by considering the challenges motor sys-
tems face in generating skillful actions. We then exam-
ine some of the neural mechanisms that have evolved 
to meet these challenges and produce smooth, accurate, 
and efficient movements. Finally, we see how motor 
learning improves our performance and allows us to 
adapt to new mechanical conditions, such as when using 
a tool, or to learn novel correspondences between sen-
sory and motor events, such as when using a computer 
mouse to control a cursor. This chapter focuses on volun-
tary movement; reflexes and rhythmic movements are 
discussed in further detail in Chapters 32 and 33.
Voluntary movements are generated by neural 
circuits that span different levels of the sensory and 
motor hierarchies, including regions of the cerebral 
cortex, subcortical areas such as the basal ganglia and 
cerebellum, and the brain stem and spinal networks. 
These different structures have unique patterns of neu-
ral activity. Moreover, focal damage to different struc-
tures can cause distinct motor deficits. Although it is 
tempting to suggest that these individual structures 
have distinct functions, these brain and spinal areas 
normally work together as a network, such that dam-
age to one component likely affects the function of all 
The Control of Movement Poses Challenges for the  
Nervous System
Actions Can Be Controlled Voluntarily, Rhythmically,  
or Reflexively
Motor Commands Arise Through a Hierarchy of 
Sensorimotor Processes
Motor Signals Are Subject to Feedforward and  
Feedback Control
Feedforward Control Is Required for Rapid Movements
Feedback Control Uses Sensory Signals to  
Correct Movements
Estimation of the Body’s Current State Relies on Sensory 
and Motor Signals
Prediction Can Compensate for Sensorimotor Delays
Sensory Processing Can Differ for Action and Perception
Motor Plans Translate Tasks Into Purposeful Movement
Stereotypical Patterns Are Employed in  
Many Movements
Motor Planning Can Be Optimal at Reducing Costs
Optimal Feedback Control Corrects for Errors in a Task-
Dependent Manner
Multiple Processes Contribute to Motor Learning
Error-Based Learning Involves Adapting Internal 
Sensorimotor Models
Skill Learning Relies on Multiple Processes for Success
Sensorimotor Representations Constrain Learning
Highlights


===== Page 7 =====
714    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–1  The challenges of sensorimotor control.
others. Many of the principles discussed in this chapter 
cannot be easily attributed to a single brain or spinal 
area. Instead, distributed neural processing is likely to 
underlie the computational mechanisms that subserve 
sensorimotor control.
The Control of Movement Poses Challenges for 
the Nervous System
Motor systems produce neural commands that act on 
the muscles, causing them to contract and generate 
movement. The ease with which we move, from tying 
our shoelaces to returning a tennis serve, masks the 
complexity of the control processes involved. Many 
factors inherent in sensorimotor control are responsi-
ble for this complexity, which becomes clearly evident 
when we try to build machines to perform human-like 
movement (Chapter 39). Although computers can now 
beat the world’s best players at chess and Go, no robot 
can manipulate a chess piece with the dexterity of a 
6-year-old child.
The act of returning a tennis serve illustrates why 
the control of movement is challenging for the brain 
(Figure 30–1). First, motor systems have to contend 
with different forms of uncertainty, such as our incom-
plete knowledge with regard to the state of the world 
and the rewards we might gain. On the sensory side, 
although the player may see the serve, she cannot be 
certain where her opponent will aim or where the ball 
might strike the racket. On the motor side, there is 
Time-varying
properties
eg, tool use,
muscle fatigue
Uncertainty
eg, where the ball
will strike the racket
Complex dynamics
eg, raising arm causes
postural instability
Noise
Sensory
Motor
Time delays
sensory and motor
Perceived
Actual
Multiple degrees of freedom
Around
200 joints
and 600
muscles
to control
uncertainty as to the likely success of different possible 
returns. Skilled performance requires reducing uncer-
tainty by anticipating events we may encounter (the 
trajectory of an opponent’s tennis serve) and by motor 
planning (adopting an appropriate stance to return the 
expected serve).
Second, even if the player can reliably estimate the 
ball’s trajectory, she must determine from sensory sig-
nals which of the 600 muscles she will use in order to 
move her body and racket to intercept the ball. Con-
trolling such a system can be challenging as it is hard to 
explore all possible actions effectively in a system with 
many degrees of freedom (eg, a large number of indi-
vidual muscles), making learning difficult. We will see 
how the motor system reduces the degrees of freedom 
of the musculoskeletal system by controlling groups of 
muscles, termed synergies, to simplify control.
Third, unwanted disturbances, termed noise, cor-
rupt many signals and are present at all stages of sen-
sorimotor control, from sensory processing, through 
planning, to the outputs of the motor system. For 
example, in a tennis serve, such noise will cause the 
ball to land in different places even when the server is 
trying to hit the same location on the court. Both sen-
sory feedback, reflecting the ball’s location, and motor 
outputs are contaminated with noise. The variability 
inherent in such noise limits our ability to perceive 
accurately and act precisely. The amount of noise in 
our motor commands tends to increase with stronger 
commands (ie, more force). This limits our ability to 
move rapidly and accurately at the same time and thus 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    715
leads to a trade-off between speed and accuracy. We 
will see how efficient planning of movement can mini-
mize the deleterious effects of noise on task success.
Fourth, time delays are present at all stages of the 
sensorimotor system, including the delays arising from 
receptor dynamics, conduction delays along nerve fib-
ers and synapses, and delays in the contraction of mus-
cles in response to motor commands. Together, these 
delays, which can be on the order of 100 ms, depend on 
the particular sensory modality (eg, longer for vision 
than proprioception) and complexity of processing (eg, 
longer for face recognition than motion perception). 
Therefore, we effectively live in the past, with the con-
trol system only having access to out-of-date informa-
tion about the world and our own body. Such delays 
can result in instability when trying to make fast move-
ments, as we try to correct for errors we perceive but 
that no longer exist. We will see how the brain makes 
predictions of the future states of the body and envi-
ronment to reduce the negative consequences of such 
delays.
Fifth, the body and environment change both on 
a short and a long timescale. For example, within the 
relatively short period of a game, a player must correct 
for weakening muscles as she fatigues and changes in 
the court surface when it rains. On a longer timescale, 
the properties of our motor system change dramati-
cally during growth as our limbs lengthen and increase 
in weight. As we will see, the ever-changing properties 
of the motor system place a premium on our ability to 
use motor learning to adapt control appropriately.
Finally, the relation between motor command and 
the ensuing action is highly complex. The motion of 
each body segment produces torques, and potentially 
motions, at all other body segments through mechani-
cal interactions. For example, when a player raises 
the racket to hit the ball, she must anticipate desta-
bilizing forces and counteract them to maintain bal-
ance. Indeed, when we raise our arms forward while 
standing, the first muscle to activate is an ankle flexor 
ensuring you remain upright. We will see how the sen-
sorimotor system controls movement of different seg-
ments to maintain fine coordination of actions.
Actions Can Be Controlled Voluntarily, 
Rhythmically, or Reflexively
Although movements are often classified according 
to function—as eye movement, prehension (reach and 
grasp), posture, locomotion, breathing, and speech—
many of these functions are subserved by overlap-
ping groups of muscles. Moreover, the same groups of 
muscles can be controlled voluntarily, rhythmically, or 
reflexively. For example, the muscles that control res-
piration can be used to take a deep breath voluntarily 
before diving under water, to breathe automatically 
and rhythmically in a regular cycle of inspiration and 
expiration, or to act reflexively in response to a noxious 
stimulus in the throat, producing a cough.
Voluntary movements are those that are under 
conscious control. Rhythmic movements can also 
be controlled voluntarily but differ from voluntary 
movements in that their timing and spatial organiza-
tion are to a larger extent controlled autonomously by 
spinal or brain stem circuitry. Reflexes are stereotyped 
responses to specific stimuli that are generated by neu-
ral circuits in the spinal cord or brain stem (although 
some reflexes involve pathways through cortex). These 
responses occur on a shorter timescale than voluntary 
responses.
Although we may consciously intend to perform a 
task or plan a certain sequence of actions, and at times 
are aware of deciding to move at a particular moment, 
movements generally seem to occur automatically. 
Conscious processes are not necessary for moment-to-
moment control of movement. We carry out the most 
complicated movements without a thought to the 
actual joint motions or muscle contractions required. 
The tennis player does not consciously decide which 
muscles to use to return a serve with a backhand or 
which body parts must be moved to intercept the ball. 
In fact, thinking about each body movement before it 
takes place can disrupt the player’s performance.
Motor Commands Arise Through a Hierarchy 
of Sensorimotor Processes
Although the final output to the musculoskeletal 
system is via motor neurons in the spinal cord, the 
motor control of muscles for a specific action occurs 
through a hierarchy of control centers. This arrange-
ment can simplify control: Higher levels can plan more 
global goals, whereas lower levels are concerned with 
how these goals are implemented.
At the lowest level, muscles themselves have 
properties that can contribute to control even with-
out any change in the motor command. Unlike the 
electric motors of a robot, muscles have substantial 
passive properties that depend on both the motor 
command acting on the muscle as well as the muscle’s 
length and rate of change of length (Chapter 31). As 
a simple approximation, a muscle can be seen as act-
ing like a spring (increasing tension as it is stretched 
and reducing tension as it is shortened) and damper 


===== Page 9 =====
716    Part V / Movement
(increasing tension as the rate of stretch increases). 
For small perturbations, these properties tend to act 
to stabilize the length of a muscle and hence stabilize 
the joint on which the muscle acts. For example, if an 
external perturbation extends a joint, the flexor mus-
cles will be stretched, increasing their tension, while 
the extensor muscles will be shortened, reducing their 
tension, and the imbalance in tension will tend to bring 
the joint back toward its original position. A particular 
advantage of such control is that, unlike higher levels 
in the motor hierarchy, such changes in force act with 
minimal delay as they are simply an effect of passive 
physical properties of the muscles.
In addition to the passive properties of muscles, 
sensory inputs can cause motor output directly with-
out the intervention of higher brain centers. Sensori-
motor responses, such as spinal reflexes, control for 
local disturbance or noxious stimuli. Reflexes are ste-
reotyped responses to specific stimuli that are gener-
ated by simple neural circuits in the spinal cord or 
brain stem. For example, a spinal flexor withdrawal 
reflex can remove your hand from a hot stove without 
any descending input from the brain. The advantage 
of such reflexes is that they are fast; the disadvantage 
is they are less flexible than voluntary control systems 
(Chapter 32). Again, there is a hierarchy of reflex cir-
cuits. The fastest is the monosynaptic stretch reflex, 
which drives contraction of a stretched muscle. In 
this reflex circuit, sensory neurons that are activated 
by stretch receptors in the muscle (the muscle spindle) 
directly synapse onto motor neurons that cause the 
same muscle to contract. The time from the stimu-
lus to the response is around 25 ms. This reflex can 
be tested clinically by striking the quadriceps muscle 
tendon just below the patella.
While this monosynaptic stretch reflex is not adapt-
able on short timescales, multisynaptic reflexes, which 
involve higher level structures such as motor cortex, 
can produce responses at around 70 ms. Unlike the 
monosynaptic reflex, multisynaptic reflexes are adapt-
able to changes in behavioral goals because the circuit 
connecting sensory and motor neurons can be modified 
by task-dependent properties. The strength of a reflex 
tends to increase with the tension in a muscle (called 
gain-scaling), and therefore, reflexes can be amplified 
by co-contracting the set of muscles around a joint so as 
to respond to perturbations with a greater force. In fact, 
we use such co-contraction when holding the hand of a 
rebellious child when crossing a road. Such a strategy 
can amplify the reflexes, thereby reducing deviations 
of the arm caused by random external forces.
Finally, voluntary movements are those that 
are under conscious control by the brain. Voluntary 
movements can be generated in the absence of a stim-
ulus or used to compensate for a perturbation. The 
time to generate a voluntary movement in response 
to a physical perturbation depends both on the 
nature of the perturbation (modality and size) as well 
as whether the response can be specified before the 
perturbation occurs. For example, a voluntary correc-
tion to a small physical perturbation can occur with a 
latency of about 110 ms.
Although we have described clear distinctions 
between the different levels of the motor hierarchy, 
from reflexes through to voluntary control, in real-
ity, such distinctions are blurred in a continuum of 
responses spanning different latencies. Increasing 
the response time permits additional neural circuitry 
to be involved in the sensorimotor loop and tends 
to increase the sophistication and adaptability of the 
response, leading to a trade-off between the speed of 
the response and the sophistication of processing as 
one ascends the motor hierarchy.
Motor Signals Are Subject to Feedforward  
and Feedback Control
In this section, we will first illustrate some principles of 
control that are important for dealing with the problem 
of sensory delays, sensory noise, and motor noise. For 
simplicity, we confine our discussion to relatively sim-
ple movements, such as moving the eyes in response 
to head movements or moving the hand from one loca-
tion to another. We consider two broad classes of con-
trol, feedforward and feedback, which differ in their 
reliance on sensory feedback during the movement.
Feedforward Control Is Required for  
Rapid Movements
Some movements are executed without monitoring the 
sensory feedback that arises from the action. In such 
feedforward control situations, the motor command is 
generated without regard to the sensory consequences. 
Such commands are therefore also termed open-loop, 
reflecting the fact that the sensorimotor loop is not 
completed by sensory feedback (Figure 30–2A).
Open-loop control requires some information 
about the body so that the appropriate command can 
be generated. For example, it should include informa-
tion about the dynamics of the motor system. Here, 
“dynamics” refers to the relation between the motor 
command (or the torques or forces) applied and the 
ensuing motion of the body, for example, joint rota-
tions. For perfect open-loop control, one needs to 


