===== Page 1 =====
116    Part I / Overall Perspective
Compared to many areas of science, the basic methods 
of brain imaging have enjoyed remarkable standardiza-
tion. A major reason for this has been the availability 
of widely adopted software packages since the earliest 
days of fMRI in the mid-1990s. These packages were 
created and released by research groups, and—before it 
was fashionable—most were open-source.
At first, they included tools for preprocessing, 
alignment, analysis models, and statistical corrections. 
They have since incorporated new tools developed by 
researchers, including nonlinear alignment, field map 
correction, nonparametric statistics, and parallelization.
As a result, virtually all fMRI researchers use one or 
more of these packages, at least for part of their analysis 
pipeline. The following are popular free software pack-
ages for fMRI analysis:
AFNI: https://afni.nimh.nih.gov
FSL: https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk
SPM: https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm
Beyond these specialized packages, fMRI is increas-
ingly being viewed through the more general lens of 
data science. There are two reasons for this. First, fMRI 
produces a huge amount of data, both within each ses-
sion but also aggregated across the thousands of studies 
that have been conducted. Making sense of fMRI data 
can thus be considered a big-data problem. Second, the 
data are incredibly complex and noisy, and the cogni-
tive signals of interest are weak and hard to find. This 
creates a data mining challenge that has inspired many 
computer scientists.
The most concrete manifestation of this trend is the 
rise of machine learning in fMRI analysis. Other points 
of contact with data science include the challenges asso-
ciated with the real-time analysis of streaming data, the 
application of network analysis and graph theoretic 
approaches, the use of high-performance computing 
clusters and cloud systems, and the growing practice 
of researchers publicly sharing data (eg, https://open-
neuro.org), code (on services such as GitHub), and edu-
cational materials (eg, https://brainiak.org/tutorials). 
Thus, the field of brain imaging will continue to ben-
efit from advances in computer science, engineering, 
applied math, and statistics.
Box 6–1  Brain Imaging as Data Science
steps referred to as preprocessing. Preprocessing seeks 
to remove known sources of noise in the data, caused 
by either the subject or the MRI machine. Standard 
practice includes five basic steps known as motion cor-
rection, slice-time correction, temporal filtering, spatial 
smoothing, and anatomical alignment.
Motion correction seeks to address inevitable noise 
in the data due to a subject’s head movement. Even 
the best subjects move their heads a few millimeters 
over the course of a scan, such that the voxels across 
three-dimensional brain volumes become somewhat 
misaligned. This movement can be corrected for using 
a spatial interpolation algorithm that lines up all of the 
volumes within each run. This algorithm quantifies the 
amount of movement at each point during the scan, 
including the translation in the x, y, and z dimensions, 
and the amount of rotation about these axes (pitch, roll, 
and yaw, respectively). These six time courses can later 
be included in the data analysis as regressors, to further 
remove motion artifacts.
Slice-time correction is applied to deal with differ-
ences in the timing of the acquisition of samples across 
different slices. EPI sequences collect the slices that 
make up each brain volume sequentially, often in an 
interleaved order to avoid contamination of adjacent 
slices. Thus, there is a large difference in the timing of 
the first- and last-acquired slices of the same volume, 
which are closer in time to the preceding and subse-
quent volumes, respectively, than to each other. Cor-
recting for this difference in the timing of the slices can 
be accomplished with temporal interpolation to esti-
mate what the signal would have been if all slices were 
acquired simultaneously.
Temporal filtering and spatial smoothing aim to 
increase the signal-to-noise ratio. Temporal filtering 
removes components of the time course in each voxel 
that are highly likely to be noise rather than meaning-
ful variance, such as very low frequencies (>100-second 
period) that typically result from scanner drift. Spatial 
smoothing applies a kernel (typically 4–8 mm wide) 
to blur individual volumes, averaging out noise across 
adjacent voxels and improving the odds that functions 
will overlap across subjects after anatomical alignment.
This anatomical alignment is accomplished by reg-
istering data across runs and subjects, usually with 
simple transformations (eg, shift, rotate, scale), to a 
standard template such as Montreal Neurological 
Institute or Talairach space. Typically, fMRI data are 


===== Page 2 =====
Figure 6–2  Collecting and analyzing fMRI data.
A. An fMRI experiment typically involves subjects performing a 
behavioral task while BOLD activity is measured from the brain.
1. The example task consists of two conditions (a, b) that alter-
nate in time, each with two events depicted (black rectangles).
2. The time course of BOLD activity in six example voxels (dif-
ferent colors) from a region of interest (ROI) during the task. 
Analysis often focuses on an ROI or other subset of voxels in 
the brain to reduce the number of statistical tests performed. 
When all voxels in the brain are analyzed, statistical corrections 
are applied to reduce the number of false positives. The results 
of such analyses are often overlaid on a structural MRI as a 
color-coded heat map. The map is the result of extensive pre-
processing and analysis and does not directly reflect neuronal 
activity or even blood oxygenation. Rather, voxels are colored 
to indicate that they have passed the threshold of being consid-
ered significant in a statistical test.
B. Three analysis approaches are often used in fMRI experiments 
such as the one depicted in A.
1. Univariate activation analysis attempts to explain the BOLD 
activity of each individual voxel in terms of what happened in the 
task. This is accomplished using a statistical model that contains a 
regressor for each task condition specifying the predicted hemo-
dynamic response (bell curves) for trial events from that condition 
(gray rectangles). The result of fitting the model to BOLD activity 
is a beta value for each regressor in every voxel, quantifying the 
average response of the voxel to trials of that condition. The beta 
values for a voxel can be subtracted to measure whether there 
is a greater response in one condition than another. To determine 
statistical significance, this difference in activation between condi-
tions in each voxel is compared across subjects.
2. Multivariate pattern analysis considers the pattern of BOLD 
activity across voxels. These spatial patterns are extracted for 
each trial from a subset of voxels (six depicted) and at a particu-
lar moment in time, often the peak of the predicted hemody-
namic response (color saturation indicates amplitude of BOLD 
activity in each voxel on that trial). There are two common ways 
of analyzing these patterns. The first (shown) involves calculat-
ing the spatial correlation of patterns from a pair of trials to 
explore how similarly voxels responded to the trials. If a brain 
region represents different information across conditions, this 
pattern similarity should be higher for pairs of trials from the 
same versus different conditions. The second type of multi-
variate pattern analysis (not shown) uses a type of machine 
learning known as pattern classification. Some of the patterns 
and their corresponding condition labels are used to train a clas-
sifier model, assigning weights to voxels based on how useful 
they are at distinguishing between conditions. The model is 
then tested with other patterns on which it was not trained. If 
a brain region represents different information across condi-
tions, the model should be able to correctly guess from which 
condition the patterns were extracted. To determine statistical 
significance, spatial correlations or classification accuracies in a 
region are compared across subjects.
3. Functional connectivity analysis examines how BOLD activity 
is correlated between voxels over time. Typically, a seed voxel 
or ROI is chosen and its time course (pink curve) is correlated 
with the time courses of other voxels (two shown here). This 
can be performed while the subject is resting, resulting in a 
correlation value for every voxel that can be used to identify 
brain networks in a baseline state. Functional connectivity can 
also be calculated in different time windows of a task (dashed 
lines), resulting in a correlation value for each trial that can be 
used to understand the dynamics of these networks. To deter-
mine statistical significance, temporal correlations for each 
voxel are compared across subjects between conditions or 
against zero.
A  Collection of fMRI data
1  Behavioral task
2  fMRI
Region of
interest
Voxels
BOLD activity
Time
Conditions
Trial events
a
b
B  Types of fMRI analysis
1  Univariate activation
2  Multivariate patterns
3  Functional connectivity
Time
Regressors
Predicted hemodynamic response
βa
βb
a
b
Condition label
BOLD activity
pattern
across voxels
Spatial
correlation
Temporal
correlation
Seed voxel
Other
voxels
a
b
a
b
Time windows
a
b
a
b


===== Page 3 =====
118    Part I / Overall Perspective
first aligned to a structural scan from the same subject, 
and then this structural scan is aligned to the standard 
template.
Once these five steps are completed, the data are 
ready for analysis.
fMRI Can Be Used to Localize Cognitive  
Functions to Specific Brain Regions
The first kind of fMRI analysis seeks to localize func-
tions in the brain and to determine what brain regions 
are associated with a behavior. This is based on having 
subjects complete a task during fMRI and then exam-
ining the relationship between different phases of the 
experiment and changes in BOLD activity in different 
parts of the brain. Based on researchers’ knowledge of 
what happened at different times in the experiment, 
the function of the regions can be inferred.
A series of statistical analyses are performed to 
quantify this relationship and to determine its signifi-
cance. Typically, this is accomplished using a statisti-
cal regression method known as a general linear model 
(GLM). The GLM attempts to explain observed data 
(here, the time course of the BOLD activity in each 
voxel) as a linear combination of regressors that reflect 
independent variables (eg, task conditions) and covari-
ates (eg, movement parameters).
The regressors that model task conditions serve 
as a hypothesis about how a voxel should respond if 
involved in the cognitive function manipulated by that 
task. The regressor for each condition is generated by 
marking the onset and duration of each trial of that con-
dition in the experimental time line, corresponding to 
the expected neuronal activity, and then accounting for 
the delayed hemodynamic response. All regressors are 
fit simultaneously to the fMRI activity in each voxel, 
and the result is a parameter estimate (or “beta”) for 
each condition and voxel, reflecting how much of the 
temporal variance of the voxel is uniquely explained 
by that condition’s trials on average.
To localize a function, betas from two or more 
conditions are compared in a contrast. The most basic 
form of contrast is to subtract one beta (eg, control 
condition) from another (eg, experimental condition). 
Contrasts are typically averaged over runs within each 
subject and then entered into a t-test to assess reliabil-
ity across subjects. Because statistics are calculated for 
every voxel, there is a high risk of false positives, and 
a correction for multiple comparisons is required (eg, 
by giving voxels more credence if they cluster together 
with other significant voxels). Alternatively, a more 
constrained analysis can be performed, focusing on a 
limited number of regions of interest (ROIs) that are 
defined a priori. Contrast values can then be averaged 
over the voxels in an ROI to produce regional esti-
mates, rather than examining all voxels in the brain, 
thereby reducing the number of comparisons.
This general family of approaches is often 
described 
as 
measuring 
univariate 
activation—
”univariate” because each voxel or region is treated 
independently and “activation” because the result is 
a measure of the relative activity evoked by one con-
dition versus another. This kind of analysis is typi-
cally used to localize a cognitive function to a set of 
voxels or regions in the brain.
However, univariate activation can be used for 
more than localization. For example, a GLM can 
make quantitative predictions about BOLD activity 
by assigning a continuous weight, rather than a cat-
egorical one, to each trial in a regressor based on an 
experimental parameter (eg, working memory load), 
behavioral measurement (eg, response time), or com-
putational model (eg, prediction error in reinforcement 
learning). The resulting beta reflects how much a voxel 
correlates with the variable of interest.
Another use of univariate activation is for measur-
ing changes in BOLD activity as a function of repeating 
a stimulus. Such studies take advantage of adaptation 
(or repetition suppression)—the tendency of stimulus-
selective neurons to respond less to repeated versus 
new stimuli. This fact allows the tuning of a brain 
region to be inferred by conducting an experiment 
in which related and unrelated stimuli are presented 
sequentially. In some trials, one stimulus is followed 
by a near-repetition of the same stimulus, but with a 
feature changed (eg, its location or size). A univariate 
analysis tests whether BOLD activity in voxels from the 
region is lower on these trials compared to other trials 
in which either (1) the first stimulus is followed by an 
unrelated second stimulus or (2) the changed stimulus 
is preceded by an unrelated stimulus. If such a BOLD 
reduction is observed, the region can be interpreted as 
not tuned for the changed feature (eg, the region could 
be considered location or size invariant).
fMRI Can Be Used to Decode What Information  
Is Represented in the Brain
The second category of fMRI analysis seeks to char-
acterize what kinds of information are represented 
in different regions of the brain to guide behavior. 
Rather than analyze voxels independently or average 
over voxels within an ROI, these analyses examine the 
information carried by spatial patterns of BOLD activ-
ity over multiple voxels. This is typically referred to 
as multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA). There are two 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 6 / Imaging and Behavior    119
types of MVPA, based on the similarity or classifica-
tion of activity patterns.
Similarity-based MVPA tries to understand what 
information is contained or “represented” in a brain 
region. This is accomplished by examining how sim-
ilarly the region processes different conditions or 
stimuli in an experiment. This similarity is calculated 
from the pattern of activation across voxels in an ROI, 
defined as either the pattern of beta values from a GLM 
or the pattern of raw BOLD activity from preprocessed 
data. Once these patterns have been defined for mul-
tiple conditions or stimuli, the correlation or distance 
of each pair of patterns is calculated. This produces a 
matrix of the pairwise similarities between conditions 
or stimuli within the ROI. With this matrix, it is possible 
to infer to what information the ROI is most sensitive. 
For example, if subjects are shown photos of different 
objects (eg, a banana, canoe, taxi), a matrix of distances 
between the activity patterns evoked by these objects 
can be computed for different brain regions. An ROI 
in which there is less distance between banana and 
canoe than between either of them and taxi could be 
interpreted to mean that the region represents shape 
(ie, concavity); another region in which the lowest dis-
tance is between banana and taxi might represent color 
(ie, yellow); or one with the lowest distance between 
canoe and taxi might be interpreted as representing 
function (ie, transportation).
Neural similarity from fMRI can also be compared 
with similarity calculated in other ways for the same 
conditions or stimuli, including  from human judg-
ments, computational models, or neural measures in 
other species. For example, if human subjects rate a 
large set of stimuli in terms of how similar they look 
to each other, a brain region with a matching similar-
ity structure could be considered a candidate source of 
this behavior. This approach of calculating second-order 
correlations between neural and behavioral similarity 
matrices, or between neural similarity matrices from 
two sources, is called representational similarity analysis 
(RSA).
Classifier-based MVPA uses techniques from 
machine learning (discussed in Chapter 5) to decode 
what information is present in a brain region. The 
first step is to train a classifier model on a subset of 
the fMRI data to discriminate between conditions 
or stimulus classes from patterns of BOLD activity 
across voxels in an ROI. These patterns are usually 
obtained from individual trials, and each is labeled 
according to the condition or stimulus on the corre-
sponding trial. This training set thus contains sev-
eral brain pattern examples of each class. Classifier 
training can use many different algorithms, the two 
most common being support vector machine and 
regularized logistic regression. The result is typi-
cally a weight for each voxel reflecting how activity 
in that voxel contributes to classification collectively 
with the other voxels. The second step after training 
is to test the classifier by examining how well it can 
decode patterns from a held-out and independent 
subset of fMRI data (eg, from a different run or sub-
ject). The pattern of BOLD activity on each test trial 
is multiplied by the learned classifier weights and 
summed to produce a guess about how the pattern 
should be labeled. Classification accuracy is quanti-
fied as the proportion of these guesses that match the 
correct labels. Importantly, this approach can be used 
to understand how different brain regions give rise 
to behavior, such as by attempting to classify which 
action was performed, which decision was made, or 
which memory was retrieved.
fMRI Can Be Used to Measure Correlated  
Activity Across Brain Networks
The third category of fMRI analysis seeks to under-
stand the organization of the brain as a network. Know-
ing what brain regions do individually does not fully 
explain how the brain as a whole generates behavior. 
It is additionally critical to know how brain regions 
relate to each other—that is, where do the inputs to a 
region come from and where do the outputs go? This 
requires an understanding of which regions communi-
cate with each other and when and how they transmit 
information. This is difficult to determine definitively 
with fMRI but can be estimated by measuring the cor-
relation of BOLD activity between voxels or regions 
over time. If two parts of the brain have correlated 
activity, they may be sharing the same information or 
participating in the same process. Such correlations are 
interpreted as measures of functional connectivity.
One way to study functional connectivity with 
fMRI is to measure BOLD correlations in a resting 
state. Subjects are scanned while they lie still without 
performing a task, and then the time course of BOLD 
activity from one “seed” ROI is extracted and corre-
lated with the time courses from other ROIs or from 
all voxels in the brain. Alternatively, clustering or com-
ponent analyses can be used without a seed to identify 
collections of voxels with similar temporal profiles. 
Resting functional connectivity defined in these ways 
has helped reveal that the brain contains several large-
scale networks of regions. The most widely studied 
of these networks is referred to as the default mode 
network, which includes the posterior medial cortex, 
lateral parietal cortex, and medial prefrontal cortex. 


===== Page 5 =====
120    Part I / Overall Perspective
By definition, resting connectivity cannot be linked to 
concurrent behavior. Nor is it static, as telling subjects 
not to do anything does not restrict what they think 
about. Nevertheless, resting connectivity can be linked 
to behavior indirectly by examining how it goes awry 
in disease or disorders and how it relates to cognitive 
differences between people.
Functional connectivity can be linked more 
directly to behavior if it is measured during tasks 
rather than at rest. One difficulty in interpreting 
such correlations between regions is that two regions 
might be correlated during a task not because they 
are communicating with each other, but because of 
a third variable. For example, the regions might be 
responding independently but coincidentally to the 
same stimulus. Thus, task-based functional connec-
tivity is typically calculated after removing, or oth-
erwise accounting for, BOLD responses evoked by 
stimuli. This approach allows functional connectiv-
ity to be manipulated experimentally and compared 
across task conditions. These comparisons provide 
insight into how the involvement and interaction of 
brain regions in a network change dynamically to 
support different behaviors. This has proven useful 
for understanding cognitive functions such as atten-
tion, motivation, and memory, which depend on 
some brain regions modulating others.
Functional connectivity can also be viewed as a 
pattern (of correlations rather than activity) and sub-
mitted to MVPA. Correlation patterns are larger in 
scale than activity patterns: If there are n voxels in 
an activity pattern, there are on the order of n2 voxel 
pairs in a correlation pattern. Thus, it can be helpful to 
summarize the properties of correlation patterns using 
graph theory, where individual voxels or regions are 
treated as the nodes in the graph and the functional 
connectivity between these nodes determines the edge 
strengths.
Functional MRI Studies Have Led to 
Fundamental Insights
Functional MRI has changed our understanding of the 
basic neurobiological building blocks of human behav-
ior. Combining experimental manipulations and com-
putational models from cognitive psychology with 
precise neurobiological measurements has expanded 
existing theories of the mind and brain and has stimu-
lated new ideas. Discoveries from fMRI have impacted 
not just our understanding of behaviors presumed to 
be uniquely human, but also behaviors that have long 
been investigated in animals.
In this section, we review three examples of this 
progress. The study of face perception reveals how 
human fMRI studies have inspired research in ani-
mals. The study of memory illustrates how fMRI has 
challenged theories from cognitive psychology and 
systems neuroscience. The study of decision-making 
shows how animal studies and computational models 
have advanced fMRI research.
fMRI Studies in Humans Have Inspired 
Neurophysiological Studies in Animals
Our understanding of how the brain perceives faces 
has grown tremendously over the past two decades 
(Chapter 24). The advances described below provide 
an example of how findings from fMRI in humans 
inspired follow-up studies with neuronal recordings 
and causal interventions in nonhuman primates. This 
synergy across species and techniques led to a more 
complete understanding of the fundamental process 
by which faces are recognized.
Some classes of stimuli are more important for 
survival than others. Does the brain have dedicated 
machinery for the processing of such stimuli? Faces are 
an obvious case in humans. The development of fMRI 
combined with careful and systematic experimental 
designs led to important insights into how and where 
faces are processed in the human brain. One region in 
the fusiform gyrus, often referred to as the fusiform 
face area (FFA), was found to show robust and selec-
tive BOLD activity when humans view faces.
Early fMRI studies that led to this discovery relied 
on simple designs in which subjects were presented 
with a series of different types of visual stimuli. To 
measure the face selectivity of brain areas, the BOLD 
response to faces was compared with the BOLD 
responses for the other categories (eg, places, objects). 
An area of the lateral fusiform gyrus, most reliably in 
the right hemisphere, was strongly activated by faces. 
These findings fit with earlier findings of individual 
neurons in nonhuman primates that respond to faces, 
but inspired a new wave of animal studies to examine 
a larger-scale network of brain regions. These newer 
animal studies, borrowing experimental designs from 
the human studies, first used fMRI to find orthologs of 
the FFA. The resulting face patches were then probed 
invasively with neuronal recording and stimulation. 
This revealed insights into the distributed neural cir-
cuitry for face processing in primates.
In addition to responding selectively to face stimuli, 
does the FFA contribute to the behavior of face recogni-
tion? This question has been addressed using stimulus 
variations that are known to affect face recognition 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 6 / Imaging and Behavior    121
(eg, presenting faces that are inverted or presenting parts 
of faces). Initial fMRI studies using simple comparisons 
of stimulus categories (inverted versus upright faces) 
produced weak and mixed results. Follow-up studies 
used an adaptation design to determine how BOLD activ-
ity changes when a face is repeated intact or altered. The 
findings suggested that the FFA represents intact faces 
differently than when the same visual features are recon-
figured in a way that disrupts behavioral recognition.
Another way to examine the behavioral sig-
nificance of a region is to study patients who have 
behavioral deficits—in this case, an impairment of 
face recognition known as prosopagnosia. Surpris-
ingly, some fMRI studies found an intact FFA in these 
patients, casting doubt on its necessity for face percep-
tion. However, here too follow-up studies using an 
adaptation design proved informative: The otherwise 
intact FFA of prosopagnosics did not adapt when the 
same face was repeated. This suggests that the FFA 
responds differently in people with prosopagnosia, 
consistent with its importance to face recognition.
The finding that visual categories, or mental pro-
cesses more generally, can be mapped to one or a 
small number of regions like the FFA was important 
for thinking about the relationship between mind 
and brain. Whether specific functions are localized 
or broadly distributed has been a central question 
regarding brain organization throughout the history 
of neuroscience (Chapter 1). The discovery of the FFA 
and the face patch system provided new evidence of 
localization, and encouraged researchers to pursue 
the hypothesis that other complex cognitive functions 
might be localized in specific brain areas or small sets 
of nodes, but also to question whether localization is 
the right way to think about brain organization. For 
example, further studies showed that faces produce 
widely distributed responses over visual cortex and 
that the FFA can be co-opted for recognition of other 
kinds of objects with which we have expertise. These 
debates reflect the transformative nature of this origi-
nal work, both for studies of the human brain and for 
related questions in animal models.
fMRI Studies Have Challenged Theories From 
Cognitive Psychology and Systems Neuroscience
Many theoretical models from cognitive psychology 
were originally agnostic about the brain. However, 
there are now several examples of fMRI findings that 
changed our understanding of the organization and 
mechanisms of cognition.
One prominent example is the study of memory. 
The overall goal of memory research, beginning in the 
19th century, has been to understand how a memory 
is created, retrieved, and used, and whether these pro-
cesses differ across types of memory. A key discovery 
came from research on patient H.M. and the realiza-
tion that damage to the hippocampus causes a loss of 
the ability to form new autobiographical memories 
but does not impact the ability to learn certain skills 
(Chapter 52). These findings led to the idea that mem-
ory can be divided into two broad classes, conscious 
versus unconscious (also known as declarative versus 
procedural or explicit versus implicit). In the tradition 
of localization, these and other types of memory were 
mapped onto distinct brain regions, based on where in 
the brain a patient had damage and which behavioral 
symptoms they exhibited.
Later fMRI studies of the healthy human brain 
helped reveal that this dichotomy was oversimplified. 
First, several studies using what came to be known as 
the subsequent memory task showed that regions beyond 
the hippocampus are implicated in the successful for-
mation of declarative memory. In such studies, sub-
jects are presented with a series of stimuli (pictures 
or words) while being scanned. Later, usually outside 
of the MRI machine, their memory for these stimuli 
is tested. The BOLD responses from when a stimulus 
was initially encoded are then sorted based on whether 
it was subsequently remembered or forgotten. These 
conditions are contrasted to reveal which brain regions 
show more (or less) activity during successful memory 
formation. In addition to finding such differences in 
the hippocampus and surrounding medial temporal 
lobe, BOLD activity in prefrontal and parietal cortices 
is also predictive of later memory. By measuring the 
whole brain of healthy individuals, fMRI revealed that 
declarative memory is served by more than one brain 
system—processes linked to prefrontal cortex (eg, 
semantic elaboration) and parietal cortex (eg, selective 
attention) are also involved in encoding.
The traditional taxonomy of memory organiza-
tion was challenged in another way by fMRI studies. 
fMRI revealed that a wide range of tasks that were 
previously assumed to not involve the hippocampus 
(or declarative memory) in fact do consistently engage 
this region. These studies often use learning tasks 
that would classically be considered unconscious, in 
which subjects have the opportunity to learn but are 
never asked to report their memories and, in some 
instances, are unable to do so if prompted. For exam-
ple, in the probabilistic classification task, subjects learn 
by trial and error to sort visual cues into categories, 
even when the relationship between cues and cat-
egories is sometimes unreliable. BOLD activity dur-
ing such learning trials is estimated and compared to 


===== Page 7 =====
122    Part I / Overall Perspective
a baseline task that does not involve trial-and-error 
learning (eg, studying cues with their categories pro-
vided). Such comparisons generally reveal activation 
in the striatum, but also reliably in the hippocampus 
(see Chapter 52).
In summary, fMRI studies of tasks thought to rely 
on declarative memory often recruit regions outside of 
the hippocampus, and tasks thought to rely on proce-
dural memory can recruit the hippocampus. In both 
cases, these discoveries were serendipitous and made 
possible only because data were obtained from the 
whole brain with fMRI. Although these began as unex-
pected results, they led to systematic follow-up studies 
that have updated our understanding of the organi-
zation of memory. Chiefly, they challenged the origi-
nal emphasis on conscious awareness as the defining 
characteristic of hippocampal processing. This in turn 
helped relate the findings from human studies to those 
from animal studies, where the notion of conscious 
memory is less central and where tasks that engage the 
hippocampus often involve spatial navigation. Thus, 
fMRI findings in humans have been transformative 
for our understanding of theoretical models of mem-
ory, in terms of both neural structures and cognitive 
behaviors.
fMRI Studies Have Tested Predictions From Animal 
Studies and Computational Models
The integration of computational models with fMRI 
has been an important development in cognitive neu-
roscience. One example of this comes from studies of 
how the brain learns to predict and obtain rewards, 
combined with models of reinforcement learning that 
formalize this process. These models co-evolved with 
studies of reward-based decision-making in animals, 
which also inspired later human studies.
Central to these studies and theories, midbrain 
dopaminergic neurons increase their firing in response 
to unexpected rewards, such as juice (Chapter 43). 
Once a predictive cue has been reliably paired with a 
reward, the neurons shift their response in time to this 
predictive cue. If a predicted reward fails to occur, fir-
ing decreases. This pattern of responses suggests that 
midbrain dopaminergic neurons signal the difference 
between expected and actual rewards. This difference is 
commonly known as reward prediction error and has been 
modeled using equations based on reinforcement learn-
ing theory. When this model is applied to human tasks 
involving rewards, hypothesized reward prediction 
errors can be estimated on a trial-by-trial basis. These 
estimates can then be used to predict BOLD activity 
and identify voxels and regions that may be involved in 
reinforcement learning in the human brain.
In a typical study of this type, subjects perform a 
learning task during fMRI, making a series of choices 
about visual cues to predict possible rewards. They 
learn the outcome immediately after each choice. 
For example, a subject might view two shapes (eg, 
circle, triangle), choose one by pressing a button, 
and then learn whether the choice led to a monetary 
reward. The key feature of such tasks is that the associ-
ation between shapes and rewards is probabilistic and 
changes over the course of the experiment. Because of 
this noisy relationship, subjects must learn to track the 
likelihood of reward for each shape. Reward predic-
tion error can be calculated on each trial based on the 
history of the subject’s choices and rewards and then 
included in the analysis of their fMRI data. Many stud-
ies using this approach have found that trial-by-trial 
reward prediction error correlates with BOLD activity 
in the ventral striatum, an area that receives input from 
midbrain dopaminergic neurons.
Other computational models, such as deep neural 
networks, which integrate cognitive psychology, com-
puter science, and neuroscience, have also served an 
important theoretical purpose by generating novel 
hypotheses about brain activity. Because these mod-
els are often inspired by the architecture and func-
tions of the brain, they help bridge levels of analysis, 
from physiological recordings in animals to fMRI 
in humans. They also serve a useful purpose in data 
analysis by simulating variables of psychological and 
neurobiological interest that can be sought in the brain, 
an approach often referred to as model-based analysis.
Functional MRI Studies Require  
Careful Interpretation
The examples provided earlier illustrate how fMRI 
can improve our understanding of the links between 
brain and behavior. At the interface with psychology, 
fMRI can complement purely behavioral measure-
ments. Many complex human behaviors (eg, memory 
recall, decision-making) depend on multiple process-
ing stages and components. Measuring these processes 
with fMRI can provide richer and more mechanistic 
explanations of behavior than those based on simple 
behavioral measurements such as accuracy or response 
time alone. At the interface with systems neurosci-
ence, fMRI complements direct neuronal recordings. 
Most brain areas (eg, hippocampus) support multiple 
behaviors and do so in concert with other regions. The 
ability to image the whole brain with fMRI makes it 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 6 / Imaging and Behavior    123
possible to arrive at a more complete understanding of 
neural mechanisms at the network level.
What does it mean then to find BOLD activity 
in a region during a task? The multiplicity of map-
pings between brain and behavior poses serious chal-
lenges to interpretation of fMRI results (Figure 6–3).  
One fundamental consideration is the type of inference. 
Most fMRI studies use forward inference, in which an 
experiment compares BOLD activity between task con-
ditions that manipulate the engagement of a particular 
mental process (eg, comparing the effects of face versus 
nonface stimuli to study face recognition). Brain regions 
that differ between these conditions can be inferred to 
take part in the manipulated process. Forward infer-
ence relies on a task manipulation and therefore allows 
a researcher to infer that differences in brain activity are 
related to the mental process of interest.
With reverse inference, differences in neural activity 
are the basis for inferring which specific mental process 
is active, even when the conditions that gave rise to the 
differences were not designed to manipulate that pro-
cess. For example, in the previous face versus nonface 
contrast, a researcher might interpret differential activ-
ity in the striatum as evidence that faces are rewarding. 
This kind of reverse inference is often unjustified, as 
reward was neither measured nor manipulated—the 
interpretation is based on other studies that manipu-
lated reward and found striatal activity. The problem 
arises because each brain region generally supports 
more than one function, meaning that it is unclear from 
the observation of activity alone which function(s) 
were engaged. Indeed, the striatum is also strongly 
implicated in movement, so perhaps faces are engag-
ing motor rather than reward processes? The logically 
sound conclusion in this example, reflecting forward 
inference, is that the striatum is involved in some (as 
yet unresolved) aspect of face recognition.
One solution therefore is not to use reverse infer-
ence in fMRI studies. However, there are some situ-
ations in which reverse inference can be desirable or 
even necessary. For example, reverse inference can 
allow researchers to perform exploratory analyses and 
generate new hypotheses, even from data that were 
collected for other purposes. This may be especially 
important for getting the most out of fMRI data that 
are hard to collect, such as from children, the elderly, 
and patients (Box 6–2). Motivated by this need, sta-
tistical tools have been developed to support reverse 
inference. For example, the web-based tool Neuro-
synth uses a large database of published studies to 
assign a probability that a specific mental process (eg, 
reward) is involved given that BOLD activity has been 
observed in a particular region (eg, striatum).
It is also important to make a distinction between 
a correlation of brain activity with behavior versus a 
cause-and-effect relationship between the brain activ-
ity and the behavior. If a brain region is selectively 
and consistently involved in a specific mental process, 
this correlation does not license the conclusion that 
it plays a necessary or sufficient role in the process. 
With respect to sufficiency, the brain region might (and 
likely does) work with one or more other brain regions 
to accomplish the process. With respect to necessity, 
activity in the region might be a secondary by-product 
of processing elsewhere.
One approach to bolstering the interpretation of an 
fMRI study is to evaluate how the findings converge 
with those from more invasive methods, such as elec-
trical stimulation in epilepsy patients. Because every 
tool has limitations, including other correlational 
measures such as neuronal recordings, this principle 
of converging evidence is central to advancing under-
standing of how the brain supports behavior. In addi-
tion to converging evidence across studies and tools, 
there are also efforts to manipulate brain function 
simultaneously with fMRI, using transcranial mag-
netic stimulation or real-time neurofeedback.
Future Progress Depends on Technological  
and Conceptual Advances
Functional MRI is the best technology we have so far 
for probing the healthy human brain. It allows meas-
urement of the whole brain at reasonably high reso-
lution as well as many aspects of the mind in large 
subject samples without harm. However, in other 
ways, it is far from what we ultimately need if we are 
to obtain a deeper and more precise understanding of 
how the brain works. When compared to tools avail-
able in animals, fMRI provides relatively noisy, slow, 
and indirect measurements of neuronal activity and 
circuit dynamics.
Efforts are underway to address these limitations, 
both technically and biologically. On the technical 
front, multiband imaging sequences can enhance the 
temporal and spatial resolution of fMRI data by ena-
bling the acquisition of multiple slices through the 
brain in parallel. However, faster measurements are 
inherently limited by the slow speed of the hemody-
namic response and smaller voxels still average across 
hundreds of thousands of neurons.
On the biological front, we have a rudimentary 
understanding of how BOLD activity emerges from 
physiological mechanisms in the brain, such as single 
neuron activity, population activity, the function of 


===== Page 9 =====
124    Part I / Overall Perspective
A  Regions involved in episodic memory
B  Multiple functions of the hippocampus
Hippocampus
Overlap
0%
100%
Hippocampus
Precuneus
Medial
prefrontal
cortex
Inferior
frontal
gyrus
Angular
gyrus
Attention
Perception
Place
Events
Associations
Reward
Learning
Memory
Figure 6–3  Challenges of mapping mind and brain. Any 
interpretation of data from fMRI must consider the complex-
ity of the relationship between cognitive functions and brain 
regions. This complexity is illustrated here with a meta-analysis 
from a database containing more than 14,000 published fMRI 
studies. (Data retrieved in 2019 from http://neurosynth.org, 
displayed on brain from Edlow et al. 2019; figure updated and 
adapted from Shohamy and Turk-Browne 2013 by Tristan Yates.)
A. This map shows that multiple brain regions are engaged by 
episodic memory—that is, encoding and retrieval of specific 
events from one’s past. Colored voxels indicate a high probabil-
ity of the term “episodic” in studies that reported activation in 
these voxels (reverse inference). This example illustrates how a 
single cognitive function can be associated with multiple brain 
regions (one-to-many mapping).
B. These maps show that multiple cognitive functions engage 
the hippocampus (circled in white in each hemisphere). Colored 
voxels in each inset brain indicate a high probability that these 
voxels were activated in studies that examined the corre-
sponding term (forward inference). The overlap map shows 
the percentage of these terms that activated each voxel. This 
example illustrates how a single brain region can be associated 
with multiple cognitive functions and behaviors (many-to-one 
mapping).


