===== Page 1 =====
140    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–6  Atlas of fibrillary structures.
A. Microtubules, the largest-diameter fibers (25 nm), are helical 
cylinders composed of 13 protofilaments, each 5 nm in width. 
Each protofilament is made up of a column of alternating α- and 
β-tubulin subunits; each subunit has a molecular weight of 
approximately 50,000 Da. Adjacent subunits bind to each other 
along the longitudinal protofilaments and laterally between 
subunits of adjacent protofilaments.
    A tubulin molecule is a heterodimer consisting of one α- and 
one β-tubulin subunit. 1. View of a microtubule. The arrows indi-
cate the direction of the right-handed helix. 2. A side view of a 
microtubule shows the alternating α- and β-subunits.
B. Neurofilaments are built with fibers that twist around each 
other to produce coils of increasing thickness. The thinnest 
units are monomers that form coiled-coil heterodimers. These 
dimers form a tetrameric complex that becomes the proto-
filament. Two protofilaments become a protofibril, and three 
protofibrils are helically twisted to form the 10-nm diameter 
neurofilament. (Adapted, with permission, from Bershadsky 
and Vasiliev 1988.)
C. Microfilaments, the smallest-diameter fibers (approximately 
7 nm), are composed of two strands of polymerized globular 
actin (G-actin) monomers arranged in a helix. At least six differ-
ent (but closely related) actins are found in mammals; each  
variant is encoded by a separate gene. Microfilaments are  
polar structures because the globular monomers are 
asymmetric.
B  Neuroﬁlament
C  Microﬁlament
Monomers
Coiled-coil
dimers
Tetrameric
complex
(protoﬁlament)
Protoﬁlament
Protoﬁbril
Filament
50 nm
2 nm
A  Microtubule
1
2
10 nm
Protoﬁlament
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
1
2
3
5.5 nm
35.5 nm
time, approximately half of the total actin in a cell can 
exist as unpolymerized monomers. The state of actin is 
controlled by binding proteins, which facilitate assem-
bly and limit polymer length by capping the rapidly 
growing end of the filament or by severing it. Other 
binding proteins crosslink or bundle actin filaments. 
The dynamic state of microtubules and microfilaments 
permits a mature neuron to retract old axons and den-
drites and extend new ones. This structural plasticity 
is thought to be a major factor in changes of synaptic 
connections and efficacy and, therefore, cellular mech-
anisms of long-term memory and learning.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    141
Tau is a microtubule-binding protein normally pre-
sent in nerve cells. In Alzheimer disease, abnormal 
aggregates of tau are visible in the light microscope in 
neurons and glia as well as in the extracellular space. 
Highly phosphorylated tau molecules arranged in 
long, thin polymers wind around one another to form 
paired helical filaments (Figure 7–7A and Chapter 64). 
Bundles of the polymers, known as neurofibrillary tangles, 
accumulate in neuronal cell bodies, dendrites, and 
axons (Figure 7–7A).
In normal neurons, tau is either bound to microtu-
bules or free in the cytosol. In the tangles, it is not bound 
to microtubules but is highly insoluble. The tangles 
form at least in part because tau is not proteolytically 
degraded. The accumulations disturb the polymeri-
zation of tubulin and therefore interfere with axonal 
transport. Consequently, the shape of the neuron is not 
maintained.
Tau accumulations are also found in neurons of 
patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, a move-
ment disorder, and in patients with frontotemporal 
dementias, a group of neurodegenerative disorders 
that affect the frontal and temporal lobes (Chapter 63). 
The familial forms of frontotemporal dementias are 
caused by mutations in the tau gene. Abnormal aggre-
gates are also found in glial cells, both astrocytes and 
oligodendrocytes, in progressive supranuclear palsy, 
cortico-basoganglionic degeneration, and frontotempo-
ral dementias.
The peptide b-amyloid also accumulates in the extra-
cellular space in Alzheimer disease (Figure 7–7B and 
Chapter 64). It is a small proteolytic product of a much 
larger integral membrane protein, amyloid precursor 
protein, which is normally processed by several proteo-
lytic enzymes associated with intracellular membranes. 
The proteolytic pathway that generates β-amyloid 
requires the enzyme β-secretase.
For unknown reasons, in Alzheimer disease, abnor-
mal amounts of the amyloid precursor are processed 
by β-secretase. Some patients with early-onset familial 
Alzheimer disease either have mutations in the amyloid 
precursor gene or in the genes coding for the membrane 
proteins presenilin 1 and 2, which are closely associated 
with secretase activity.
In Parkinson disease, abnormal aggregates of 
a-synuclein accumulate in cell bodies of neurons. Like tau, 
a-synuclein is a normal soluble constituent of the cell. 
But in Parkinson disease, it becomes insoluble, forming 
spherical inclusions called Lewy bodies (Figure 7–7C and 
Chapter 63).
These abnormal inclusions also contain ubiquitin. 
Because ubiquitin is required for proteasomal degra-
dation of proteins, its presence suggests that affected 
neurons have attempted to target α-synuclein or other 
molecular constituents for proteolysis. Apparently, deg-
radation does not occur, possibly because of misfolding 
or the abnormal aggregation of the proteins or because 
of faulty proteolytic processing in the cell.
Do these abnormal protein accumulations affect the 
physiology of the neurons and glia? On the one hand, the 
accumulations may form in response to altered posttrans-
lational processing of the proteins and serve to isolate the 
abnormal proteins, permitting normal cell activities. On 
the other hand, the accumulations may disrupt cellular 
activities such as membrane trafficking, axonal and den-
dritic transport, and the maintenance of synaptic connec-
tions between specific classes of neurons. In addition, the 
altered proteins themselves, aside from the aggregations, 
may have deleterious effects. With β-amyloid, there is evi-
dence that the peptide itself is toxic.
Box 7–1  Abnormal Accumulations of Proteins Are Hallmarks of Many Neurological Disorders
In addition to serving as the cytoskeleton, micro-
tubules and actin filaments act as tracks along which 
organelles and proteins are rapidly driven by molecu-
lar motors. The motors used by the actin filaments, the 
myosins, also mediate other types of cell motility, includ-
ing extension of the cell’s processes and translocation 
of membranous organelles from the bulk cytoplasm to 
the region adjacent to the plasma membrane. (Actomyo-
sin is responsible for muscle contraction.) Because the 
microtubules and actin filaments are polar, each motor 
drives its organelle cargo in only one direction.
As already mentioned, microtubules are arranged 
in parallel in the axon with plus ends pointing away 
from the cell body and minus ends facing the cell 
body. This regular orientation allows some organelles 
to move toward and others to move away from nerve 
endings, the direction being determined by the specific 
type of molecular motor, thus maintaining the distinc-
tive distribution of axonal organelles (Figure 7–8). In 
dendrites, however, microtubules with opposite polar-
ities are mixed together, explaining why the organelles 
of the cell body and dendrites are similar.
(continued)


===== Page 3 =====
142    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
A  Neuroﬁbrillary tangle
B  Amyloid plaque
C  Lewy body
Amyloid
deposits
Amyloid
core
Paired
helical
ﬁlaments
Lewy 
body
Neuron
Neuronal
processes
with paired
helical
ﬁlaments 
Figure 7–7  Abnormal aggregates of proteins  
inside neurons in Alzheimer and Parkinson  
diseases.
A. Left: Intracellular neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer 
disease, labeled here with a dark silver stain. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from J.P. Vonsattel.) Right: An electron 
micrograph of a tangle shows bundles of abnormal fila-
ments, filling a dendrite. The filaments are composed of 
altered tau protein. (Used, with permission, from  
Dr. L. Carrasco, formerly of Runwell Hospital, Wickford, UK.)
B. In Alzheimer disease, amyloid plaque is created by 
extracellular deposits of polymerized β-amyloid peptides. 
The plaque shown here has a dense core of amyloid as 
well as a surrounding halo of deposits. Some neuronal 
processes in the plaque exhibit tangle pathology. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from J.P. Vonsattel.)
C. A Lewy body in the substantia nigra of a patient with 
Parkinson disease contains accumulations of abnormal 
filaments made up of α-synuclein, among other pro-
teins. (Reproduced, with permission, from J.P. Vonsattel.)
Protein Particles and Organelles Are Actively 
Transported Along the Axon and Dendrites
In neurons, most proteins are made in the cell body 
from mRNAs. Important examples are neurotransmit-
ter biosynthetic enzymes, synaptic vesicle membrane 
components, and neurosecretory peptides. Because 
axons and terminals often lie at great distances from 
the cell body, sustaining the function of these remote 
regions presents a challenge. Passive diffusion would 
be far too slow to deliver vesicles, particles, or even 
single macromolecules over this great distance.
The axon terminal, the site of secretion of neuro-
transmitters, is particularly distant from the cell body. 
In a motor neuron that innervates a muscle of the leg 
in humans, the distance of the nerve terminal from the 
cell body can exceed 10,000 times the cell body diam-
eter. Thus, membrane and secretory products formed 
in the cell body must be actively transported to the end 
of the axon (Figure 7–9).
In 1948, Paul Weiss first demonstrated axonal trans-
port when he tied off a sciatic nerve and observed that 
axoplasm in the nerve accumulated with time on the 
proximal side of the ligature. He concluded that axoplasm 
Box 7–1  Abnormal Accumulations of Proteins Are Hallmarks of Many Neurological Disorders 
(continued)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    143
moves at a slow, constant rate from the cell body toward 
terminals in a process he called axoplasmic flow. Today we 
know that the flow Weiss observed consists of two dis-
crete mechanisms, one fast and the other slow.
Membranous organelles move toward axon ter-
minals (anterograde direction) and back toward the 
cell body (retrograde direction) by fast axonal transport, 
a form of transport that is up to 400 mm per day in 
warm-blooded animals. In contrast, cytosolic and 
cytoskeletal proteins move only in the anterograde 
direction by a much slower form of transport, slow 
axonal transport. These transport mechanisms in neu-
rons are adaptations of processes that facilitate intra-
cellular movement of organelles in all secretory cells. 
Because all these mechanisms operate along axons, 
they have been used by neuroanatomists to trace the 
course of individual axons as well as interconnections 
between neurons (Box 7–2).
Fast Axonal Transport Carries Membranous 
Organelles
Large membranous organelles are carried to and from 
the axon terminals by fast transport (Figure 7–11). 
These organelles include synaptic vesicle precursors, 
large dense-core vesicles, mitochondria, elements of 
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, and protein parti-
cles carrying RNAs. Direct microscopic analysis reveals 
that fast transport occurs in a stop-and-start (saltatory) 
fashion along linear tracks of microtubules aligned 
with the main axis of the axon. The saltatory nature 
of the movement results from the periodic dissociation 
MT
M
M
Figure 7–8  The cytoskeletal structure of an axon. The 
micrograph shows the dense packing of microtubules and neu-
rofilaments linked by cross bridges (arrows). Organelles are 
transported in both the anterograde and retrograde directions 
in the microtubule-rich domains. Visualization in the micrograph 
was achieved by quick freezing and deep etching. M, myelin 
sheath; MT, microtubules. ×105,000. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Schnapp and Reese 1982. Copyright © 1982  
Rockefeller University Press.)


===== Page 5 =====
144    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
4.  Retrograde
 
transport for
 
degradation
 
or reuse
Nucleus
Microtubules
2.  Axonal
 
transport
3. Release of neurotransmitter
 
and membrane recycling
1.  Synthesis,
 
assembly,
 
and export
Figure 7–9  Membrane trafficking in the neuron. 1. Proteins 
and lipids of secretory organelles are synthesized in the endo-
plasmic reticulum and transported to the Golgi complex, where 
large dense-core vesicles (peptide-containing secretory gran-
ules) and synaptic vesicle precursors are assembled. 2. Large 
dense-core vesicles and transport vesicles carry synaptic vesi-
cle proteins down the axon via axonal transport. 3. At the nerve 
terminals, the synaptic vesicles are assembled and loaded 
with nonpeptide neurotransmitters. Synaptic vesicles and large 
dense-core vesicles release their contents by exocytosis. 4. 
Following exocytosis, large dense-core vesicle membranes are 
returned to the cell body for reuse or degradation. Synaptic 
vesicle membranes undergo many cycles of local exocytosis 
and endocytosis in the presynaptic terminal.
of an organelle from the track or from collisions with 
other particles.
Early experiments on dorsal root ganglion cells 
showed that anterograde fast transport depends criti-
cally on ATP, is not affected by inhibitors of protein 
synthesis (once the injected labeled amino acid is 
incorporated), and does not depend on the cell body, 
because it occurs in axons severed from their cell bod-
ies. In fact, active transport can occur in reconstituted 
cell-free axoplasm.
Microtubules provide an essentially station-
ary track on which specific organelles can be moved 
by molecular motors. The idea that microtubules are 
involved in fast transport emerged from the finding 
that certain alkaloids that disrupt microtubules and 
block mitosis, which depends on microtubules, also 
interfere with fast transport.
Molecular motors were first visualized in electron 
micrographs as cross bridges between microtubules 
and moving particles (Figure 7–8). More advanced fluo-
rescence time-lapse microscopy techniques are able to 
visualize the dynamics of axon transport for specific 
cargos such as mitochondria and synaptic vesicles. The 
motor molecules for anterograde transport are plus-
end-directed motors called kinesin and a variety of 
kinesin-related proteins. The kinesins represent a large 
family of adenosine triphosphatases (ATPase), each of 
which transports different cargos. Kinesin is a hetero-
tetramer composed of two heavy chains and two light 
chains. Each heavy chain has three domains: (1) a glob-
ular head (the ATPase domain) that acts as the motor 
when attached to microtubules, (2) a coiled-coil helical 
stalk responsible for dimerization with the other heavy 
chain, and (3) a fan-like carboxyl-terminus that interacts 
with the light chains. This end of the complex attaches 
indirectly to the organelle that is moved through spe-
cific families of proteins referred to as cargo adapters.
Fast retrograde transport primarily moves 
endosomes generated by endocytic activity at nerve 
endings, mitochondria, and elements of the endoplas-
mic reticulum. Many of these components are degraded 
through fusion with lysosomes. Fast retrograde trans-
port also delivers signals that regulate gene expression 
in the neuron’s nucleus. For example, activated growth 
factor receptors at nerve endings are taken up into vesi-
cles and carried back along the axon to the nucleus. 
Transport of transcription factors informs the gene 
transcription apparatus in the nucleus of conditions in 
the periphery. Retrograde transport of these molecules 
is especially important during nerve regeneration and 
axon regrowth (Chapter 47). Certain toxins (tetanus 
toxin) as well as pathogens (herpes simplex, rabies, and 
polio viruses) are also transported toward the cell body 
along the axon.
The rate of retrograde fast transport is approximately 
one-half to two-thirds that of anterograde fast transport. 
As in anterograde transport, particles move along micro-
tubules during retrograde flow. The motor molecules 
for retrograde axonal transport are minus-end-directed 
motors called dyneins, similar to those found in cilia and 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    145
Neuroanatomists typically locate axons and terminals 
of specific nerve cell bodies by microinjection of dyes; 
expression of fluorescent proteins; or autoradiographi-
cally tracing specific proteins soon after administering 
radioactively labeled amino acids, certain labeled sugars 
(fucose or amino sugars, precursors of glycoprotein), or 
specific transmitter substances.
Similarly, particles, proteins, or dyes that are 
readily taken up at nerve terminals by endocytosis 
and transported back to cell bodies are used to iden-
tify the cell bodies. The enzyme horseradish peroxi-
dase has been most widely used for this type of study 
because it readily undergoes retrograde transport 
and its reaction product is conveniently visualized 
histochemically.
Axonal transport is also used by neuroanatomists 
to label material exchanged between neurons, making 
it possible to identify neuronal networks (Figure 7–10).
Box 7–2  Neuroanatomical Tracing Makes Use of Axonal Transport
A
A  Pontine nuclei
B  Cerebellar cortex
Motor cortex
B
1 mm
30 µm
Figure 7–10  Axonal transport of the herpes simplex 
virus (HSV) is used to trace cortical pathways in mon-
keys. Depending on the strain, the virus moves in the 
anterograde or retrograde direction by axonal transport. In 
either direction, it enters a neuron with which the infected 
cell makes synaptic contact. Here the projections of cells 
in the primary motor cortex to the cerebellum in monkeys 
were traced using an anterograde-moving strain (HSV-1 
[H129]). Monkeys were injected in the region of the pri-
mary motor cortex that controls the arm. After 4 days, the 
brain was sectioned and immunostained for viral antigen. 
Micrographs show the virus was transported from the 
primary motor cortex to second-order neurons in pontine 
nuclei (A) and then to third-order neurons in the  
cerebellar cortex (B). (Reproduced, with permission, from 
P.L. Strick.)
flagella of nonneuronal cells. They consist of a multimeric 
ATPase protein complex with two globular heads on two 
stalks connected to a basal structure. The globular heads 
attach to microtubules and act as motors, moving toward 
the minus end of the polymer. As with kinesin, the other 
end of the complex attaches to the transported organelle 
through specialized cargo adapters.
Microtubules also mediate anterograde and retro-
grade transport of mRNAs and ribosomal RNA carried 
in particles formed with RNA-binding proteins. These 
proteins have been characterized in both vertebrate 
and invertebrate nervous systems and include the 
cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding pro-
tein (CPEB), the fragile X protein, Hu proteins, NOVA, 
and Staufen. The activities of these proteins are criti-
cal. For example, CPEB keeps select mRNAs dormant 
during transport from the cell body to nerve endings; 
once there (upon stimulation), the binding protein can 
facilitate the local translation of the RNA by mediat-
ing polyadenylation and activation of the messenger. 
Both CPEB and Staufen were discovered in Drosophila, 
where they maintain maternal mRNAs dormant in 


===== Page 7 =====
146    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
2 h
4 h
6 h
8 h
10 h
Counts per minute
Distance (mm)
24
0
24
48
72
96
120
144
168
Counts per minute
102
103
104
105
102
104
105
103
106
102
103
104
102
103
102
103
Central
Peripheral
Figure 7–11  Early experiments on anterograde axonal 
transport used radioactive labeling of proteins. In the 
experiment illustrated here, the distribution of radioactive 
proteins along the sciatic nerve of the cat was measured at 
various times after injection of [3H]-leucine into dorsal root 
ganglia in the lumbar region of the spinal cord. To show trans-
port curves for various times (2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 hours after the 
injection) in one figure, several ordinate scales (in logarithmic 
units) are used. Large amounts of labeled protein stay in the 
ganglion cell bodies but, with time, move out along axons in 
the sciatic nerve, so the advancing front of the labeled  
protein is progressively farther from the cell body (arrows). 
The velocity of transport can be calculated from the distance 
of the front at the various times. From experiments of this 
kind, Sidney Ochs found that the rate of fast axonal transport 
is constant at 410 mm per day at body temperature.  
(Adapted, with permission, from Ochs 1972. Copyright © 
1972 AAAS.)
unfertilized eggs and, upon fertilization, distribute 
and localize mRNA to various regions of the divid-
ing embryo. Loss-of-function mutations in the frag-
ile X (FMR1) gene lead to a severe form of mental 
retardation.
Proteins, ribosomes, and mRNA are concentrated 
at the base of some dendritic spines (Figure 7–12). 
Only a select group of mRNAs are transported into 
the dendrites from the soma. These include mRNAs 
that encode actin- and cytoskeletal-associated pro-
teins, MAP2, and the α-subunit of the Ca2+/calmodulin-
dependent protein kinase. They are translated in the 
dendrites in response to activity in a presynaptic 
neuron. This local protein synthesis is thought to be 
important in sustaining the molecular changes at the 
synapse that underlie long-term memory and learning. 
Likewise, the mRNA for myelin basic protein is trans-
ported to the distant ends of the oligodendrocytes, 
where it is translated as the myelin sheath grows, as 
discussed later in this chapter.
Slow Axonal Transport Carries Cytosolic Proteins 
and Elements of the Cytoskeleton
Cytosolic proteins and cytoskeletal proteins are moved 
from the cell body by slow axonal transport. Slow 
transport occurs only in the anterograde direction and 
consists of at least two kinetic components that carry 
different proteins at different rates.
The slower component travels at 0.2 to 2.5 mm 
per day and carries the proteins that make up the 
fibrillar elements of the cytoskeleton: the subunits of 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    147
A
B
0.17 µm
Den
S
T
Figure 7–12  Ribosomes in the dendritic arbor. (Images 
reproduced, with permission, from Oswald Steward.)
A. Some ribosomes are dispatched from the cell body to 
dendrites where they are used in local protein synthesis. This 
autoradiograph shows the distribution of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
in hippocampal neurons in low-density cultures using in situ 
hybridization. The image was made with dark field illumination, 
in which silver grains reflect light and thus appear as bright 
spots. Silver grains, denoting the rRNA, are heavily concen-
trated over cell bodies and dendrites but are not detectable 
over the axons that crisscross among the dendrites.
B. Ribosomes in dendrites are selectively concentrated at the 
junction of the spine and main dendritic shaft (arrow), where 
the spine contacts the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron. 
This electron micrograph shows a mushroom-shaped spine of 
a neuron in the hippocampal dentate gyrus. Note the absence 
of ribosomes in the dendritic shaft. S, spine head; T, presynap-
tic terminal; Den, main shaft of the dendrite containing a long 
mitochondrion. ×60,000.
neurofilaments and α- and β-tubulin subunits of micro-
tubules. These fibrous proteins constitute approxi-
mately 75% of the total protein moved in the slower 
component. Microtubules are transported in polym-
erized form by a mechanism involving microtubule 
sliding in which relatively short preassembled micro-
tubules move along existing microtubules. Neurofila-
ment monomers or short polymers move passively 
together with the microtubules because they are 
crosslinked by protein bridges.
The other component of slow axonal transport is 
approximately twice as fast as the slower component. 
It carries clathrin, actin, and actin-binding proteins as 
well as a variety of enzymes and other proteins.
Proteins Are Made in Neurons as in Other 
Secretory Cells
Secretory and Membrane Proteins Are Synthesized 
and Modified in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
The mRNAs for secretory and membrane proteins are 
translated through the membrane of the rough endo-
plasmic reticulum, and their polypeptide products are 
processed extensively within the lumen of the endo-
plasmic reticulum. Most polypeptides destined to 
become proteins are translocated across the membrane 
of the rough endoplasmic reticulum during synthesis, 
a process called cotranslational transfer.
Transfer is possible because ribosomes, the site 
where proteins are synthesized, attach to the cytosolic 
surface of the reticulum (Figure 7–13). Complete transfer 
of the polypeptide chain into the lumen of the reticu-
lum produces a secretory protein (recall that the inside 
of the reticulum is related to the outside of the cell). 
Important examples are the neuroactive peptides. If the 
transfer is incomplete, an integral membrane protein 
results. Because a polypeptide chain can thread its way 
through the membrane many times during synthesis, 
several membrane-spanning configurations are possi-
ble depending on the primary amino acid sequence of 
the protein. Important examples are neurotransmitter 
receptors and ion channels (Chapter 8).
Some proteins transported into the endoplasmic 
reticulum remain there. Others are moved to other 
compartments of the vacuolar apparatus or to the plas-
malemma, or are secreted into the extracellular space. 
Proteins that are processed in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum are extensively modified. One important modi-
fication is the formation of intramolecular disulfide 
linkages (Cys-S-S-Cys) caused by oxidation of pairs of 
free sulfhydryl side chains, a process that cannot occur 


===== Page 9 =====
148    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Cytoplasmic
protein
Proteins
Ribosome
mRNA emerging
Forms
polysome
Mitochondrion
Peroxisome
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Secretory granules
Golgi apparatus
Lysosome
Nuclear
pore
Endoplasmic
membrane
Secretory
protein
Integral 
membrane
protein
Figure 7–13  Protein synthesis in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum. Free and membrane-bound polysomes translate mRNA 
that encodes proteins with a variety of destinations. Mes-
senger RNA, transcribed from genomic DNA in the neuron’s 
nucleus, emerges into the cytoplasm through nuclear pores to 
form polyribosomes (see enlargement). The polypeptides that 
become secretory and membrane proteins are translocated 
across the membrane of the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
in the reducing environment of the cytosol. Disulfide 
linkages are crucial to the tertiary structure of these 
proteins.
Proteins may be modified by cytosolic enzymes 
either during synthesis (cotranslational modification) 
or afterward (posttranslational modification). One 
example is N-acylation, the transfer of an acyl group 
to the N-terminus of the growing polypeptide chain. 
Acylation by a 14-carbon fatty acid myristoyl group 
permits the protein to anchor in membranes through 
the lipid chain.
C O
N
(CH2)12
CH3
Other fatty acids can be conjugated to the sulfhy-
dryl group of cysteine, producing a thioacylation:
C O
S
Cys
(CH2)14
CH3
Isoprenylation is another posttranslational modifi-
cation important for anchoring proteins to the cytosolic 
side of membranes. It occurs shortly after synthesis of the 
protein is completed and involves a series of enzymatic 
steps that result in thioacylation by one of two long-chain 
hydrophobic polyisoprenyl moieties (farnesyl, with 
15 carbons, or geranyl-geranyl, with 20) of the sulfhydryl 
group of a cysteine at the C-terminus of proteins.


