===== Page 1 =====
644    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–13  The vestibulo-ocular reflex is adaptable.
A. For several days, the monkey continuously wears magnifying 
spectacles that double the speed of the retinal-image motion 
evoked by head movement. Each day, the gain of the vestibulo-
ocular reflex—the amount the eyes move for a given head 
movement—is tested in the dark so that the monkey cannot 
use retinal motion as a clue to modify the reflex. Over a period 
of 4 days, the gain increases gradually (left). It quickly returns 
to normal when the spectacles are removed (right). (Adapted, 
with permission, from Miles and Eighmy 1980.)
B. Adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex occurs in cerebel-
lar and brain stem circuits. A visual error signal, triggered by 
motion of the retinal image during head movement, reaches 
the inferior olivary nucleus. The climbing fiber transmits this 
error signal to the Purkinje cell, affecting the parallel fiber–
Purkinje cell synapse. The Purkinje cell transmits changed 
information to the floccular target cell in the vestibular nucleus, 
changing its sensitivity to the vestibular input. After the 
reflex has been adapted, the Purkinje cell input is no longer 
necessary.
Purkinje 
cell
Parallel ﬁber
Granule
cell
Mossy
ﬁber
Climbing 
ﬁber
Vestibular 
nucleus
Abducens 
nucleus
Motor 
neuron
+
–
Eye
movement
Horizontal 
canal
Head 
rotation
A  Adaptability of the vestibulo-ocular reﬂex
B  Sites of adaptive learning
Reﬂex gain
×2.0
Spectacles
on
×2.0
Spectacles
off
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (days)
Cerebellar 
ﬂocculus
1st
2nd 
3rd  
Exposure:
Vestibular 
nucleus
Cerebellar 
ﬂocculus
Inferior 
olivary
nucleus
Target neuron 
sensitivity altered
Purkinje cell 
output modiﬁed
Visual 
error signal


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    645
The Thalamus and Cortex Use Vestibular Signals 
for Spatial Memory and Cognitive and Perceptual 
Functions
For decades, vestibular function has been studied pri-
marily in relation to reflexes, both vestibulo-ocular and 
vestibulospinal. Yet, in the past decade, it has become 
increasingly clear that the function of the vestibular 
system is as important for cognitive processes as for 
reflexes. The difficulty in understanding the vestibular 
system’s role in spatial cognition stems from the fact 
that these functions are inherently multisensory, aris-
ing through convergence of vestibular, visual, soma-
tosensory, and motor cues, following principles that 
remain poorly understood. Some of these perceptual 
functions of the vestibular system include tilt per-
ception, visual-vertical perception, and visuospatial 
constancy.
Tilt perception. Vestibular information is critical for 
spatial orientation—the perception of how our head 
and body are positioned relative to the outside world. 
Nearly all species orient themselves using gravity, 
which provides a global, external reference. Thus, spa-
tial awareness is governed by our orientation relative 
to gravity, collectively typically referred to as tilt.
Visual-vertical perception. We commonly experi-
ence the visual scene as perceptually oriented relative 
to earth-vertical orientation, regardless of our spatial 
orientation in the world. This ability has been studied 
psychophysically in humans and monkeys using tasks 
in which a subject is turned ear-down in the dark and 
asked to orient a dimly lit bar vertically in space (to 
align it with gravity). The results suggest that the neu-
ral representation of the visual scene is modified by 
static vestibular and proprioceptive signals that indi-
cate the orientation of the head and body.
Visuospatial constancy. Vestibular signals are also 
important for the perception of a stable visual world 
despite constantly changing retinal images caused by 
movement of the eyes, head, and body. The projec-
tion of the scene onto the retina continuously changes 
because of these movements. Despite the changing ret-
inal image, the percept of the scene as a whole remains 
stable; this stability is critical not only for vison but 
also for sensorimotor transformations (eg, to update 
the motor goal of an eye or arm movement).
Vestibular Information Is Present in the Thalamus
Vestibular projections to the thalamus are complicated 
and overall less clear, partly because of the strong 
multisensory nature of the responses in these cells 
and the difficulty in comparing thalamic regions and 
nomenclature across studies and species. Some neu-
rons in all vestibular nuclei and likely the fastigial 
cerebellar nuclei project bilaterally to the thalamus, 
but most fibers terminate in the contralateral thalamic 
nuclei (Figure 27–9).
Several major thalamic regions receive vestibular 
projections, including the ventral posterolateral and 
ventral lateral thalamic nuclei and, to a lesser extent, 
the ventral posteroinferior nuclei, the posterior group, 
and the anterior pulvinar. These nuclei are tradition-
ally thought to also receive somatosensory input and 
project to the primary and secondary somatosensory 
cortices, as well as the posterior parietal cortex (areas 5 
and 7) and the insula of the temporal cortex.
Vestibular Information Is Widespread in the Cortex
A number of cortical areas receiving short-latency 
vestibular signals either alone or more commonly in 
concert with proprioceptive, tactile, oculomotor, vis-
ual, and auditory signals have been identified (Figure 
27–14). Although vestibular signals are widely distrib-
uted to a number of cortical regions, all such regions 
are multimodal and none seems to represent a purely 
vestibular cortex, similar to other modalities such as 
vision, proprioception, and audition.
Vestibular modulation has been established in the 
lateral sulcus (parietoinsular vestibular cortex), soma-
tosensory cortex (areas 3a and 2v), oculomotor cortex 
(frontal and supplementary eye fields), extrastriate 
visual motion cortex (dorsal medial superior tempo-
ral area), and parietal cortex (ventral intraparietal area 
and area 7a). In the primary somatosensory cortex, 
area 2v lies at the base of the intraparietal sulcus just 
posterior to the areas of the postcentral gyrus repre-
senting the hand and mouth. Electrical stimulation of 
area 2v in humans produces sensations of whole-body 
motion. Area 3a lies at the base of the central sulcus, 
adjacent to the motor cortex. Many cells in the pari-
etoinsular vestibular cortex are multisensory, respond-
ing to body motion, somatosensory, proprioceptive, 
and visual motion stimuli. Patients with lesions in this 
region report episodes of vertigo, unsteadiness, and a 
loss of perception for visual vertical. Neurons in the 
medial intraparietal and medial superior temporal 
areas respond to both visual (optic flow) and vestibu-
lar signals. These cells utilize multisensory cue integra-
tion (Bayesian) frameworks to assist in the cognitive 
perception of motion through space.
Imaging studies reveal an even larger portion 
of cerebral cortex involved in processing vestibu-
lar information, including the temporoparietal cor-
tex and the insula, the superior parietal lobe, the 


===== Page 3 =====
646    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–14  The vestibular cortex.
A. This lateral view of a monkey’s brain shows the areas of cer-
ebral cortex in which vestibular responses have been recorded. 
Areas in monkey cortex include periarcuate cortex, area 6, fron-
tal eye fields, areas 3a and 2v, ventral intraparietal area (VIP), 
medial intraparietal area (MIP), area 7, visual posterior sylvian 
area (VPS), medial superior temporal area (MST), parieto-insular 
vestibular cortex (PIVC), and the hippocampal formation.
B. In the human cortex, areas recording vestibular activity 
include 6v, frontal eye fields (FEF), superior frontal gyrus, 
2v, 3a, posterior parietal cortex, PIVC, and the hippocampal 
formation.
Hippocampus
Area 3a
Area 2v
Area 2v, 3a
6v, FEF
Area 7a 
Area 7b
Area 6
MST 
VPS
VIP, MIP 
Periarcuate 
cortex
A  Monkey 
B  Human
Frontal
eye ﬁeld
Hippocampus
Posterior
parietal cortex
7, VIP, MIP, MST
Superior
frontal gyrus
PIVC
PIVC
pre- and postcentral gyri, anterior cingulate and pos-
terior middle temporal gyri, premotor and frontal 
cortices, inferior parietal lobule, putamen, and hip-
pocampal regions. Using electrical stimulation of the 
vestibular nerve in patients activates the prefrontal 
lobe and anterior portion of the supplementary motor 
area at relatively short latencies. However, imaging 
and, to a lesser extent, single-cell recording studies 
may overstate the range of vestibular representations. 
In particular, vestibular stimuli often co-activate the 
somatosensory and proprioceptive systems, as well 
as evoke postural and oculomotor responses, which 
might in turn result in increased cortical activations.
Vestibular Signals Are Essential for Spatial 
Orientation and Spatial Navigation
Our ability to move about depends on a stable direc-
tional orientation. Certain cells in the thalamus, hip-
pocampal region, entorhinal cortex, and subiculum are 
involved in navigation tasks. Damage to these areas 
impairs a variety of spatial and directional abilities. 
At least six cell types contributing to spatial orienta-
tion have been identified, including place cells, grid 
cells, head direction cells, border cells, speed cells, 
and conjunctive cells. In the hippocampus, place cells 
discharge relative to the animal’s location in the envi-
ronment (Chapter 54). Head direction cells in the dor-
sal thalamus, parahippocampal regions, and several 
regions of the cortex indicate the animal’s heading 
direction like a compass. Grid cells in the entorhinal 
cortex respond to multiple spatial locations in a unique 
triangular grid pattern. Border cells in the entorhinal 
cortex signal environmental boundaries, speed cells 
discharge in proportion to the animal’s running speed, 
and conjunctive cells exhibit a combination of several 
of these properties.
These regions are intimately connected and appear 
to work together in a “navigation network” to provide 
for spatial orientation, spatial memory, and our ability 
to move through our surroundings. Think of walking 
through your house, driving to the store, or knowing 
which direction to go in a new city. Lesions of central 
vestibular networks disrupt head direction, place, and 
grid responses. Patients with disease or trauma to the 
vestibular system, hippocampus, and anterior thala-
mus regions often exhibit severe deficits in their ability 
to orient in familiar environments or even find their 
way home.
All of these cells depend on a functioning vestibu-
lar system to maintain their spatial orientation prop-
erties. The pathway by which vestibular signals reach 
the navigation network and the computational princi-
ples determining how vestibular cues influence these 
spatially tuned cells is not well understood. We know 
that there are at least three different influences: Semi-
circular canal signals contribute to the estimate of head 
direction; gravity signals influence the three-dimensional 
properties of head direction cells; and translation sig-
nals influence the estimate of linear speed, which 
controls both grid cell properties and the magnitude 
and frequency of theta oscillations in the hippocam-
pal network. What is clear is that there is no evidence 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    647
linking vestibular nuclei response properties directly 
to head direction or other spatially tuned cell types, 
and no direct projections from the vestibular nuclei to 
the brain areas thought to house these spatially tuned 
neurons have been identified. Furthermore, vestibular 
nuclei responses are inappropriate for driving these 
spatially tuned cells, as these signals need to encom-
pass the total head movement, rather than individual 
components during active or passive head movement.
It has long been recognized that proprioceptive 
and motor efference cues should participate, together 
with vestibular signals, to track head direction over 
time. It has been proposed that internally generated 
information from vestibular, proprioceptive, and 
motor efference cues can be utilized to keep track of 
changes in directional heading. More recent insights 
have started to shed light on how each of these cues 
contributes to the final self-motion estimate that can 
be precisely predicted and quantitatively estimated 
based on a Bayesian framework. Although as yet dif-
ficult to define, quantitative internal models govern 
the relationship of vestibular and other multisensory 
self-motion cues for computing the spatial properties 
of navigation circuit cells.
Clinical Syndromes Elucidate Normal 
Vestibular Function
As we have seen, rotation excites hair cells in the semi-
circular canal whose hair bundles are oriented in the 
direction of motion and inhibits those in the canals ori-
ented away from the motion direction. This imbalance 
in vestibular signals is responsible for the compensa-
tory eye movements and the sensation of rotation that 
accompanies head movement. It can also originate 
from disease of one labyrinth or vestibular nerve, 
which results in a pattern of afferent vestibular sign-
aling analogous to that stemming from rotation away 
from the side of the lesion, that is, more discharge from 
the intact side. There is accordingly a strong feeling of 
spinning, called vertigo.
Caloric Irrigation as a Vestibular Diagnostic Tool
Nystagmus can be used as a diagnostic indicator of 
vestibular system integrity. In patients complain-
ing of dizziness or vertigo, the function of the ves-
tibular labyrinth is typically assessed by a caloric test  
(Figure 27–15). Either warm (44°C) or cold (30°C) 
water is introduced into the external auditory canal. In 
normal persons, warm water induces nystagmus that 
beats toward the ear into which the water has been 
introduced, whereas cold water induces nystagmus 
that beats away from the ear into which the water has 
been introduced. This relationship is encapsulated in 
the mnemonic COWS: Cold water produces nystag-
mus beating to the Opposite side; Warm water pro-
duces nystagmus beating to the Same side. In normal 
persons, the two ears give equal responses. If there is 
a unilateral lesion in the vestibular pathway, however, 
nystagmus will be induced and directed toward the 
side opposite the lesion.
The vertigo and nystagmus resulting from an 
acute vestibular lesion typically subside over several 
days, even if peripheral function does not recover. This 
is because central compensatory mechanisms restore 
the balance in vestibular signals in the brain stem, 
even when peripheral input is permanently lost or 
unbalanced.
The loss of input from one labyrinth also means 
that all vestibular reflexes must be driven by a single 
labyrinth. For the VOR, this condition is quite effec-
tive at low speeds because the intact labyrinth can be 
both excited and inhibited. However, during rapid, 
high-frequency rotations, inhibition is not sufficient, 
such that the gain of the reflex is reduced when the 
head rotates toward the lesioned side. This is the basis 
of an important clinical test of canal function, the head-
impulse test. In this test, the head is moved rapidly 
one time along the axis of rotation of a single canal. If 
there is a significant decrease in gain owing to canal 
dysfunction, the movement of the eyes will lag behind 
that of the head, and there will be a visible catch-up 
saccade.
Bilateral Vestibular Hypofunction Interferes With 
Normal Vision
Vestibular function is sometimes lost simultaneously 
on both sides, for example, from ototoxicity owing to 
aminoglycoside antibiotics such as gentamicin or can-
cer treatment medications such as cisplatin. The symp-
toms of bilateral vestibular hypofunction are different 
from those of unilateral loss. First, vertigo is absent 
because there is no imbalance in vestibular signals; 
input is reduced equally from both sides. For the same 
reason, there is no spontaneous nystagmus. In fact, 
these patients may have no symptoms when they are 
at rest and the head is still.
In humans, receptor and nerve fiber loss due to 
disease, trauma, or ototoxicity is permanent. How-
ever, in other animal classes such as amphibians, rep-
tiles, and birds, spontaneous regeneration does occur 
over time. Although the differences in regeneration 
between animal groups is not yet understood, recent 


===== Page 5 =====
648    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–15  Bithermal caloric test of the vestibulo-
ocular reflex.  The vestibular caloric test remains the 
primary test used today in clinics around the world to 
determine if there is system dysfunction. The head is 
elevated 30° to align the horizontal semicircular canals 
with gravity.
A. Cold water or air introduced into the right ear causes 
a downward convection current in the endolymph, pro-
ducing an inhibitory response in the right ear hair cells 
and afferent fibers. The result is a leftward (opposite 
side) beating nystagmus (as determined by fast phase 
direction).
B. Warm water or air introduced into the right ear pro-
duces an upward endolymph movement, producing an 
excitatory response in the hair cells and afferents. The 
result is a rightward (same side) beating nystagmus.
B
Leftward
nystagmus
Quick phase
Slow phase
Quick phase
Excitatory
response
44°C
A
Inhibitory
response
Utricle
Ampulla
Crista
30°C
External
auditory
meatus
Right ear
Middle
ear space
Horizontal
semicircular
canal
Slow phase
Rightward
nystagmus
Time
Time
Eye
position
R
L
Eye
position
R
L
research shows promise for the future development of 
regenerative treatments in humans.
For the present, the loss of vestibular reflexes is 
devastating. A physician who lost his vestibular hair 
cells because of a toxic reaction to streptomycin wrote 
a dramatic account of this loss. Immediately after 
the onset of streptomycin toxicity, he could not read 
without steadying his head to keep it motionless. 
Even after partial recovery, he could not read signs 
or recognize friends while walking in the street; he 
had to stop to see clearly. Some patients may even 
“see” their heartbeat if the VOR fails to compensate 
for the miniscule head movements that accompany 
each arterial pulse.
Highlights
  1.  The vestibular system provides the brain with 
a rapid estimate of head movement. Vestibular 
signals are used for balance, visual stability, spa-
tial orientation, movement planning, and motion 
perception.
  2.  Vestibular receptor hair cells are mechanotrans-
ducers that sense rotational and linear accelera-
tions. Through kinematic and neural processing 
mechanisms, movements are transformed into 
acceleration, velocity, and position signals. These 
signals are used throughout the brain efficiently 
and quickly to guide behavior and cognition.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    649
  3.  Receptor cells are polarized to detect the direc-
tion of motion. Three semicircular canals in each 
inner ear detect rotational motion and work in 
bilateral synergistic pairs through convergent 
commissural pathways in the vestibular nuclei. 
Two otolith organs in each ear detect linear trans-
lations and tilts relative to gravity.
  4.  Vestibular nuclei neurons receive converging 
multisensory and motor signals from visual, pro-
prioceptive, cerebellar, and cortical sources. The 
multisensory integration allows for discrimina-
tion between active and passive body motion, as 
well as appropriate motor responses for reactive 
or volitional behavior.
  5.  Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the oculo-
motor system allow eye muscles to compensate for 
head movement through the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
to hold the image of the external world motionless 
on the retina. Cortical projections to the vestibular 
and oculomotor nuclei allow volitional eye move-
ments to be separated from reflex eye movements 
but work through a final common pathway. Motor 
learning through vestibulocerebellar networks 
provides compensatory changes in eye movement 
responses to changing visual conditions through 
the use of spectacles, disease, or aging.
  6.  Projections from the vestibular nuclei to motor 
areas and the spinal cord facilitate postural sta-
bility. Gaze stability coordinates eye and neck 
movements through the medial vestibulospinal 
pathway. Postural control is exerted through the 
lateral vestibulospinal pathway.
  7.  Projections from the vestibular nuclei to the ros-
tral and caudal medulla nuclei are involved in 
regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, respira-
tion, bone remodeling, and homeostasis.
  8.  Projections from the vestibular nuclei to thala-
mus and cortex ensure spatial orientation and 
influence spatial perception more generally.
  9.  Vestibular signals processed in the hippocampal 
regions are crucial for spatial location and navi-
gation functions.
10.  Vestibular signals are combined with visual sig-
nals in several cortical regions through Bayesian 
cue integration to provide motion perception.
11.  Disease or trauma to the vestibular system can 
produce nausea, vertigo, dizziness, balance dis-
orders, visual instability, and spatial confusion.
12.  We are only beginning to appreciate the role of 
the vestibular system in cognition. However, it 
is clear that vestibular signals contribute to our 
perception of self, conception of body presence, 
and memory.
13.  New approaches in computation and theory 
promise to provide the lapidary keys needed to 
unlock our understanding of how vestibular sig-
nals contribute to the essence of brain function.
 J. David Dickman  
 Dora Angelaki 
Selected Reading
Baloh RW, Honrubia V. 1990. Clinical Neurology of the Vestibular 
System, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis.
Beitz AJ, Anderson JH. 2000. Neurochemistry of the Vestibular 
System. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Goldberg JM, Wilson VJ, Cullen KE, et al. 2012. The Vestibular 
System: A Sixth Sense. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Leigh RJ, Zee DS. 2015. The Neurology of Eye Movements, 
5th ed. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
References
Angelaki DE, Cullen KE. 2008. Vestibular system: the 
many facets of a multimodal sense. Ann Rev Neurosci 
31:125–150.
Angelaki DE, Shaikh AG, Green AM, Dickman JD. 2004. 
Neurons compute internal models of the physical laws of 
motion. Nature 430:560–564.
Brandt T, Dieterich M. 1999. The vestibular cortex. Its 
locations, functions, and disorders. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
871:293–312.
Clark BJ, Taube JS. 2012. Vestibular and attractor network 
basis of the head direction cell signal in subcortical cir-
cuits. Front Neural Circuits 6:1–12.
Crèmer PD, Halmagyi GM, Aw ST, et al. 1998. Semicircular 
canal plane head impulses detect absent function of indi-
vidual semicircular canals. Brain 121:699–716.
Cullen KE, Roy JE. 2004. Signal processing in the vestibular 
system during active versus passive head movements.  
J Neurophys 91:1919–1933.
Curthoys IS, Halmagyi GM. 1992. Behavioral and neural cor-
relates of vestibular compensation. Behav Clin Neurol 
1:345–372.
Dickman JD, Angelaki DE. 2002. Vestibular convergence 
patterns in vestibular nuclei neurons of alert primates. 
J Neurophys 88:3518–3533.
Dieterich M, Brandt T. 1995. Vestibulo-ocular reflex. Curr 
Opin Neurol 8:83–88.
Distler C, Mustari MJ, Hoffmann KP. 2002. Cortical projec-
tions to the nucleus of the optic tract and dorsal termi-
nal nucleus and to the dorsolateral pontine nucleus in 


===== Page 7 =====
650    Part IV / Perception
macaques: a dual retrograde tracing study. J Comp Neurol 
444:144–158.
Einstein A. 1908. Über das Relativitätsprinzip und die aus 
demselben gezogenen Folgerungen. Jahrbuch Radioaktiv 
Electronik 4:411–462.
Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1971. Physiology of peripheral 
neurons innervating semicircular canals of the squir-
rel monkey. II. Response to sinusoidal stimulation and 
dynamics of peripheral vestibular system. J Neurophysiol 
34:661–675.
Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1976a. Physiology of peripheral 
neurons innervating otolith organs of the squirrel mon-
key. I. Response to static tilts and to long-duration cen-
trifugal force. J Neurophysiol 39:970–984.
Fernandez C, Goldberg JM. 1976b. Physiology of peripheral 
neurons innervating otolith organs of the squirrel monkey. 
II. Directional selectivity and force-response relations.  
J Neurophysiol 39:985–995.
Flock Å. 1965. Transducing mechanisms in the lateral line 
canal organ receptors. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant 
Biol 30:133–145.
Fukushima K. 1997. Corticovestibular interactions: anatomy, 
electrophysiology, and functional considerations. Exp 
Brain Res 117:1–16.
Gacek RR, Lyon M. 1974. The localization of vestibular effer-
ent neurons in the kitten with horseradish peroxidase. 
Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 77:92–101.
Goldberg JM, Fernández C. 1971. Physiology of peripheral 
neurons innervating semicircular canals of the squirrel 
monkey. I. Resting discharge and response to constant 
angular accelerations. J Neurophysiol 34:635–660.
Goldberg ME, Colby CL. 1992. Oculomotor control and spa-
tial processing. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2:198–202.
Grüsser OJ, Pause M, Schreiter U. 1990. Localization and 
responses of neurons in the parieto-insular vestibular 
cortex of awake monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). J Physiol 
(Lond) 430:537–557.
Gu Y, Watkins PV, Angelaki DE, DeAngelis GC. 2006. Visual 
and nonvisual contributions to three-dimensional head-
ing selectivity in the medial superior temporal area.  
J Neurosci 26:73–85.
Hillman DE, McLaren JW. 1979. Displacement configuration 
of semicircular canal cupulae. Neuroscience 4:1989–2000.
Hudspeth AJ, Corey DP. 1977. Sensitivity, polarity, and conduct-
ance change in the response of vertebrate hair cells to con-
trolled mechanical stimuli. Proc Nat Acad Sci 74:2407–2411.
Iurato S. 1967. Submicroscopic Structure of the Inner Ear. 
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Laurens J, Kim H, Dickman JD, Angelaki DE. 2016. Grav-
ity orientation tuning in macaque anterior thalamus. Nat 
Neurosci 19:1566–1568.
Miles FA, Eighmy BB. 1980. Long-term adaptive changes in 
primate vestibuloocular reflex. I. Behavioral observations. 
J Neurophysiol 43:1406–1425.
Moser EI, Moser MB. 2008. A metric for space. Hippocampus 
18:1142–1156.
Mustari MJ, Fuchs AF. 1990. Discharge patterns of neurons in 
the pretectal nucleus of the optic tract (NOT) in the behav-
ing primate. J Neurophysiol 64:77–90.
Newlands SD, Vrabec JT, Purcell IM, Stewart CM, Zimmerman 
BE, Perachio AA. 2003. Central projections of the sac-
cular and utricular nerves in macaques. J Comp Neurol 
466:31–47.
O’Keefe J. 1976. Place units in the hippocampus of the freely 
moving rat. Exp Neurol 51:78–109.
Raymond JL, Lisberger SG. 1998. Neural learning rules for 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex. J Neurosci 18:9112–9129.
Spoendlin H. 1966. Ultrastructure of the vestibular sense 
organ. In: RJ Wolfson (ed). The Vestibular System and Its 
Diseases, pp. 39–68. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania 
Press.
Sugiuchi Y, Izawa Y, Ebata S, Shinoda Y. 2005. Vestibular cor-
tical areas in the periarcuate cortex: its afferent and effer-
ent projections. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1039:111–123.
Taube JS. 1995. Head direction cells recorded in the anterior 
thalamic nuclei of freely moving rats. J Neurosci 15:70–86.
Waespe W, Henn V. 1977. Neuronal activity in the vestibular 
nuclei of the alert monkey during vestibular and opto-
kinetic stimulation. Exp Brain Res 27:523–538.
Watanuki K, Schuknecht HF. 1976. A morphological study 
of human vestibular sensory epithelia. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 102:583–588.


===== Page 8 =====
28
Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System
A Second Sound-Localization Pathway From the Inferior 
Colliculus Involves the Cerebral Cortex in Gaze Control
Auditory Circuits in the Cerebral Cortex Are Segregated 
Into Separate Processing Streams
The Cerebral Cortex Modulates Sensory Processing in 
Subcortical Auditory Areas
The Cerebral Cortex Forms Complex Sound Representations
The Auditory Cortex Uses Temporal and Rate Codes to 
Represent Time-Varying Sounds
Primates Have Specialized Cortical Neurons That Encode 
Pitch and Harmonics
Insectivorous Bats Have Cortical Areas Specialized for 
Behaviorally Relevant Features of Sound
The Auditory Cortex Is Involved in Processing Vocal 
Feedback During Speaking
Highlights
H
earing is crucial for localizing and iden-
tifying sound; for humans, it is particularly 
important because of its role in the understand-
ing and production of speech. The auditory system has 
several noteworthy features. Its subcortical pathway is 
longer than that of other sensory systems. Unlike the 
visual system, sounds can enter the auditory system 
from all directions, day and night, when we are asleep 
as well as when we are awake. The auditory system 
processes not only sounds emanating from outside the 
body (environmental sounds, sounds generated by 
others) but also self-generated sounds (vocalizations 
and chewing sounds). The location of sound stimuli in 
space is not conveyed by the spatial arrangement of 
Sounds Convey Multiple Types of Information to  
Hearing Animals
The Neural Representation of Sound in Central Pathways 
Begins in the Cochlear Nuclei
The Cochlear Nerve Delivers Acoustic Information 
in Parallel Pathways to the Tonotopically Organized 
Cochlear Nuclei
The Ventral Cochlear Nucleus Extracts Temporal and 
Spectral Information About Sounds
The Dorsal Cochlear Nucleus Integrates Acoustic With 
Somatosensory Information in Making Use of Spectral 
Cues for Localizing Sounds
The Superior Olivary Complex in Mammals Contains 
Separate Circuits for Detecting Interaural Time and  
Intensity Differences
The Medial Superior Olive Generates a Map of Interaural 
Time Differences
The Lateral Superior Olive Detects Interaural Intensity 
Differences
The Superior Olivary Complex Provides Feedback  
to the Cochlea
Ventral and Dorsal Nuclei of the Lateral Lemniscus 
Shape Responses in the Inferior Colliculus  
With Inhibition
Afferent Auditory Pathways Converge in the  
Inferior Colliculus
Sound Location Information From the Inferior Colliculus 
Creates a Spatial Map of Sound in the Superior Colliculus
The Inferior Colliculus Transmits Auditory Information to 
the Cerebral Cortex
Stimulus Selectivity Progressively Increases Along the 
Ascending Pathway
The Auditory Cortex Maps Numerous Aspects of Sound


===== Page 9 =====
652    Part IV / Perception
sensory afferent neurons but is instead computed by 
the auditory system from representations of the physi-
cal cues.
Sounds Convey Multiple Types of Information 
to Hearing Animals
Hearing helps to alert animals to the presence of 
unseen dangers or opportunities and, in many species, 
also serves as a means for communication. Information 
about where sounds arise and what they mean must 
be extracted from the representations of the physical 
characteristics of sound at each of the ears. To under-
stand how animals process sound, it is useful first to 
consider which cues are available.
Most vertebrates take advantage of having two 
ears for localizing sounds in the horizontal plane. 
Sound sources at different positions in that plane affect 
the two ears differentially: Sound arrives earlier and 
is more intense at the ear nearer the source (Figure 
28–1A). Interaural time and intensity differences carry 
information about where sounds arise.
The size of the head determines how interaural 
time delays are related to the location of sound sources; 
the neuronal circuitry determines the precision with 
which time delays are resolved. Because air pressure 
waves travel at roughly 340 m/s in air, the maximal 
interaural delay in humans is approximately 600 μs; in 
small birds, the greatest delay is only 35 μs. Humans 
can resolve the location of a sound source directly 
ahead to within approximately 1 degree, correspond-
ing to an interaural time difference of 10 μs. Interau-
ral time differences are particularly well conveyed by 
neurons that encode relatively low frequencies. These 
neurons can fire at the same position in every cycle of 
the sound and in this way encode the interaural time 
difference as an interaural phase difference. Sounds of 
high frequencies produce sound shadows or intensity 
differences between the two ears. For many mammals 
with small heads, high-frequency sounds provide the 
primary cue for localizing sound in the horizontal 
plane.
Mammals can localize sounds in the vertical plane 
and with a single ear using spectral filtering. High-
frequency sounds, with wavelengths that are close to 
or smaller than the dimensions of the head, shoulders, 
and external ears, interact with those parts of the body 
to produce constructive and destructive interference, 
introducing broad spectral peaks and deep, narrow 
spectral notches whose frequency changes with the 
location of the sound (Figure 28–1B). High-frequency 
sounds from different origins are filtered differently 
because in mammals the shape of the external ear differs 
back-to-front as well as top-to-bottom. Animals learn to 
use these spectral cues to locate sound sources. If the 
shape of the ear is experimentally altered, even adult 
humans can learn to make use of a new pattern of spec-
tral cues. If animals lose hearing in one ear, they lose 
interaural timing and intensity cues and must depend 
completely on spectral cues for localizing sounds.
How do we make sense of the complex and chang-
ing sounds that we hear? Most natural sounds contain 
energy over a wide range of frequencies and change 
rapidly with time. The information used to recognize 
sounds varies among animal species, and depends on 
listening conditions and experience. Human speech, 
for example, can be understood in the midst of noise, 
over electronic devices that distort sounds, and even 
through cochlear implants. One reason for its robust-
ness is that speech contains redundant cues: The vocal 
apparatus produces sounds in which multiple param-
eters covary. At the same time, this makes the task of 
understanding how animals recognize patterns a com-
plicated one. It is not clear which cues are used by ani-
mals under various conditions.
Music is a source of pleasure to human beings. 
Musical instruments and human voices produce 
sounds that have energy at the fundamental frequency 
that corresponds to its perceived pitch, as well as at 
multiples of that frequency, giving sounds a quality 
that allows us, for example, to distinguish a flute from 
a violin when their pitch is the same. Musical pitches 
are largely in the low-frequency range in which audi-
tory nerve fibers fire in phase with sounds. In music, 
sounds are combined simultaneously to produce 
chords and successively to produce melodies. Eupho-
nious, pleasant chords elicit regular, periodic firing in 
cochlear nerve fibers. In dissonant sounds, there is less 
regularity both in the sound itself and in the firing of 
auditory nerve fibers; the component frequencies are 
so close that they interfere with one another instead of 
periodically reinforcing one another.
The Neural Representation of Sound in Central 
Pathways Begins in the Cochlear Nuclei
The neural pathways that process acoustic informa-
tion extend from the ear to the brain stem, through the 
midbrain and thalamus, to the cerebral cortex (Figure 
28–2). Acoustic information is conveyed from cells in 
the cochlear ganglion (see Figure 26–17) to the cochlear 
nuclei in the brain stem. There information is received 
by several different types of neurons, most of which 
are arranged tonotopically.


