===== Page 1 =====
properties that allow it to release neurotransmitters at syn-
apses. Fourth, this system for rapid signaling over the long 
distances between the cell body and its terminals is enabled 
by a cytoskeletal structure that mediates, on a slower time 
scale, efficient transport of various proteins, mRNAs, and 
organelles between the two compartments.
In this part of the book, we shall be concerned with the 
distinctive cell biological properties that allow neurons and 
glia to fulfill their various specialized functions. A major 
emphasis will be on properties of ion channels that endow 
neurons with the ability to generate and propagate electri-
cal signals in the form of action potentials. We begin the 
discussion of neurons by considering general properties 
shared by ion channels—the ability to select and conduct 
ions, and to gate between open and closed conformations. 
Neurons use four major classes of channels for signaling: (1) 
resting channels generate the resting potential and underlie 
the passive electrical properties of neurons that determine 
the time course of synaptic potentials, their spread along 
dendrites, and the threshold for firing an action potential; 
(2) sensory receptor channels respond to certain sensory 
stimuli to generate local receptor potentials; (3) ligand-
gated channels open in response to neurotransmitters, 
generating local synaptic potentials; and (4) voltage-gated 
channels produce the currents that generate self-propagat-
ing action potentials. In this part, we focus mainly on rest-
ing and voltage-gated channels. In Part III, we consider in 
more detail ligand-gated channels, and the neurotransmit-
ters and second messengers that control their activity. The 
channels that are activated by sensory stimuli will be exam-
ined in Part IV.
Part Editors: John D. Koester and Steven A. Siegelbaum
Part II
Chapter 7	
The Cells of the Nervous System
Chapter 8	
Ion Channels
Chapter 9	
Membrane Potential and the Passive 
Electrical Properties of the Neuron
Chapter 10 	 Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential


===== Page 2 =====
7
The Cells of the Nervous System
First, they have a high degree of morphological 
and functional asymmetry: Neurons have receptive 
dendrites at one end and a transmitting axon at the 
other. This arrangement is the structural basis for uni-
directional neuronal signaling.
Second, neurons are both electrically and chemi-
cally excitable. The cell membrane of neurons contains 
specialized proteins—ion channels and receptors—that 
facilitate the flow of specific inorganic ions, thereby 
redistributing charge and creating electrical currents 
that alter the voltage across the membrane. These 
changes in charge can produce a wave of depolariza-
tion in the form of action potentials along the axon, the 
usual way a signal travels within the neuron. Glia are 
less excitable, but their membranes contain transporter 
proteins that facilitate the uptake of ions as well as pro-
teins that remove neurotransmitter molecules from the 
extracellular space, thus regulating neuronal function.
There are hundreds of distinct types of neurons 
depending on their dendritic morphology, pattern of 
axonal projections, and electrophysiological proper-
ties. This structural and functional diversity is largely 
specified by the genes expressed by each neuronal 
cell type. Although neurons all inherit the same 
complement of genes, each expresses a restricted set 
and thus produces only certain molecules—enzymes, 
structural proteins, membrane constituents, and 
secretory products—and not others. In large part, 
this expression depends on the cell’s developmental 
history. In essence, each cell is the set of molecules it 
expresses.
There are also many kinds of glial cells that can 
be identified based on their unique morphological, 
Neurons and Glia Share Many Structural and Molecular 
Characteristics
The Cytoskeleton Determines Cell Shape
Protein Particles and Organelles Are Actively Transported 
Along the Axon and Dendrites
Fast Axonal Transport Carries Membranous Organelles
Slow Axonal Transport Carries Cytosolic Proteins and 
Elements of the Cytoskeleton
Proteins Are Made in Neurons as in Other Secretory Cells
Secretory and Membrane Proteins Are Synthesized and 
Modified in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Secretory Proteins Are Modified in the Golgi Complex
Surface Membrane and Extracellular Substances Are 
Recycled in the Cell
Glial Cells Play Diverse Roles in Neural Function
Glia Form the Insulating Sheaths for Axons
Astrocytes Support Synaptic Signaling
Microglia Have Diverse Functions in Health and Disease
Choroid Plexus and Ependymal Cells Produce  
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Highlights
T
he cells of the nervous system— neurons and 
glia—share many characteristics with cells in 
general. However, neurons are specially endowed 
with the ability to communicate precisely and rapidly 
with other cells at distant sites in the body. Two fea-
tures give neurons this ability.


===== Page 3 =====
134    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
physiological, and biochemical features. The diverse 
morphologies of glial cells suggest that glia are prob-
ably as heterogeneous as neurons. Nonetheless, glia in 
the vertebrate nervous system can be divided into two 
major classes: macroglia and microglia. There are three 
main types of macroglia: oligodendrocytes, Schwann 
cells, and astrocytes. In the human brain, about 90% 
of all glial cells are macroglia. Of these, approximately 
half are myelin-producing cells (oligodendrocytes and 
Schwann cells) and half are astrocytes. Oligodendrocytes 
provide the insulating myelin sheaths of the axons of 
some neurons in the central nervous system (CNS) 
(Figure 7–1A). Schwann cells myelinate the axon of neu-
rons in the peripheral nervous system (Figure 7–1B); 
nonmyelinating Schwann cells have other functions, 
including promoting development, maintenance, and 
repair at the neuromuscular synapse. Astrocytes owe 
their name to their irregular, roughly star-shaped cell 
bodies and large numbers of processes; they support 
neurons and modulate neuronal signaling in several 
ways (Figure 7–1C). Microglia are the brain’s resident 
immune cells and phagocytes, but also have homeo-
static functions in the healthy brain.
Layers
of myelin
Inner
tongue
Nucleus
Schwann
cell
Axon
Nodes of
Ranvier
A  Oligodendrocyte
B  Schwann cell
Capillary
End-foot
Fibrous
astrocyte
Neuron
End-foot
Nodes 
of Ranvier
C  Astrocyte
Figure 7–1  The principal types of glial cells are oligoden-
drocytes and astrocytes in the central nervous system and 
Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system.
A. Oligodendrocytes are small cells with relatively few pro-
cesses. In the white matter of the brain, as shown here, they 
provide the myelin sheaths that insulate axons. A single oligo-
dendrocyte can wrap its membranous processes around many 
axons. In the gray matter, perineural oligodendrocytes surround 
and support the cell bodies of neurons.
B. Schwann cells furnish the myelin sheaths for axons in the 
peripheral nervous system. During development, several 
Schwann cells are positioned along the length of a single axon. 
Each cell forms a myelin sheath approximately 1 mm long 
between two nodes of Ranvier. The sheath is formed as the 
inner tongue of the Schwann cell turns around the axon several 
times, wrapping the axon in layers of membrane. In actuality, 
the layers of myelin are more compact than what is shown 
here. (Adapted from Alberts et al. 2002.)
C. Astrocytes, a major class of glial cells in the central nervous 
system, are characterized by their star-like shape and the broad 
end-feet on their processes. Because these end-feet put the 
astrocyte into contact with both capillaries and neurons, astro-
cytes are thought to have a nutritive function. Astrocytes also 
play an important role in maintaining the blood–brain barrier 
(described later in the chapter).
Neurons and Glia Share Many Structural and 
Molecular Characteristics
Neurons and glia develop from common neuroepi-
thelial progenitors of the embryonic nervous system 
and share many structural characteristics (Figure 7–2). 
The boundaries of these cells are defined by the cell 
membrane or plasmalemma, which has the asymmet-
ric bilayer structure of all biological membranes and 
provides a hydrophobic barrier impermeable to most 
water-soluble substances. Cytoplasm has two main 
components: cytosol and membranous organelles.
Cytosol is the aqueous phase of cytoplasm. In this 
phase, only a few proteins are actually free in solu-
tion. With the exception of some enzymes that catalyze 
metabolic reactions, most proteins are organized into 
functional complexes. A recent subdiscipline called 
proteomics has determined that these complexes can 
consist of many distinct proteins, none of which are 
covalently linked to another. For example, the cyto-
plasmic tail of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type 
glutamate receptor, a membrane-associated protein 
that mediates excitatory synaptic transmission in the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    135
Nuclear
envelope
Cell
body
Axon
Synaptic
vesicle
Myelin sheath
Transport
vesicle
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi 
apparatus
Dendrites
Synaptic
terminal
Muscle
Figure 7–2  The structure of a neuron. The cell body and 
nucleus of a spinal motor neuron are surrounded by a double-
layered membrane, the nuclear envelope, which is continu-
ous with the endoplasmic reticulum. The space between the 
two membrane layers that constitutes the nuclear envelope 
is continuous with the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Dendrites emerge from the basal aspect of the neuron, the 
axon from the apical aspect. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Williams et al. 1989.)
CNS, is anchored in a large complex of more than 100 
scaffold proteins and protein-modifying enzymes. 
(Many cytosolic proteins involved in second-messenger 
signaling, discussed in later chapters, are embed-
ded in the cytoskeletal matrix immediately below 
the plasmalemma.) Ribosomes, the organelle on which 
messenger RNA (mRNA) molecules are translated, 
are made up of several protein subunits. Proteasomes, 
large multi-enzyme organelles that degrade ubiq-
uitinated proteins (a process described later in this  
chapter), are also present throughout the cytosol of 
neurons and glia.
Membranous organelles, the second main compo-
nent of cytoplasm, include mitochondria and peroxi-
somes as well as a complex system of tubules, vesicles, 
and cisternae called the vacuolar apparatus. Mitochon-
dria and peroxisomes process molecular oxygen. Mito-
chondria generate adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the 
major molecule by which cellular energy is transferred 
or spent, whereas peroxisomes prevent accumulation 
of the strong oxidizing agent hydrogen peroxide. Mito-
chondria, which are derived from symbiotic archeobac-
teria that invaded eukaryotic cells early in evolution, 
are not functionally continuous with the vacuolar 
apparatus. Mitochondria also play other essential roles 
in Ca2+ homeostasis and lipid biogenesis.
The vacuolar apparatus includes the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum, the rough endoplasmic reticulum, 
the Golgi complex, secretory vesicles, endosomes, lys-
osomes, and a multiplicity of transport vesicles that 
interconnect these various compartments (Figure 7–3). 
Their lumen corresponds topologically to the out-
side of the cell; consequently, the inner leaflet of their 
lipid bilayer corresponds to the outer leaflet of the 
plasmalemma.
The major subcompartments of this system are 
anatomically discontinuous but functionally con-
nected because membranous and lumenal material is 
moved from one compartment to another by means of 
transport vesicles. For example, proteins and phospho-
lipids synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum 
(the portion of the reticulum studded with ribosomes) 
and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum are transported 
to the Golgi complex and then to secretory vesicles, 
which empty their contents when the vesicle mem-
brane fuses with the plasmalemma (a process called 
exocytosis). This secretory pathway adds membranous 
components to the plasmalemma and also releases the 
contents of these secretory vesicles into the extracellu-
lar space.
Conversely, components of cell membrane are 
taken into the cell through endocytic vesicles (endocytosis). 
These are incorporated into early endosomes, sort-
ing compartments that are concentrated at the cell’s 
periphery. The endocytosed membrane, which typi-
cally contains specific proteins such as transmembrane 
receptors, can be either directed back to the plasma 
membrane by maturing into recycling endosomes or 
can mature into late endosomes which are targeted 
for degradation by fusion with lysosomes. (Exocyto-
sis and endocytosis are discussed in detail later in this 


===== Page 5 =====
Mit
AT
AT
G
Mt
G
Mt
R
R
ER
ER
ER
ER
N
Nf
Ly
A
B
C
D
Ly
N
Ch
Mit
G
G
Ly
Ly
Ly
Mit
Mit
N
M
G
Ly
RER
B
A
D
C
Figure 7–3  Organelles of the neuron. Electron micrographs 
show cytoplasm in four different regions of the  
neuron. (Adapted, with permission, from Peters et al. 1991.)
A. A dendrite emerges from a pyramidal neuron’s cell body, 
which includes the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) above the 
nucleus (N) and a portion of the Golgi complex (G) nearby. 
Some Golgi cisternae have entered the dendrite, as have 
mitochondria (Mit), lysosomes (Ly), and ribosomes (R). Microtu-
bules (Mt) are prominent cytoskeletal filaments in the cytosol. 
Axon terminals (AT) making contact with the dendrite are seen 
at the top and right.
B. Some components of a spinal motor neuron that participate 
in the synthesis of macromolecules. The nucleus (N) contains 
masses of chromatin (Ch) and is bounded by the nuclear enve-
lope, which contains many nuclear pores (arrows). The mRNA 
leaves the nucleus through these pores and attaches to ribo-
somes that either remain free in the cytoplasm or attach to the 
membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum to form the rough 
endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Regulatory proteins synthesized 
in the cytoplasm are imported into the nucleus through the 
pores. Several parts of the Golgi apparatus (G) are seen, as are 
lysosomes (Ly) and mitochondria (Mit).
C, D. Micrographs of a dorsal root ganglion cell (C) and a 
motor neuron (D) show the organelles in the cell body that are 
chiefly responsible for synthesis and processing of proteins. 
The mRNA enters the cytoplasm through the nuclear envelope 
and is translated into proteins. Free polysomes, strings of 
ribosomes attached to a single mRNA, generate cytosolic pro-
teins and proteins to be imported into mitochondria (Mit) and 
peroxisomes. Proteins destined for the endoplasmic reticulum 
are formed after the polysomes attach to the membrane of the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The particular region of the motor 
neuron shown here also includes membranes of the Golgi 
apparatus (G), in which membrane and secretory proteins are 
further processed. Some of the newly synthesized proteins 
leave the Golgi apparatus in vesicles that move down the axon 
to synapses; other membrane proteins are incorporated into 
lysosomes (Ly) and other membranous organelles. The micro-
tubules (M) and neurofilaments (Nf) are components of the 
cytoskeleton.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    137
chapter.) The smooth endoplasmic reticulum also acts 
as a regulated internal Ca2+ store throughout the neu-
ronal cytoplasm (see the discussion of Ca2+ release in 
Chapter 14).
A specialized portion of the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum forms the nuclear envelope, a spherical flat-
tened cisterna that surrounds chromosomal DNA and 
its associated proteins (histones, transcription factors, 
polymerases, and isomerases) and defines the nucleus 
(Figure 7–3). Because the nuclear envelope is continu-
ous with other portions of the endoplasmic reticulum 
and other membranes of the vacuolar apparatus, it is 
presumed to have evolved as an invagination of the 
plasmalemma to ensheathe eukaryotic chromosomes. 
The nuclear envelope is interrupted by nuclear pores, 
where fusion of the inner and outer membranes of the 
envelope results in the formation of hydrophilic chan-
nels through which proteins and RNA are exchanged 
between the cytoplasm proper and the nuclear 
cytoplasm.
Even though nucleoplasm and cytoplasm are 
continuous domains of cytosol, only molecules with 
molecular weights less than 5,000 can pass through 
the nuclear pores freely by diffusion. Larger molecules 
B
A
10 µm
0.5 µm
Figure 7–4  Golgi and endoplasmic 
reticulum membranes extend from 
the cell body into dendrites.
A. The Golgi complex (solid arrow) 
appears under the light microscope as 
several filaments that extend into the 
dendrites (open arrow) but not into the 
axon. The arrowheads at the bottom 
indicate the axon hillock. For this micro-
graph, a large neuron of the brain stem 
was immunostained with antibodies 
specifically directed against the Golgi 
complex. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from De Camilli et al. 1986. Copyright © 
1986 Rockefeller University Press.)
B. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum 
(arrowhead) extends into the neck of 
a dendritic spine, while another mem-
brane compartment sits at the origin 
of the spine (arrow). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Cooney et al. 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Society for 
Neuroscience.)
need help. Some proteins have special nuclear localiza-
tion signals, domains that are composed of a sequence 
of basic amino acids (arginine and lysine) that are 
recognized by soluble proteins called nuclear import 
receptors (importins). At a nuclear pore, this complex is 
guided into the nucleus by another group of proteins 
called nucleoporins.
The cytoplasm of the nerve cell body extends into 
the dendritic tree without functional differentiation. 
Generally, all organelles in the cytoplasm of the cell 
body are also present in dendrites, although the densi-
ties of the rough endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi com-
plex, and lysosomes rapidly diminish with distance 
from the cell body. In dendrites, the smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum is prominent at the base of thin pro-
cesses called spines (Figures 7–4 and 7–5), the receptive 
portion of excitatory synapses. Concentrations of pol-
yribosomes in dendritic spines mediate local protein 
synthesis (see below).
In contrast to the continuity of the cell body 
and dendrites, a sharp functional boundary exists 
between the cell body at the axon hillock, where 
the axon emerges. The organelles that compose the 
main biosynthetic machinery for proteins in the 


===== Page 7 =====
138    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–5  Types of dendritic spines. Three types of dendritic 
spine shapes are shown in a mature dendrite in a pyramidal 
cell in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. The drawing at left 
is based on a series of electron micrographs. (Drawing repro-
duced, with permission, from Harris and Stevens 1989;  
A, B, and C are reproduced, with permission, from Sorra  
and Harris 1993. Copyright © 1993 Society for Neuroscience.)
A. In this thin dendritic spine, the thickened receptive surface 
(arrow), located across from the presynaptic axon, contains 
synaptic receptors. The tissue shown here and in B and C is 
from the hippocampus of a postnatal day-15 rat brain.
B. Stubby spines containing postsynaptic densities (arrow) are 
both small and rare in the mature hippocampus. Their larger 
counterparts (not shown) predominate in the immature brain.
C. Mushroom-shaped spines have a larger head. The immature 
spine shown here contains flat cisternae of smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum, some with a beaded appearance (solid arrow). 
The postsynaptic density is indicated by the open arrow.
A  Thin
B  Stubby
C  Mushroom
10 µm
Thin
Stubby
Mushroom


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    139
neuron—ribosomes, rough endoplasmic reticulum, 
and the Golgi complex—are generally excluded from 
axons (Figure 7–4), as are lysosomes and certain pro-
teins. However, axons are rich in smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum, individual synaptic vesicles, and their pre-
cursor membranes.
The Cytoskeleton Determines Cell Shape
The cytoskeleton determines the shape of a cell and is 
responsible for the asymmetric distribution of orga-
nelles within the cytoplasm. It includes three filamen-
tous structures: microtubules, neurofilaments, and 
microfilaments. These filaments and associated pro-
teins account for approximately a quarter of the total 
protein in the cell.
Microtubules form long scaffolds that extend from 
one end of a neuron to the other and play a key role 
in developing and maintaining cell shape. A single 
microtubule can be as long as 0.1 mm. Microtubules 
consist of protofilaments, each of which consists of 
multiple pairs of a- and b-tubulin subunits arranged 
longitudinally along the microtubule (Figure 7–6A). 
Tubulin subunits bind to neighboring subunits along 
the protofilament and also laterally between adjacent 
protofilaments. Microtubules are polarized with a plus 
end (or growing end) and a minus end (where micro-
tubules can be depolymerized). Interestingly, microtu-
bule orientations differ between axons and dendrites. 
In the axon, microtubules display a single orientation 
with the plus end directed away from the cell body. In 
proximal dendrites, microtubules can be oriented both 
ways, with a plus end oriented toward or away from 
the cell body.
Microtubules grow by addition of guanosine 
triphosphate (GTP)-bound tubulin dimers at their plus 
end. Shortly after polymerization, the GTP is hydro-
lyzed to guanosine diphosphate (GDP). When a micro-
tubule stops growing, its positive end is capped by 
a GDP-bound tubulin monomer. The low affinity of  
the GDP-bound tubulin for the polymer would lead 
to catastrophic depolymerization, were not for the fact 
that the microtubules are stabilized by interaction with 
other proteins.
In fact, while microtubules undergo rapid cycles 
of polymerization and depolymerization in dividing 
cells, a phenomenon referred to as dynamic instability, 
in mature dendrites and axons, they are more stable. 
This stability is thought to be caused by microtubule-
associated proteins (MAPs) that promote the oriented 
polymerization and assembly of the tubulin poly-
mers. MAPs in axons differ from those in dendrites. 
For example, MAP2 is present in dendrites but not in 
axons, where tau proteins (see Box 7–1) and MAP1b 
are present. Furthermore, microtubule stability is also 
tightly regulated by many different types of revers-
ible tubulin posttranslational modifications such as 
acetylation, detyrosination, and polyglutamylation. 
In Alzheimer disease and some other degenerative 
disorders, tau proteins are modified and abnormally 
polymerized, forming a characteristic lesion called the 
neurofibrillary tangle (Box 7–1).
Tubulins are encoded by a multigene family. At 
least six genes code the α- and β-subunits. Because of 
the expression of the different genes or posttranscrip-
tional modifications, more than 20 isoforms of tubulin 
are present in the brain.
Neurofilaments, 10 nm in diameter, are the bones 
of the cytoskeleton (Figure 7–6B). Neurofilaments are 
related to intermediate filaments of other cell types, 
including the cytokeratins of epithelial cells (hair and 
nails), glial fibrillary acidic protein in astrocytes, and 
desmin in muscle. Unlike microtubules, neurofilaments 
are stable and almost totally polymerized in the cell.
At 3 to 7 nm in diameter, microfilaments are the 
thinnest of the three main types of fibers that make up 
the cytoskeleton (Figure 7–6C). Like thin filaments of 
muscle, microfilaments are made up of two strands of 
polymerized globular actin monomers, each bearing 
an ATP or adenosine diphosphate (ADP), wound into 
a double-stranded helix. Actin is a major constituent 
of all cells, perhaps the most abundant animal protein 
in nature. There are several closely related molecular 
forms: the α actin of skeletal muscle and at least two 
other molecular forms, β and γ. Each is encoded by a 
different gene. Neural actin in higher vertebrates is a 
mixture of the β and γ species, which differ from mus-
cle actin by a few amino acid residues. Most actin mol-
ecules are highly conserved, not only in different cell 
types of a species but also in organisms as distantly 
related as humans and protozoa.
Unlike microtubules and neurofilaments, actin 
filaments are short. They are concentrated at the cell’s 
periphery in the cortical cytoplasm just beneath the 
plasmalemma, where they form a dense network 
with many actin-binding proteins (eg, spectrin-
fodrin, ankyrin, talin, and actinin). This matrix plays 
a key role in the dynamic function of the cell’s periph-
ery, such as the motility of growth cones (the grow-
ing tips of axons) during development, generation 
of specialized microdomains at the cell surface, and 
the formation of pre- and postsynaptic morphological 
specializations.
Like microtubules, microfilaments undergo cycles 
of polymerization and depolymerization. At any one 


===== Page 9 =====
140    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–6  Atlas of fibrillary structures.
A. Microtubules, the largest-diameter fibers (25 nm), are helical 
cylinders composed of 13 protofilaments, each 5 nm in width. 
Each protofilament is made up of a column of alternating α- and 
β-tubulin subunits; each subunit has a molecular weight of 
approximately 50,000 Da. Adjacent subunits bind to each other 
along the longitudinal protofilaments and laterally between 
subunits of adjacent protofilaments.
    A tubulin molecule is a heterodimer consisting of one α- and 
one β-tubulin subunit. 1. View of a microtubule. The arrows indi-
cate the direction of the right-handed helix. 2. A side view of a 
microtubule shows the alternating α- and β-subunits.
B. Neurofilaments are built with fibers that twist around each 
other to produce coils of increasing thickness. The thinnest 
units are monomers that form coiled-coil heterodimers. These 
dimers form a tetrameric complex that becomes the proto-
filament. Two protofilaments become a protofibril, and three 
protofibrils are helically twisted to form the 10-nm diameter 
neurofilament. (Adapted, with permission, from Bershadsky 
and Vasiliev 1988.)
C. Microfilaments, the smallest-diameter fibers (approximately 
7 nm), are composed of two strands of polymerized globular 
actin (G-actin) monomers arranged in a helix. At least six differ-
ent (but closely related) actins are found in mammals; each  
variant is encoded by a separate gene. Microfilaments are  
polar structures because the globular monomers are 
asymmetric.
B  Neuroﬁlament
C  Microﬁlament
Monomers
Coiled-coil
dimers
Tetrameric
complex
(protoﬁlament)
Protoﬁlament
Protoﬁbril
Filament
50 nm
2 nm
A  Microtubule
1
2
10 nm
Protoﬁlament
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
1
2
3
5.5 nm
35.5 nm
time, approximately half of the total actin in a cell can 
exist as unpolymerized monomers. The state of actin is 
controlled by binding proteins, which facilitate assem-
bly and limit polymer length by capping the rapidly 
growing end of the filament or by severing it. Other 
binding proteins crosslink or bundle actin filaments. 
The dynamic state of microtubules and microfilaments 
permits a mature neuron to retract old axons and den-
drites and extend new ones. This structural plasticity 
is thought to be a major factor in changes of synaptic 
connections and efficacy and, therefore, cellular mech-
anisms of long-term memory and learning.


