===== Page 1 =====
252    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
synapses begin to form, they often initiate the down-
regulation of electrical transmission.
Both types of synapses also can coexist in neurons 
in the mature nervous system. The role of these two 
types of synapses is perhaps best understood in the 
circuitry of the retina. There, rod and cone photorecep-
tors release the neurotransmitter glutamate and form 
chemical synapses on a class of interneurons called 
bipolar cells. Each bipolar cell extends its dendrites 
horizontally, receiving chemical synaptic input from a 
number of overlying rods and cones that respond to 
light from a very small region of the visual field. The 
receptive field of a bipolar neuron, however, extends 
about twice as far as the receptive field of the photore-
ceptors from which it receives chemical synaptic input. 
This is a result of electrical synapses formed between 
neighboring bipolar cells and between bipolar cells 
and a second type of interneuron, the amacrine cell 
(Chapter 22).
Finally, the efficacy of gap junctions can be regu-
lated by phosphorylation through different protein 
kinases, which generally enhances gap-junction cou-
pling. For example, dopamine and other transmitters 
can increase or decrease gap-junction coupling by 
acting on metabotropic G protein–coupled receptors 
to regulate levels of cAMP and thereby enhance or 
decrease channel phosphorylation. Such complex sign-
aling loops are a hallmark of many neural circuits and 
greatly expand their computational powers.
Highlights
1.	 Neurons communicate by two major mechanisms: 
electrical and chemical synaptic transmission.
2.	 Electrical synapses are formed at regions of tight 
apposition called gap junctions, which provide 
a direct pathway for charge to flow between the 
cytoplasm of communicating neurons. This results 
in very rapid synaptic transmission that is suited 
for synchronizing the activity of populations of 
neurons.
3.	 Neurons at electrical synapses are connected 
through gap-junction channels, which are formed 
from a pair of hemichannels, called connexons, 
one each contributed by the presynaptic and post-
synaptic cells. Each connexon is a hexamer, com-
posed of six subunits termed connexins.
4.	 At chemical synapses, a presynaptic action poten-
tial triggers the release of a chemical transmitter 
from the presynaptic cell through the process of 
exocytosis. Transmitter molecules then rapidly 
diffuse across the synaptic cleft to bind to and 
activate transmitter receptors in the postsynaptic 
cell.
5.	 Although slower than electrical synaptic transmis-
sion, chemical transmission allows for amplification 
of the presynaptic action potential through the 
release of tens of thousands of molecules of trans-
mitter and the activation of hundreds to thou-
sands of receptors in the postsynaptic cell.
6.	 There are two major classes of transmitter recep-
tors. Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion 
channels. Binding of transmitter to an extracellu-
lar binding site triggers a conformational change 
that opens the channel pore, generating an ionic 
current that excites (depolarizes) or inhibits 
(hyperpolarizes) the postsynaptic cell, depend-
ing on the receptor. Ionotropic receptors underlie 
fast chemical synaptic transmission that mediates 
rapid signaling in the nervous system.
7.	 Metabotropic receptors are responsible for the 
second major class of chemical synaptic actions. 
These receptors activate intracellular metabolic 
signaling pathways, often leading to the synthesis 
of second messengers, such as cAMP, that regulate 
levels of protein phosphorylation. Metabotropic 
receptors underlie slow, modulatory synaptic 
actions that contribute to changes in behavioral 
state and arousal.
 Steven A. Siegelbaum  
 Gerald D. Fischbach 
Selected Reading
Bennett MV, Zukin RS. 2004. Electrical coupling and neu-
ronal synchronization in the mammalian brain. Neuron 
19:495–511.
Colquhoun D, Sakmann B. 1998. From muscle endplate to 
brain synapses: a short history of synapses and agonist-
activated ion channels. Neuron 20:381–387.
Cowan WM, Kandel ER. 2000. A brief history of synapses 
and synaptic transmission. In: MW Cowan, TC Südhof, 
CF Stevens (eds). Synapses, pp. 1–87. Baltimore and London: 
The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.
Curti S, O’Brien J. 2016. Characteristics and plasticity of elec-
trical synaptic transmission. BMC Cell Biol 17:13. Suppl 1.
Eccles JC. 1976. From electrical to chemical transmission in 
the central nervous system. The closing address of the 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 11 / Overview of Synaptic Transmission    253
Sir Henry Dale Centennial Symposium. Notes Rec R Soc 
Lond 30:219–230.
Furshpan EJ, Potter DD. 1959. Transmission at the giant 
motor synapses of the crayfish. J Physiol 145:289–325.
Goodenough DA, Paul DL. 2009. Gap junctions. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol 1:a002576.
Jessell TM, Kandel ER. 1993. Synaptic transmission: a bidi-
rectional and a self-modifiable form of cell-cell communi-
cation. Cell 72:1–30.
Nakagawa S, Maeda S, Tsukihara T. 2010. Structural and 
functional studies of gap junction channels. Curr Opin 
Struct Biol 20:423–430.
Pereda AE. 2014. Electrical synapses and their functional 
interactions with chemical synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci 
15:250–263.
References
Beyer EC, Paul DL, Goodenough DA. 1987. Connexin 43: a 
protein from rat heart homologous to a gap junction pro-
tein from liver. J Cell Biol 105:2621–2629.
Bruzzone R, White TW, Scherer SS, Fischbeck KH, Paul 
DL. 1994. Null mutations of connexin 32 in patients 
with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Neuron 
13:1253–1260.
Carew TJ, Kandel ER. 1976. Two functional effects of 
decreased conductance EPSP’s: synaptic augmentation 
and increased electrotonic coupling. Science 192:150–153.
Cornell-Bell AH, Finkbeiner SM, Cooper MS, Smith SJ. 1990. 
Glutamate induces calcium waves in cultured astrocytes: 
long-range glial signaling. Science 247:470–473.
Dale H. 1935. Pharmacology and nerve-endings. Proc R Soc 
Lond 28:319–332.
Eckert R. 1988. Propagation and transmission of signals. In: 
Animal Physiology: Mechanisms and Adaptations, 3rd ed., 
pp. 134–176. New York: Freeman.
Ehrlich P. 1900. On immunity with special reference to cell 
life. Croonian Lect Proc R Soc Lond 66:424–448.
Furshpan EJ, Potter DD. 1957. Mechanism of nerve-impulse 
transmission at a crayfish synapse. Nature 180:342–343.
Harris AL. 2009. Gating on the outside. J Gen Physiol 
133:549–553.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1977. Structure of the synapse. In: ER 
Kandel (ed). Handbook of Physiology: A Critical, Comprehen-
sive Presentation of Physiological Knowledge and Concepts, 
Sect. 1. The Nervous System, Vol. 1 Cellular Biology of 
Neurons, Part 1, pp. 261–294. Bethesda, MD: American 
Physiological Society.
Jaslove SW, Brink PR. 1986. The mechanism of rectification 
at the electrotonic motor giant synapse of the crayfish. 
Nature 323:63–65.
Langley JN. 1906. On nerve endings and on special excitable 
substances in cells. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 78:170–194.
Loewi O, Navratil E. [1926] 1972. On the humoral propaga-
tion of cardiac nerve action. Communication X. The fate 
of the vagus substance. English translation in: I Cooke, M 
Lipkin Jr (eds). Cellular Neurophysiology: A Source Book, pp. 
4711–485. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Maeda S, Nakagawa S, Suga M, et al. 2009. Structure of the 
connexin 26 gap junction channel at 3.5 Å resolution. 
Nature 458:597–602.
Makowski L, Caspar DL, Phillips WC, Goodenough DA. 
1977. Gap junction structures. II. Analysis of the X-ray dif-
fraction data. J Cell Biol 74:629–645.
Pappas GD, Waxman SG. 1972. Synaptic fine structure: mor-
phological correlates of chemical and electronic trans-
mission. In: GD Pappas, DP Purpura (eds). Structure and 
Function of Synapses, pp. 1–43. New York: Raven.
Ramón y Cajal S. 1894. La fine structure des centres nerveux. 
Proc R Soc Lond 55:444–468.
Ramón y Cajal S. 1911. Histologie du Système Nerveux de 
l’Homme & des Vertébrés, Vol. 2. L Azoulay (transl). Paris: 
Maloine, 1955. Reprint. Madrid: Instituto Ramón y Cajal.
Sherrington C. 1947. The Integrative Action of the Nervous 
System, 2nd ed. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press.
Unwin PNT, Zampighi G. 1980. Structure of the junction 
between communicating cells. Nature 283:545–549.
Whittington MA, Traub RD. 2003. Interneuron diversity 
series: inhibitory interneurons and network oscillations 
in vitro. Trends Neurosci 26:676–682.


===== Page 3 =====
12
Directly Gated Transmission:  
The Nerve-Muscle Synapse
motor neurons on skeletal muscle cells. The landmark 
work of Bernard Katz and his colleagues over three 
decades beginning in 1950 defined the basic param-
eters of synaptic transmission and opened the door 
to modern molecular analyses of synaptic function. 
Therefore, before we examine the complexities of syn-
apses in the central nervous system, we will examine 
the basic features of chemical synaptic transmission at 
the simpler nerve-muscle synapse.
The early studies capitalized on several experi-
mental advantages offered by nerve-muscle prepara-
tions of various species. Muscles and attached motor 
axons are easy to dissect and maintain for several 
hours in vitro. Muscle cells are large enough to be 
penetrated with two or more fine-tipped microelec-
trodes, enabling precise analyses of synaptic poten-
tials and underlying ionic currents. In most species, 
innervation is restricted to one site, the motor end-
plate, and in adult animals that site is innervated by 
only one motor axon. In contrast, central neurons 
receive many convergent inputs that are distributed 
throughout the dendritic arbor and the soma, and 
thus the impact of single inputs is more difficult to 
discern.
Most important, the chemical transmitter that medi-
ates synaptic transmission between nerve and muscle, 
acetylcholine (ACh), was identified early in the 20th 
century. We now know that signaling at the nerve-muscle 
synapse involves a relatively simple mechanism: Neuro-
transmitter released from the presynaptic nerve binds to 
a single type of receptor in the postsynaptic membrane, 
The Neuromuscular Junction Has Specialized Presynaptic 
and Postsynaptic Structures
The Postsynaptic Potential Results From a Local Change 
in Membrane Permeability
The Neurotransmitter Acetylcholine Is Released in 
Discrete Packets
Individual Acetylcholine Receptor-Channels Conduct  
All-or-None Currents
The Ion Channel at the End-Plate Is Permeable to Both 
Sodium and Potassium Ions
Four Factors Determine the End-Plate Current
The Acetylcholine Receptor-Channels Have Distinct 
Properties That Distinguish Them From the Voltage-Gated 
Channels That Generate the Muscle Action Potential
Transmitter Binding Produces a Series of State Changes 
in the Acetylcholine Receptor-Channel
The Low-Resolution Structure of the Acetylcholine 
Receptor Is Revealed by Molecular and Biophysical 
Studies
The High-Resolution Structure of the Acetylcholine 
Receptor-Channel Is Revealed by X-Ray  
Crystal Studies
Highlights
Postscript: The End-Plate Current Can Be Calculated  
From an Equivalent Circuit
M
uch of our understanding of the principles 
that govern chemical synapses in the brain 
is based on studies of synapses formed by 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     255
the nicotinic ACh receptor.1 Binding of transmitter to 
the receptor directly opens an ion channel; both the 
receptor and channel are components of the same mac-
romolecule. Synthetic and natural agents that activate 
or inhibit nicotinic ACh receptors have proven useful 
in analyzing not only the ACh receptors in muscle, but 
also cholinergic synapses in peripheral ganglia and in 
the brain. Moreover, such ligands can be useful thera-
peutic agents, including the treatment of inherited and 
acquired neurological diseases resulting from altera-
tions in ACh receptor function or genetic mutations.
The Neuromuscular Junction Has Specialized 
Presynaptic and Postsynaptic Structures
As the motor axon approaches the end-plate, the site 
of contact between nerve and muscle (also known as 
the neuromuscular junction), it loses its myelin sheath 
and divides into several fine branches. At their ends, 
these fine branches form multiple expansions or vari-
cosities called synaptic boutons (Figure 12–1) from which 
the motor axon releases its transmitter. Although 
myelin ends some distance from the sites of transmit-
ter release, Schwann cells cover and partially enwrap 
the nerve terminal. A terminal “arbor” defines the area 
of the motor end-plate. In different species, end-plates 
range from compact elliptical structures about 20 μm 
across to linear arrays more than 100 μm in length.
The nerve terminals lie in grooves, the primary 
folds, along the muscle surface. The membrane under 
each synaptic bouton is further invaginated to form a 
series of secondary or junctional folds (Figure 12–1). 
The muscle cytoplasm beneath the nerve terminals 
contains many round muscle nuclei that likely are 
involved in synthesis of synapse-specific molecules. 
They are different from the flat nuclei located away 
from the synapse along the length of the muscle fiber.
Action potentials in the axon are conducted to the 
tips of the fine branches where they trigger the release 
of ACh. The synaptic boutons contain all the machin-
ery required to synthesize and release ACh. This 
includes the synaptic vesicles containing the trans-
mitter ACh and the active zones where the synaptic 
vesicles are clustered. In addition, each active zone 
contains voltage-gated Ca2+ channels that conduct Ca2+ 
into the terminal with each action potential. This influx 
of Ca2+ triggers the fusion of the synaptic vesicles with 
the plasma membrane at the active zones, releasing the 
contents of the synaptic vesicles into the synaptic cleft 
by the process of exocytosis (Chapter 15).
The distribution of ACh receptors can be studied 
using α-bungarotoxin (αBTX), a peptide isolated from 
the venom of the snake Bungarus multicinctus that binds 
tightly and specifically to the ACh receptors at the 
neuromuscular junction (Figure 12–2B). Quantitative 
autoradiography of iodinated BTX (125I-αBTX) showed 
that the ACh receptors are packed at the crests of the sec-
ondary folds at a surface density in excess of 10,000/μm2 
(Figure 12–3). The factors responsible for localizing the 
receptor are discussed in Chapter 48, where we consider 
the development of synaptic connections.
Presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes at 
the neuromuscular junction are separated by a cleft 
approximately 100 nm wide. Although such a gap was 
postulated by Ramón y Cajal in the last years of the 
19th century, it was not visualized until synapses were 
examined by electron microscopy more than 50 years 
later! A basement membrane (basal lamina) composed 
of collagen and other extracellular matrix proteins is 
present throughout the synaptic cleft. Acetylcholinest-
erase (AChE), an enzyme that rapidly hydrolyzes 
ACh, is anchored to collagen fibrils within the base-
ment membrane. The ACh released into the synaptic 
cleft must run a “gauntlet” of AChE before it reaches 
the ACh receptors in the muscle membrane. As AChE 
is inhibited by high concentrations of ACh, most mole-
cules get through. Nevertheless, the enzyme limits the 
action of ACh to “one hit” because AChE hydrolyzes 
transmitter as soon as it dissociates from its receptor in 
the postsynaptic membrane.
The Postsynaptic Potential Results From a Local 
Change in Membrane Permeability
Once ACh is released from a synaptic terminal, it rap-
idly binds to and opens the ACh receptor-channels in 
the end-plate membrane. This produces a dramatic 
increase in the permeability of the muscle membrane 
to cations, which leads to the entry of positive charge 
into the muscle fiber and a rapid depolarization of the 
end-plate membrane. The resulting excitatory post-
synaptic potential (EPSP) is very large; stimulation of a 
single motor axon produces an EPSP of approximately 
75 mV. At the nerve-muscle synapse, the EPSP is also 
referred to as the end-plate potential.
This change in membrane potential usually is 
large enough to rapidly activate the voltage-gated Na+ 
1There are two basic types of receptors for ACh: nicotinic and mus-
carinic, so called because the alkaloids nicotine and muscarine bind 
exclusively to and activate one or the other type of ACh receptor. 
The nicotinic ACh receptor is ionotropic, whereas the muscarinic 
receptor is metabotropic. We shall learn more about muscarinic ACh 
receptors in Chapter 14.


===== Page 5 =====
256    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Motor neuron
Muscle ﬁber
Neuromuscular junction
Myelin
Axon
End-plate
region
Schwann cell sheath
Synaptic boutons
Mitochondrion
Synaptic vesicle (ACh)
Presynaptic membrane
Active zone
Synaptic cleft
Postsynaptic
membrane
Ca2+ channel
Basal lamina
Junctional fold
Voltage-gated
Na+ channel
ACh
receptor-channels
Figure 12–1  The neuromuscular junction is 
an ideal site for studying chemical synaptic 
signaling. At the muscle, the motor axon ram-
ifies into several fine branches approximately  
2 μm thick. Each branch forms multiple 
swellings called synaptic boutons, which are 
covered by a thin layer of Schwann cells. The 
boutons contact a specialized region of the 
muscle fiber membrane, the end-plate, and 
are separated from the muscle membrane by 
a 100-nm synaptic cleft. Each bouton contains 
mitochondria and synaptic vesicles clustered 
around active zones, where the neurotransmit-
ter acetylcholine (ACh) is released. Immedi-
ately under each bouton in the end-plate are 
several junctional folds, the crests of which 
contain a high density of ACh receptors.
    The muscle fiber and nerve terminal are 
covered by a layer of connective tissue, the 
basal lamina, consisting of collagen and glyco-
proteins. Unlike the cell membrane, the basal 
lamina is freely permeable to ions and small 
organic compounds, including the ACh trans-
mitter. Both the presynaptic terminal and the 
muscle fiber secrete proteins into the basal 
lamina, including the enzyme acetylcholinest-
erase, which inactivates the ACh released 
from the presynaptic terminal by breaking 
it down into acetate and choline. The basal 
lamina also organizes the synapse by aligning 
the presynaptic boutons with the postsynaptic 
junctional folds. (Adapted from McMahan and 
Kuffler 1971.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     257
Figure 12–2  Poisons, venoms, and high-voltage electric fish 
help elucidate the structure and function of the nicotinic 
ACh receptor.
A. Curare is a mixture of toxins extracted from the leaves of 
Strychnos toxifera and is used by South American indigenous 
people on arrowheads to paralyze their quarry. The active com-
pound, D-tubocurarine, is a complex multiring structure with 
positively charged amine groups that bear some similarity to 
ACh. It binds tightly to the ACh binding site on the nicotinic 
receptor, where it acts as a competitive antagonist for ACh. 
(Reproduced from Pabst, G (ed). 1898. Köhler’s Medizinal-
Pflanzen, Vol. 3, Plate 45. Gera-Untermhaus, Germany: Franz 
Eugen Köhler.)
B. The toxin α-bungarotoxin is obtained from the venom of 
the banded krait, Bungarus. It is a 74-amino acid polypeptide 
that contains five disulfide bonds (yellow lines), producing 
a rigid structure (From https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alpha-
bungarotoxin. Adapted from Zeng et al. 2001.). The toxin binds 
extremely tightly to the ACh binding site and acts as an irrevers-
ible, noncompetitive antagonist of ACh.
C. The electric ray Torpedo marmorata has a specialized struc-
ture, the electric organ, which consists of a large number of 
small, flat, muscle-like cells, or electroplaques, arranged in 
series like a stack of batteries. When a motor nerve releases 
ACh, a large current is generated by the opening of a very large 
number of nicotinic ACh receptor-channels, which produces a 
very large voltage drop of up to 200 V outside the fish, thereby 
stunning nearby prey. The electroplaques provide a rich source 
of ACh receptors for biochemical purification and characteriza-
tion. (From Walsh 1773.)
OCH3
H3C
CH3
N
+
+
N
OCH3
H
CH3
OH
OH
O
O
Strychnos toxifera
Torpedo marmorata  - Electric Ray
Bungarus multicinctus
A 
C 
B  
α-Bungarotoxin
Nicotinic ACh receptor
D-tubocurarine
channels in the muscle membrane, converting the end-
plate potential into an action potential, which then 
propagates along the muscle fiber. The threshold for 
generating an action potential in the muscle is particu-
larly low at the end-plate, owing to a high density of 
voltage-gated Na+ channels in the bottom of the junc-
tional folds. The combination of a very large EPSP and 
low threshold results in a high safety factor for trigger-
ing an action potential in the muscle fiber. In contrast, 
in the central nervous system, most presynaptic neu-
rons produce postsynaptic potentials less than 1 mV 
in amplitude, such that inputs from many presynaptic 
neurons are needed to generate an action potential in 
most central neurons.
The end-plate potential was first studied in detail 
in the 1950s by Paul Fatt and Bernard Katz using intra-
cellular voltage recordings. Fatt and Katz were able to 
isolate the end-plate potential by applying the drug 
curare (Figure 12–2A) to reduce the amplitude of the 
postsynaptic potential below the threshold for the action 
potential (Figure 12–4). At the end-plate, the synaptic 
potential rises within 1 to 2 ms but decays more slowly. 


===== Page 7 =====
258    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 12–4  The end-plate potential can be isolated phar-
macologically for study.
A. Under normal circumstances, stimulation of the motor axon 
produces an action potential in a skeletal muscle cell. The 
dashed curve in the plot shows the inferred time course of the 
end-plate potential that triggers the action potential. The lighter 
dashed line shows the action potential threshold.
B. Curare blocks the binding of ACh to its receptor and so  
prevents the end-plate potential from reaching the threshold 
for an action potential. In this way, the currents and channels 
that contribute to the end-plate potential, which are different 
from those producing an action potential, can be studied.  
The end-plate potential shown here was recorded in the 
presence of a low concentration of curare, which blocks only 
a fraction of the ACh receptors. The values for the resting 
potential (–90 mV), end-plate potential, and action potential in 
these intracellular recordings are typical of a vertebrate  
skeletal muscle.
Figure 12–3  Acetylcholine receptors in 
the vertebrate neuromuscular junction 
are concentrated at the top one-third 
of the junctional folds. This receptor-rich 
region is characterized by an increased 
density of the postjunctional membrane 
(arrow). The autoradiograph shown here 
was made by first incubating the membrane 
with radiolabeled α-bungarotoxin, which 
binds to the ACh receptor. Radioactive decay 
results in the emittance of a particle that 
causes overlaid silver grains to become fixed 
along its trajectory (black grains). Magnifica-
tion ×18,000. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Salpeter 1987.)
By recording at different points along the muscle fiber, 
Fatt and Katz found that the EPSP is maximal at the 
end-plate and decreases progressively with distance 
(Figure 12–5). In addition, the time course of the EPSP 
slows progressively with distance.
From this, Fatt and Katz concluded that the end-
plate potential is generated by an inward ionic cur-
rent that is confined to the end-plate and then spreads 
passively away. (An inward current corresponds to an 
influx of positive charge, which depolarizes the inside 
of the membrane.) Inward current is confined to the 
end-plate because the ACh receptors are concentrated 
there, opposite the presynaptic terminal from which 
transmitter is released. The decrease in amplitude and 
slowing of the EPSP as a function of distance is a result 
of the passive cable properties of the muscle fiber.
Electrophysiological evidence that the ACh recep-
tors are localized to the end-plate was provided by 
Stephen Kuffler and his colleagues, who applied 
ACh to precise points on the muscle membrane 
Vm
(mV)
–40
–60
Action potential
–20
0
+20
–80
+40
–90
A  Normal
End-plate potential
Threshold
Time (ms)
5
0
10
Vm
(mV)
Time (ms)
–60
–70
–50
–80
–90
5
0
10
B  With curare
Threshold
–40
–30
End-plate potential


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     259
Figure 12–5  The end-plate potential 
decreases with distance as it pas-
sively propagates away from the end-
plate. (Adapted, with permission, from Miles 
1969.)
A. The amplitude of the postsynaptic potential 
decreases and the time course of the potential 
slows with distance from the site of initiation 
in the end-plate.
B. The decay results from leakiness of the 
muscle fiber membrane. Because charge must 
flow in a complete circuit, the inward synaptic 
current at the end-plate gives rise to a return 
outward current through resting channels and 
across the lipid bilayer (the capacitor). This 
return outward flow of positive charge depolar-
izes the membrane. Because current leaks out 
all along the membrane, the outward current 
and resulting depolarization decreases with 
distance from the end-plate.
A
B
0
1
2
3
4 mm
Motor
axon
Motor neuron terminal 
Synaptic current
Interior of muscle ﬁber
Muscle
ﬁber
using a technique called micro-iontophoresis. In this 
approach, the positively charged ACh is ejected from 
an ACh-filled extracellular microelectrode by apply-
ing a positive voltage to the inside of the electrode. 
Exposing the end-plate region to proteolytic enzymes 
allows the nerve terminal to be pulled away from the 
muscle surface and the ACh to be applied directly to 
the postsynaptic membrane directly under the tip of 
the small microelectrode. Using this technique, Kuffler 
found that the postsynaptic depolarizing response to 
ACh declined steeply within a few micrometers of the 
synaptic terminal.
Voltage-clamp experiments have revealed that the 
end-plate current rises and decays more rapidly than 
the resultant end-plate potential (Figure 12–6). The 
time course of the end-plate current is directly deter-
mined by the rapid opening and closing of the ACh 
receptor-channels. Because it takes time for an ionic 
A
B
Muscle
ﬁber
+
Motor
axon
Vc
Vm
Im
2 ms
Time
10 mV
10 nA
Stimulate motor axon
Depolarizing
end-plate potential
Inward synaptic current
at the end-plate
Figure 12–6  The end-plate current increases and decays 
more rapidly than the end-plate potential.
A. The membrane at the end-plate is voltage-clamped by insert-
ing two microelectrodes into the muscle near the end-plate. 
One electrode measures membrane potential (Vm), and the 
second passes current (Im). Both electrodes are connected to a 
negative feedback amplifier, which ensures that sufficient cur-
rent (Im) is delivered so that Vm will remain clamped at the com-
mand potential Vc. The synaptic current evoked by stimulating 
the motor nerve can then be measured at constant Vm, for 
example, −90 mV (see Box 10–1).
B. The end-plate potential (measured when Vm is not clamped) 
changes relatively slowly and lags behind the more rapid inward 
synaptic current (measured under voltage-clamp conditions). 
This is because synaptic current must first alter the charge on 
the muscle membrane capacitance before the muscle  
membrane can be depolarized.


===== Page 9 =====
260    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
current to charge or discharge the muscle membrane 
capacitance, and thus alter the membrane voltage, the 
EPSP lags behind the synaptic current (see Figure 9–10 
and the Postscript at the end of this chapter).
The Neurotransmitter Acetylcholine  
Is Released in Discrete Packets
During their first microelectrode recordings at frog 
motor end-plates in the 1950s, Fatt and Katz observed 
small spontaneous depolarizing potentials (0.5–1.0 mV) 
that occurred at an average rate of about 1/s. Such 
spontaneous potentials were restricted to the end-
plate, exhibited the same time course as stimulus-
evoked EPSPs, and were blocked by curare. Hence, 
they were named “miniature” end-plate potentials 
(mEPPs, or mEPSPs in our current terminology).
What could account for the small, fixed size of 
the miniature end-plate potential? Del Castillo and 
Katz tested the possibility that an mEPSP represents 
the action of a single ACh molecule. This hypothesis 
was quickly dismissed, because applying very small 
amounts of ACh to the end-plate could elicit depolariz-
ing responses that were much smaller than the 1.0-mV 
mEPSP. The low doses of ACh did produce an increase 
in baseline fluctuations or “noise.” Later analysis of 
the statistical components of this noise led to estimates 
that the underlying unitary postsynaptic response was 
a depolarization of 0.3 μV in amplitude and 1.0 ms  
in duration. This was the first hint of the electrical 
signaling properties of a single ACh receptor-channel 
(described later).
Del Castillo and Katz concluded that each mEPSP 
must represent the action of a multimolecular packet 
or “quantum” of transmitter. Further, they suggested 
that the large, stimulus-evoked EPSP was made up of 
an integral number of quanta. Evidence for this quan-
tal hypothesis is presented in Chapter 15.
Individual Acetylcholine Receptor-Channels 
Conduct All-or-None Currents
What are the properties of the ACh receptor-channels 
that produce the inward current that generates the 
depolarizing end-plate potential? Which ions move 
through the channels to produce this inward current? 
And what does the current carried by a single ACh 
receptor-channel look like?
In 1976, Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann obtained 
key insights into the biophysical nature of ACh recep-
tor-channel function from recordings of the current 
conducted by single ACh receptor-channels in skeletal 
muscle cells, the unitary or elementary current. They 
found that the opening of an individual channel gener-
ates a very small rectangular step of ionic current (Figure 
12–7A). At a given resting potential, each channel open-
ing generates the same-size current pulse. At −90 mV, the 
current steps are approximately −2.7 pA in amplitude. 
Although this is a very small current, it corresponds to a 
flow of approximately 17 million ions per second!
Whereas the amplitude of the current through 
a single ACh receptor-channel is constant for every 
opening, the duration of each opening and the time 
between openings vary considerably. These varia-
tions occur because channel openings and closings 
are stochastic; they obey the same statistical law that 
describes the exponential time course of radioactive 
decay. Because channels and ACh undergo random 
thermal motions and fluctuations, it is impossible to 
predict exactly how long it will take any one channel 
to bind ACh or how long that channel will stay open 
before the ACh dissociates and the channel closes. 
However, the average length of time a particular type 
of channel stays open is a well-defined property of that 
channel, just as the half-life of radioactive decay is an 
invariant property of a particular isotope. The mean 
open time for ACh receptor-channels is approximately 
1 ms. Thus, each channel opening permits the move-
ment of approximately 17,000 ions. Once a channel 
closes, the ACh molecules dissociate and the channel 
remains closed until it binds ACh again.
The Ion Channel at the End-Plate Is Permeable to 
Both Sodium and Potassium Ions
Once a receptor-channel opens, which ions flow 
through the channel, and how does this lead to depo-
larization of the muscle membrane? One important 
means of identifying the ion (or ions) responsible for 
the synaptic current is to measure the value of the 
chemical driving force (the chemical battery) propel-
ling ions through the channel. Remember, the current 
through a single open channel is given by the prod-
uct of the single-channel conductance and the electro-
chemical driving force on the ions conducted through 
the channel (Chapter 9). Thus, the current generated 
by a single ACh receptor-channel is given by:
	
IEPSP = γEPSP × (Vm − EEPSP),	
(12–1)
where IEPSP is the amplitude of current through one chan-
nel, γEPSP is the conductance of a single open channel, EEPSP is 
membrane potential at which the net flux of ions through 
the channel is zero, and Vm − EEPSP is the electrochemi-
cal driving force for ion flux. The current steps change in 


