===== Page 1 =====
1036    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Liver
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Long-term signals
Pancreas
Fat
mass
Short-term signals
A  Maintenance of energy balance
B
Blood
Blood
Hypothalamus
B
Vagus
nerve
Cervical spine
SNS afferents
GLP-1
PYY
CCK
Ghrelin
Insulin
Leptin
Satiety
Hunger
AgRP
POMC
VGLUT2
Arcuate
nucleus
Hypothalamus
MC4R
GABA
AgRP
Glutamate
–
+
NPY
αMSH
Hunger
promoting
Satiety 
promoting
PVH satiety neuron
Lateral parabrachial nucleus


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1037
Figure 41–14  (Opposite) Neural and endocrine components 
combine to regulate energy balance.
A. Short-term signals. During meals, cholecystokinin (CCK) 
from the intestinal tract stimulates sensory fibers of the vagus 
nerve, thus promoting satiation (meal termination). Glucagon-
like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY), also released by 
the intestinal tract, appear to work on both sensory fibers of 
the vagus and neurons in the brain. The vagal sensory fibers, 
along with sympathetic fibers from the gut and orosensory 
information, converge in the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS). 
Prior to mealtime, release of ghrelin from the stomach peaks, 
providing a blood-borne signal to neurons in the brain. Whereas 
CCK promotes satiety, ghrelin promotes eating.
   Long-term signals. Leptin and insulin are among the humoral 
signals that inform the brain about the status of the fat stores. 
Leptin is produced in fat-storing cells, whereas insulin is pro-
duced in the pancreas. Both hormones are sensed by recep-
tors in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus as well as by 
receptors in the NTS. Leptin and insulin reduce food intake and 
increase energy expenditure. (Abbreviation: SNS, sympathetic 
nervous system.)
B. Neurons in the arcuate nucleus that synthesize agouti-
related peptide (AgRP), proopiomelanocortin (POMC), and 
vesicular glutamate transporter 2 (VGLUT2) project to the 
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) where they 
control hunger and satiety. Satiety-promoting POMC neurons 
release the processed POMC peptide, α-melanocyte stimulat-
ing hormone (αMSH), which binds to melanocortin-4 receptors 
(MC4R) on neurons in the PVH. Activation of these neurons 
causes satiety. In contrast, the hunger-promoting AgRP neu-
rons release two inhibitory transmitters, γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) and neuropeptide Y (NPY), and the MC4R antagonist 
AgRP. Their combined effect is to inhibit the MC4R-expressing 
neurons, causing hunger. The MC4R-expressing neurons also 
receive direct excitatory input from another population of arcu-
ate neurons, VGLUT2 neurons, which also promote satiety. The 
binding of αMSH to MC4R causes satiety by two mechanisms: 
by directly activating the PVH-MC4R neurons and by upregulat-
ing excitatory transmission from the arcuate VGLUT2 neurons 
to the PVH-MC4R neurons (blue arrows). Finally, PVH-MC4R 
neurons project to the lateral parabrachial nucleus where they 
promote satiety.
rather, they simply have leptin levels that exceed the 
maximally effective concentration.
POMC, AgRP, and MC4R Neurons Are Key Nodes in the 
Afferent/Efferent Loop
Neuron-specific 
manipulation 
technologies 
have 
revealed two antagonistic populations of neurons in 
the arcuate nucleus that control energy balance: one 
expresses agouti-related peptide (AgRP) and the other 
the precursor polypeptide proopiomelanocortin (POMC) 
(Figure 41–14B). POMC neurons decrease hunger and 
stimulate sympathetically driven energy expenditure; 
AgRP neurons do the opposite. POMC neurons release 
the processed peptide α-melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mone (αMSH), which activates the melanocortin-4 
receptor (MC4R), a G protein–coupled receptor.
The downstream MC4R-expressing neurons that 
control hunger lie within the PVH. When these MC4R 
neurons are excited by αMSH released from POMC 
afferents, hunger is decreased. The PVH-MC4R “sati-
ety neurons” are glutamatergic; they decrease hunger 
via their excitatory projections to the lateral parabra-
chial nucleus.
The MC4R-expressing neurons that control energy 
expenditure are sympathetic preganglionic neurons in 
the spinal cord. POMC neurons project to these sites, 
in addition to the PVH, increasing sympathetically 
driven energy expenditure.
The AgRP neurons increase hunger in part by 
opposing the actions of POMC neurons (Figure 41–14B). 
They release three factors: AgRP, an inverse agonist of 
MC4R, and neuropeptide Y and γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA), two inhibitory transmitters. The AgRP neu-
rons project to and inhibit the PVH-MC4R satiety neu-
rons and directly inhibit POMC neurons. In addition, 
different subsets of arcuate AgRP neurons project to 
other sites, including the lateral hypothalamus and the 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. These sites, when 
inhibited by AgRP inputs, can also stimulate hunger.
A third group of neurons in the arcuate nucleus 
express VGLUT2, release glutamate, and act in parallel 
with POMC neurons to induce satiety (Figure 41–14B). 
Like POMC neurons, and opposite to AgRP neurons, 
they excite the PVH-MC4R satiety neurons. αMSH/
MC4R signaling in PVH-MC4R neurons causes satiety 
by two mechanisms: by directly activating the PVH-
MC4R satiety neurons and by upregulating excitatory 
transmission from the VGLUT2 neurons to the PVH-
MC4R neurons via postsynaptic facilitation.
The importance of the POMC, AgRP, and PVH-
MC4R satiety neurons in regulating food intake is 
supported by a number of compelling findings. First, 
fasting activates AgRP neurons and inhibits POMC 
neurons, while feeding or leptin treatment does the 
opposite. The downstream PVH-MC4R satiety neu-
rons are inhibited by fasting and excited by feeding. 
Second, genetic deficiency of the POMC protein or 
MC4R causes massive obesity. Third, genetic ablation 
of AgRP neurons in mice causes starvation, while stim-
ulation of AgRP neurons rapidly brings about extreme 
hyperphagia, even in mice that are calorically replete 
and otherwise sated. Finally, several findings impli-
cate the PVH-MC4R satiety neurons as an important 


===== Page 3 =====
1038    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
downstream target of AgRP and POMC neurons. 
Most notable are the development of marked hyper-
phagia and obesity in mice genetically engineered to 
lack MC4R neurons in the PVH and the induction of 
intense feeding following optogenetic stimulation of 
AgRP terminals in the PVH, which inhibits the satiety 
neurons.
Surprisingly, environmental cues that predict 
future ingestion of food induce inhibition of AgRP 
neurons. Indeed, in fasted mice, which have high 
AgRP neuron activity, presentation of food alone with-
out ingestion decreases AgRP neuron firing. This is 
roughly analogous to rapid, feedforward inhibition 
of vasopressin secretion and thirst neuron activity 
(mentioned previously). Thus, in addition to receiv-
ing strong bottom-up feedback signals from the body, 
the hunger-promoting AgRP neurons also receive top-
down feedforward information from the environment. 
The function of this input is not yet clear, but it could 
serve as an anticipatory signal to limit future ingestion 
of excessive calories, or as discussed below, it could 
serve as a reward-related signal to motivate feeding.
Finally, the complete pathway accounting for reg-
ulation of hunger by the AgRP and POMC neuron → 
PVH pathway is presently unknown. It is likely that, 
via relays through a number of synapses, it affects neu-
ronal activity in pathways controlling reward as well 
as perception. This is the case because, in the fasted 
state, food and cues predictive of food are both more 
rewarding and much more likely to become the focus of 
attention. How specificity for a given goal—in this case 
food—is retained as neural information flows from the 
highly specific deficiency-regulated homeostatic neu-
rons in the hypothalamus to the “nonspecific” reward 
and perception pathways in the accumbens and cortex 
is one of the great mysteries of motivated behaviors 
such as hunger and thirst. The solution could provide 
clues for disorders of motivated behavior like drug 
addiction.
Psychological Concepts Are Used to Explain Motivational 
Drives Such as Hunger
In a simplified stimulus–response view of behavior, 
one might assume that neural detection of water or 
energy deficiency (the stimulus) is hardwired to motor 
pathways for drinking or eating (the response), and thus 
analogous to the knee-jerk stretch reflex (Chapter 3). 
However, this cannot be the case because the responses 
that can be employed to obtain food, all motivated by 
the deficiency stimulus, are remarkably varied and 
complex—to such a degree that they could not be 
hardwired. Indeed, animals can complete an infinite 
number of complex operant learning tasks to obtain 
water or food rewards.
The challenge to understanding motivational 
drive is to devise a model that accounts for the ability 
of deprivation states to induce behavior that is remark-
ably varied and complex, while remaining completely 
specific for one goal. Two compelling theories are rel-
evant. According to incentive motivation theory, defi-
ciency increases the reward value of food and water. 
Drive reduction theory posits that deficiency generates 
an aversive state, the resolution of which is thought 
to motivate behavior. Notably, these two views are 
not mutually exclusive and may in some ways be two 
sides of the same coin.
Incentive Motivation: Fasting Increases the Reward Value 
of Food.  The incentive motivation theory is the work 
of theorists over many years, most recently refined 
by Frederick Toates and Kent Berridge. Consider eat-
ing and the hunger drive. Briefly, food is viewed as 
inherently rewarding. Through learned associations, 
cues and tasks related to obtaining food also become 
rewarding; in this way, varied and complex behavioral 
responses are learned (Figure 41–15A).
The theory posits that the deprivation state 
increases the reward value of food and of the related 
cues and tasks (ie, their incentive salience). Thus, 
during fasting, the reward value is increased, and all 
food and cues and tasks related to food are extremely 
rewarding. After a meal, the reward value is decreased, 
and only the most inherently palatable foods, for exam-
ple, ice cream, are still sufficiently rewarding to be 
eaten. The task of neuroscientists is to determine how 
deprivation increases reward value. Experimental acti-
vation of AgRP neurons in an otherwise sated mouse 
dramatically increases the reward value of food—
remarkably, the reward value of food is increased to 
the same extremely high level seen with fasting.
Drive Reduction: Activity of AgRP Hunger Neurons Can Be 
Aversive.  As we know from personal experience, the 
behavioral states created by dehydration and caloric 
deficiency, namely thirst and hunger, are unpleasant. 
It was originally proposed many years ago that reduc-
tion of these states, which relieves this discomfort, is 
rewarding and hence motivates drinking and feeding. 
Recently, Scott Sternson’s group has provided compel-
ling new support for a modified version of this model 
(Figure 41–15B). Using a behavioral conditioning para-
digm such as the place preference test, they discovered 
that optogenetic activation of AgRP neurons in sated 
mice was aversive. When the same mice were then stud-
ied in a food-deprived state (which is associated with 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1039
Figure 41–15  Two theories of how fasting promotes eating.
A. Incentive motivation. Food is inherently rewarding, and 
different foods have different reward values (lettuce–low, ice 
cream–high). Through learned associations, cues that predict 
food become rewarding. The fed (sated) versus fasted state 
sets the gain determining how rewarding food and food cues 
are. Fasting greatly increases while the sated state decreases 
reward value.
B. Drive reduction. The feeling of hunger is aversive. Eating 
reduces this aversive state. Consistent with this theory, experi-
mental stimulation of hunger-promoting agouti-related peptide 
(AgRP) neurons is aversive, while stimulation of satiety-promoting 
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus melanocortin-4 
receptors (MC4R) neurons (which are downstream of the AgRP 
and proopiomelanocortin [POMC] neurons) in an otherwise 
hungry mouse creates a pleasant feeling.
A  Incentive motivation
B  Drive reduction
Fasting
AgRP
neurons
POMC
neurons
AgRP
neurons
POMC
neurons
Hunger
Hunger
External Stimuli
Food
(unconditioned stimuli)
The brain
Reward value?
Motivational
state
(hunger)
Cues predictive of food
(conditioned stimuli)
Fasted
Sated
Behavior
Eating
Seeking food 
Seeking food 
Eating
The body
Caloric deﬁciency
Reward value
(signals from the 
body adjust gain)
AgRP neurons
Aversive
+
+
–
+
Rewarding
increased AgRP neuron activity), they engaged in behav-
iors that in the earlier conditioning had lowered AgRP 
neuron activity—in short, they acted as if motivated to 
turn off the AgRP neuron–induced aversive state. Similar 
results were obtained with thirst neurons in the SFO.
In further support of this view, optogenetic acti-
vation of downstream PVH-MC4R satiety neurons 
in calorically deprived mice, but not in sated mice, is 
emotionally positive (ie, the mice like it). Thus, caus-
ing satiety when otherwise hungry is pleasant. In total, 
these findings provide strong evidence for the view that 
homeostatic deficiency is unpleasant, that the aversive 
state is caused by activation of deficiency-responsive 
homeostatic neurons, and that when afflicted by the 
deficiency-induced aversive state animals engage in 
behaviors that they associate with relief.
This model provides an explanation for why diet-
ing is so difficult. It generates an aversive, unpleasant 
state that can only be relieved by eating. Finally, the 
rapid reduction in AgRP neuron activity in response 
to sensory cues that predict food, and the alleviation 
of the aversive state that this should cause, could func-
tion as a rewarding “teaching signal” that motivates 
pursuit of the goal (food).
Sexually Dimorphic Regions in the 
Hypothalamus Control Sex, Aggression, and 
Parenting
Now we turn to behaviors that are not homeostatic, 
but are controlled by the hypothalamus, involve inte-
gration between sensory cues and signals from the 
body (ie, gonadal steroids), and are critical for survival 
of the species.


===== Page 5 =====
1040    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–16  Sexually dimorphic neural structures com-
prise highly interconnected behavioral circuits. Hypotha-
lamic and amygdalar nuclei that regulate sexually dimorphic 
behaviors are extensively interconnected. These areas pro-
cess pheromonal information, and subsets of adult neurons 
within each of these regions express sex hormone receptors; 
neurons within some of these regions (blue) also express 
aromatase. (Abbreviations: BNSTmpm, medial division  
of the posteromedial bed nucleus of the stria terminalis;  
MeA, medial amygdala; PAG, periaqueductal gray; PMV, 
ventral premammillary nucleus; POA, preoptic hypothalamus; 
VMHvl, ventrolateral component of the ventromedial hypo-
thalamus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Yang and Shah 
2014. Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc.)
Males and females differ in their sexual, aggres-
sive, and parenting behaviors. These differences are 
especially notable in animals, for example in mice, 
where they are clearly hardwired (ie, require no prior 
training). These differences include mounting and lor-
dosis by males and females, respectively; territorial-
related behaviors such as marking and aggression by 
males; and the tendency toward nurturing in females 
versus aggressive behavior in males when dealing 
with the young. The latent capacity for these sexu-
ally dimorphic behaviors is the product of sex steroid 
action on the brain during embryogenesis (Chapter 51). 
Full actualization of adult sex-specific behaviors also 
requires adult levels of gonadal steroids. Sex chromo-
some–specific genes, other than Sry, which causes male 
sex determination, as well as genes that are imprinted 
in a sexually dimorphic way, also subtly modulate sex-
specific behaviors independent of gonadal steroids. 
Ultimately, the behaviors themselves are triggered by 
cues from the environment, such as pheromones.
Two regions of the hypothalamus are critically 
involved in the control of these behaviors, the POA and 
the ventral lateral aspect of the ventromedial hypotha-
lamic nucleus (vlVMH). Both sites are sexually dimor-
phic: The POA contains more neurons in males, and 
the vlVMH contains more progesterone-expressing 
neurons in females. These sites are heavily intercon-
nected, and they receive strong input from two other 
sexually dimorphic areas outside the hypothalamus: 
the medial division of the posteromedial bed nucleus 
of the stria terminalis (BNSTmpm) and medial amyg-
dala (MeA).
Sexual Behavior and Aggression Are Controlled by 
the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area and a Subarea of 
the Ventromedial Hypothalamic Nucleus
Brain lesion studies have demonstrated that the sexu-
ally dimorphic brain regions—the accessory olfac-
tory bulb, BNSTmpm, MeA, and particularly POA 
and vlVMH—play important roles in sex-specific 
behaviors. Neurons in these regions are highly inter-
connected, are downstream of pathways involved in 
detecting and responding to pheromones (BNSTmpm 
and MeA), express sex hormone receptors, and, with 
the exception of neurons in the vlVMH, also express 
aromatase (Figure 41–16). Neurons in both the POA 
and vlVMH send strong projections to the lateral peri-
aqueductal gray area, which is thought to mediate and 
coordinate the motor and autonomic aspects of sexual 
and aggressive behavior.
The vlVMH plays a critical role in controlling 
sexually dimorphic behaviors. Firing rates of vlVMH 
neurons in male mice increase during mating or peri-
ods of aggression toward a male intruder. Stimula-
tion of these neurons triggers intense attack behavior 
toward intruder males and toward atypical targets 
for male aggression such as castrated males, females, 
or even rubber gloves! Silencing these neurons elimi-
nates aggressive behavior toward male intruders. 
BNSTmpm
POA
VMHvl
PMV
MeA
PAG


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1041
Furthermore, stimulation of a subset of vlVMH neu-
rons that express estrogen receptor evokes either sex-
ual behavior (mounting) or aggression, depending on 
the number of neurons activated and their degree of 
activation: Lower levels of activation induce mount-
ing, whereas higher levels induce aggression. Con-
sistent with these results, genetic ablation of related 
progesterone receptor–expressing vlVMH neurons 
causes loss of both sexual behavior and aggression in 
males and loss of sexual behavior in females. Thus, it is 
clear that sex neurons in the vlVMH-expressing steroid 
receptors play a critical role in driving sexual behavior 
in males and females and aggression in males.
Parental Behavior Is Controlled by the Preoptic 
Hypothalamic Area
Nurturing parental behavior is key to the survival of 
one’s offspring. Male rodents demonstrate strikingly 
different patterns of behavior. Males can be nurturing 
or hostile to offspring, even to the point of infanticide, 
depending on whether they view the offspring as their 
own or those of another male. Female mice, on the 
other hand, are generally nurturing.
Social interaction between mouse pups and appro-
priately receptive adult female and male mice, but 
not hostile adult male mice, induces activity in sub-
sets of galanin-expressing neurons in the POA. These 
offspring-activated neurons are largely distinct from 
POA neurons activated by mating. Genetic ablation of 
galanin-expressing POA neurons prevents nurturing 
parental behavior, even to the point of inducing unchar-
acteristic aggression in females toward their offspring. 
On the other hand, stimulation of these galanin-positive 
neurons in males, which are normally extremely hostile 
to unrelated pups, decreases aggression and induces 
nurturing pup grooming. Thus, neurons in the POA, in 
addition to controlling sexual behavior itself, also play a 
role in ensuring survival of the fruit of sexual behavior.
Highlights
  1.  The hypothalamus and the autonomic and 
neuroendocrine motor systems coordinate and 
control body homeostasis by inducing adaptive 
behaviors; by controlling glands, smooth muscle, 
cardiac muscle, and adipocytes; and by releasing 
hormones from the pituitary gland.
  2.  Homeostatic control of body temperature, fluid 
and electrolyte balance, and blood pressure 
allows organisms to function under harsh envi-
ronmental conditions.
  3.  Feedback loops that sense temperature, osmo-
larity, blood pressure, and body fat are essential 
for homeostatic control. The combined action of 
multiple feedback-informed sensory-afferent/
efferent-effector control loops results in emergent 
settling points.
  4.  Modality-specific hypothalamic neurons link 
specific interoceptive sensory feedback with out-
puts that control adaptive behaviors and physi-
ologic responses. In addition to feedback, these 
modality-specific neurons also receive feedfor-
ward information regarding future anticipated 
homeostatic challenges.
  5.  The autonomic motor system contains neurons 
located in sympathetic, parasympathetic, and 
enteric ganglia located near the spinal column 
or embedded within peripheral targets. Func-
tional subsets of autonomic neurons selectively 
innervate effector tissues comprised of smooth 
muscle, cardiac muscle, glandular epithelia, and 
adipocytes.
  6.  Sympathetic neurons are activated in response to 
exercise and stress. Parasympathetic and sympa-
thetic neurons generally have antagonistic func-
tions, but often act in concert. The enteric system 
coordinates peristaltic contractions of the gastro-
intestinal tract with mucosal function and local 
blood flow.
  7.  Preganglionic neurons that control the sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic outflows are located 
in the spinal cord and brain stem.
  8.  Acetylcholine, norepinephrine, and neuropep-
tide cotransmitters act as synaptic signaling mol-
ecules in the autonomic motor system. Excitatory 
fast synaptic transmission in autonomic ganglia 
is mediated by acetylcholine acting on nicotinic 
receptors. G protein–coupled receptors in ganglia 
mediate additional pre- and postsynaptic excita-
tory and inhibitory effects. G protein–coupled 
receptors mediate transmitter actions at auto-
nomic neuroeffector junctions.
  9.  The neuroendocrine system links the hypo-
thalamus, via the pituitary gland, to various 
physiologic responses in the body. The posterior 
pituitary contains hypothalamic axon terminals 
that release two neurohormones into the blood: 
Vasopressin stimulates water reabsorption by 
the kidney, while oxytocin controls uterine con-
traction and milk release. The anterior pituitary 
contains endocrine cells that secrete hormones 
in response to factors released by hypothalamic 
neurons. These anterior pituitary hormones con-
trol the thyroid gland, glucocorticoid secretion 


===== Page 7 =====
1042    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
by the adrenal cortex, sex steroid secretion by the 
gonads, lactation, and linear growth.
10.  Body temperature is detected in multiple sites 
including the periphery, in and around major 
organs, and in the brain. Constancy of body 
temperature is maintained by multiple thermo-
receptor-afferent/thermoeffector-efferent control 
loops.
11.  Some neurons in the lamina terminalis are acti-
vated by both dehydration and loss of intravas-
cular volume. Key parameters sensed in these 
deficiency states include osmolarity and angio-
tensin II levels, respectively. When these neurons 
are activated, they cause thirst and release of vas-
opressin from the posterior pituitary. Vasopressin 
release is also rapidly regulated in a feedforward 
fashion by cues that anticipate future distur-
bances in osmolarity.
12.  Energy balance involves short-term and long-
term feedback signals. Short-term signals from 
the gut mediate satiation, which terminates 
meals. CCK, released by intestinal endocrine 
cells, plays a key role in satiation. A key long-
term signal is leptin, which is secreted by adipo-
cytes in proportion to the amount of fat stores. 
When fat stores are low, the consequent low lev-
els of leptin signal the brain to induce a hunger 
state and to decrease energy expenditure, result-
ing in replenished fat stores.
13.  Leptin is more effective in defending against low 
fat stores than in resisting obesity.
14.  POMC-, AgRP-, and MC4R-expressing neurons 
in the hypothalamus are key nodes in the afferent/
efferent loop controlling energy balance. Neurons 
that signal satiety are activated by satiety-promoting 
POMC neurons and inhibited by hunger-promoting 
AgRP neurons.
15.  How specificity for a given goal (eg, food) is 
retained as neural information flows from the 
highly specific deficiency-regulated homeo-
static neurons in the hypothalamus to the “non-
specific” reward and perception pathways in 
the accumbens and cortex is one of the great 
mysteries of motivated behaviors such as hun-
ger and thirst. Solving this could provide clues 
for disorders of motivated behavior like drug 
addiction.
16.  Leptin regulates hunger and energy expenditure 
in part by activating POMC neurons and inhib-
iting AgRP neurons. Hunger-promoting AgRP 
neurons are also rapidly regulated in a feed-
forward fashion by cues that anticipate future 
changes in energy balance.
17.  Motivational drives such as hunger have been 
explained by two mechanisms: The deficiency 
state (starvation) increases the reward value of 
food, or deficiency generates an aversive state, 
the resolution of which motivates behavior.
18.  Sexually dimorphic regions in the hypothalamus 
control sexual behavior and aggression. Neural 
activity in the sexually dimorphic preoptic area 
controls parental behavior. Full actualization of 
adult sex-specific behaviors also requires adult 
levels of gonadal steroids.
 Bradford B. Lowell 
  Larry W. Swanson 
  John P. Horn 
Selected Reading
Andermann ML, Lowell BB. 2017. Towards a wiring diagram 
understanding of appetite control. Neuron 95:757–778.
Berridge KC. 2004. Motivation concepts in behavioral neuro-
science. Physiol Behav 81:179–209.
Bourque CW. 2008. Central mechanisms of osmosensa-
tion and systemic osmoregulation. Nat Rev Neurosci 
9:519–531.
Clarke IJ. 2015. Hypothalamus as an endocrine organ. Compr 
Physiol 5:217–253.
Dulac C, O’Connell LA, Wu Z. 2014. Neural control of mater-
nal and paternal behaviors. Science 345:765–770.
Guyenet PG. 2006. The sympathetic control of blood pres-
sure. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:335–346.
Jænig, W. 2006. The Integrative Action of the Autonomic Nervous 
System. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Leib DE, Zimmerman CA, Knight ZA. 2016. Thirst. Curr Biol 
26:R1260–R1265.
Morrison SF. 2016. Central control of body temperature. 
F1000Res 5:F1000.
Morton GJ, Meek TH, Schwartz MW. 2014. Neurobiology 
of food intake in health and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 
15:367–378.
Romanovsky AA. 2007. Thermoregulation: some concepts 
have changed. Functional architecture of the thermoregu-
latory system. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 
292:R37–R46.
Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL. 2014. 20 years of leptin: role of 
leptin in energy homeostasis in humans. J Endocrinol 
223:T83–T96.
Yang CF, Shah NM. 2014. Representing sex in the brain, one 
module at a time. Neuron 82:261–278.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1043
References
Ahima RS, Prabakaran D, Mantzoros C, et al. 1996. Role of 
leptin in the neuroendocrine response to fasting. Nature 
382:250–252.
Aponte Y, Atasoy D, Sternson SM. 2011. AGRP neurons are 
sufficient to orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and 
without training. Nat Neurosci 14:351–355.
Balthasar N, Dalgaard LT, Lee CE, et al. 2005. Divergence of 
melanocortin pathways in the control of food intake and 
energy expenditure. Cell 123:493–505.
Berthoud HR, Neuhuber WL. 2000. Functional and chemi-
cal anatomy of the afferent vagal system. Auton Neurosci 
85:1-17.
Betley JN, Xu S, Cao ZF, et al. 2015. Neurons for hunger and 
thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal. Nature 
521:180–185.
Brookes SJ, Spencer NJ, Costa M, Zagorodnyuk VP. 2013. 
Extrinsic primary afferent signalling in the gut. Nat Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 10:286–296.
Burnstock G. 2013. Cotransmission in the autonomic nervous 
system. Handb Clin Neurol 117:23–35.
Campos CA, Bowen AJ, Schwartz MW, Palmiter RD. 2016. 
Parabrachial CGRP neurons control meal termination. 
Cell Metab 23:811–820.
Chambers AP, Sandoval DA, Seeley RJ. 2013. Integration of 
satiety signals by the central nervous system. Curr Biol 
23:R379–R388.
Chen Y, Lin YC, Kuo TW, Knight ZA. 2015. Sensory detection 
of food rapidly modulates arcuate feeding circuits. Cell 
160:829–841.
Coleman DL. 2010. A historical perspective on leptin. Nat 
Med 16:1097–1099.
DeGroat WC, Booth AM, Yoshimura N. 1993. Neurophysiol-
ogy of micturition and its modification in animal mod-
els of human disease. In: CA Maggi (ed). Nervous Control 
of the Urogenital System, pp. 227–348. Chur, Switzerland: 
Harwood Academic Publishers.
Fenselau H, Campbell JN, Verstegen AM, et al. 2017. A 
rapidly acting glutamatergic ARC→PVH satiety circuit 
postsynaptically regulated by α-MSH. Nat Neurosci 20: 
42–51.
Furness JB. 2012. The enteric nervous system and neu-
rogastroenterology. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 9: 
286–294.
Furness JB, Costa M. 1980. Types of nerves in the enteric 
nervous system. Neurosci 5:1–20.
Furness JB, Jones C, Nurgali K, Clerc N. 2004. Intrinsic pri-
mary afferent neurons and nerve circuits within the intes-
tine. Prog Neurobiol 72:143–164.
Garfield AS, Li C, Madara JC, et al. 2015. A neural basis for 
melanocortin-4 receptor-regulated appetite. Nat Neurosci 
18:863–871.
Gay VL. 1972. The hypothalamus: physiology and clinical 
use of releasing factors. Fertil Steril 23:50–63.
Gibbins IL. 1995. Chemical neuroanatomy of sympathetic 
ganglia. In: E McLachlan (ed). Autonomic Ganglia, pp. 73–122. 
Luxembourg: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Huszar D, Lynch CA, Fairchild-Huntress V, et al. 1997. Tar-
geted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in 
obesity in mice. Cell 88:131–141.
Ingalls AM, Dickie MM, Snell GD. 1950. Obese, a new muta-
tion in the house mouse. J Hered 41:317–318.
Krashes MJ, Koda S, Ye C, et al. 2011. Rapid, reversible acti-
vation of AgRP neurons drives feeding behavior in mice. 
J Clin Invest 121:1424–1428.
Krashes MJ, Lowell BB, Garfield AS. 2016. Melanocortin-4 
receptor-regulated energy homeostasis. Nat Neurosci 
19:206–219.
Lechner SG, Markworth S, Poole K, et al. 2011. The molecular 
and cellular identity of peripheral osmoreceptors. Neuron 
69:332–344.
Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, et al. 2014. Scalable control of 
mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventrome-
dial hypothalamus. Nature 509:627–632.
Lin D, Boyle MP, Dollar P, et al. 2011. Functional identifica-
tion of an aggression locus in the mouse hypothalamus. 
Nature 470:221–226.
Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, et al. 2015. Genetic studies of 
body mass index yield new insights for obesity biology. 
Nature 518:197–206.
Lowell BB, Spiegelman BM. 2000. Towards a molecu-
lar understanding of adaptive thermogenesis. Nature 
404:652–660.
Luquet S, Perez FA, Hnasko TS, Palmiter RD. 2005. NPY/
AgRP neurons are essential for feeding in adult mice but 
can be ablated in neonates. Science 310:683–685.
Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Kim A, Burgess CR, et al. 2017. Bidirec-
tional anticipation of future osmotic challenges by vaso-
pressin neurons. Neuron 93:57–65.
Mandelblat-Cerf Y, Ramesh RN, Burgess CR, et al. 2015. 
Arcuate hypothalamic AgRP and putative POMC neu-
rons show opposite changes in spiking across multiple 
timescales. Elife 4:e07122.
McKinley MJ, Yao ST, Uschakov A, McAllen RM, Rundgren 
M, Martelli D. 2015. The median preoptic nucleus: front 
and centre for the regulation of body fluid, sodium, tem-
perature, sleep and cardiovascular homeostasis. Acta 
Physiol (Oxf) 214:8–32.
Mountjoy KG, Robbins LS, Mortrud MT, Cone RD. 1992. The 
cloning of a family of genes that encode the melanocortin 
receptors. Science 257:1248–1251.
Myers MG Jr, Leibel RL, Seeley RJ, Schwartz MW. 2010. 
Obesity and leptin resistance: distinguishing cause from 
effect. Trends Endocrinol Metab 21:643–651.
Nakamura K, Morrison SF. 2011. Central efferent path-
ways for cold-defensive and febrile shivering. J Physiol 
589:3641–3658.
Oka Y, Ye M, Zuker CS. 2015. Thirst driving and suppress-
ing signals encoded by distinct neural populations in the 
brain. Nature 520:349–352.
Powley TL, Phillips RJ. 2004. Gastric satiation is volumetric, 
intestinal satiation is nutritive. Physiol Behav 82:69–74.
Reichlin S. 1978. The hypothalamus: introduction. Res Publ 
Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 56:1–14.


===== Page 9 =====
1044    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Romanovsky AA. 2014. Skin temperature: its role in ther-
moregulation. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 210:498–507.
Rossi J, Balthasar N, Olson D, et al. 2011. Melanocortin-4 
receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate 
energy balance and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab 
13:195–204.
Saper CB. 2002. The central autonomic nervous system: con-
scious visceral perception and autonomic pattern genera-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:433–469.
Saper CB, Romanovsky AA, Scammell TE. 2012. Neural cir-
cuitry engaged by prostaglandins during the sickness 
syndrome. Nat Neurosci 15:1088–1095.
Shah BP, Vong L, Olson DP, et al. 2014. MC4R-expressing 
glutamatergic neurons in the paraventricular hypothala-
mus regulate feeding and are synaptically connected 
to the parabrachial nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111:13193–13198.
Song K, Wang H, Kamm GB, et al. 2016. The TRPM2 channel 
is a hypothalamic heat sensor that limits fever and can 
drive hypothermia. Science 353:1393–1398.
Speakman JR, Levitsky DA, Allison DB, et al. 2011. Set points, 
settling points and some alternative models: theoreti-
cal options to understand how genes and environments 
combine to regulate body adiposity. Dis Model Mech 
4:733–745.
Stricker EM, Hoffmann ML. 2007. Presystemic signals in the 
control of thirst, salt appetite, and vasopressin secretion. 
Physiol Behav 91:404–412.
Swanson LW. 2000. Cerebral hemisphere regulation of moti-
vated behavior. Brain Res 886:113–164.
Tan CH, McNaughton PA. 2016. The TRPM2 ion channel is 
required for sensitivity to warmth. Nature 536:460–463.
Tan CL, Cooke EK, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Warm-sensitive neu-
rons that control body temperature. Cell 167:47–59 e15.
Tanaka M, Owens NC, Nagashima K, Kanosue K, McAllen 
RM. 2006. Reflex activation of rat fusimotor neurons by 
body surface cooling, and its dependence on the medul-
lary raphe. J Physiol 572:569–583.
Toates F 1986. Motivational Systems. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BD, Lowell BB, 
Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and 
nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.
Wong LC, Wang L, D’Amour JA, et al. 2016. Effective mod-
ulation of male aggression through lateral septum to 
medial hypothalamus projection. Curr Biol 26:593–604.
Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 
2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern 
parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimor-
phic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus gov-
ern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell 
153:896–909.
Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L,  
Friedman JM. 1994. Positional cloning of the mouse obese 
gene and its human homologue. Nature 372:425–432.
Zimmerman CA, Lin YC, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Thirst neurons 
anticipate the homeostatic consequences of eating and 
drinking. Nature 537:680–684.


