===== Page 1 =====
996    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 40–9  Respiratory motor output is regu-
lated by carbon dioxide in the blood.
A. Lung ventilation (determined by the rate and 
depth of breathing) in humans is steeply depend-
ent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide 
(PCO2) at normal levels of the partial pressure of 
oxygen (PO2) (>100 mm Hg). When PO2 drops to 
very low values (<50 mm Hg), breathing is stimu-
lated directly and also becomes more sensitive 
to an increase in PCO2 (seen here as an increase 
in the slope of the curves for alveolar PO2 of 37 
and 47 mm Hg). (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Nielsen and Smith 1952.)
B. Central chemoreceptors in the medulla control 
ventilatory motor output to maintain normal blood 
CO2. The firing rate of serotonergic neurons within 
the raphe nuclei of the medulla increases when 
elevated PCO2 causes a pH decrease. The records 
shown here are from in vitro recordings of a neu-
ron in the raphe nuclei of a rat at two different 
levels of pH (7.4, control, and 7.2, acidosis). (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Wang et al. 2002.)
C. Serotonergic neurons are closely associated 
with large arteries in the ventral medulla where 
they can monitor local changes in PCO2. Two 
images of the same transverse section of the rat 
medulla show blood vessels after injection of a 
red fluorescent dye into the arterial system (left) 
and green antibody staining for tryptophan hydrox-
ylase, the enzyme that synthesizes serotonin 
(right). The basilar artery (B) is on the ventral sur-
face of the medulla between the pyramidal tracts 
(P). (Reproduced, with permission, from Bradley 
et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
B
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
50
0
–50
50
0
–50
Lung ventilation (liters/min)
Alveolar PCO2 (mm Hg)
Alveolar PO2
(mm Hg)
37
47
110
or 169
A
C
Control
Acidosis
Vm (mV)
Vm (mV)
Blood vessels
Serotonin neurons
Dorsal
B
P
P
5 s
accompanying decrease in pH. The most sensitive area 
for this is along the ventral surface of the medulla lat-
eral to the pyramidal tract. This region contains at least 
two sets of neurons that respond to elevated CO2. Glu-
tamatergic neurons in the retrotrapezoid nucleus in 
the rostral ventrolateral medulla, near the facial motor 
nucleus, are highly sensitive to CO2 levels. Absence of 
these neurons, due to a mutation in the phox2b tran-
scription factor required for their development, causes 
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, in which 
there is failure to breathe adequately, particularly dur-
ing sleep. In addition, serotonergic neurons in the ros-
tral ventrolateral medulla, like retrotrapezoid neurons, 
lie along penetrating arteries and are sensitive to acido-
sis (Figure 40–9B,C). Genetic deletion of these neurons 
reduces the ventilatory response to hypercapnia, espe-
cially during sleep. Recent studies demonstrate that a 
serotonin 5-HT2A agonist can restore arousal responses 
to CO2, suggesting that the serotonergic neurons play 
a modulatory role, increasing the sensitivity of the 
CO2 reflexes during hypercapnia, and that this may be 
especially important during sleep.
The motor pattern generated by the respiratory 
system is remarkably stable in healthy people, but 
a variety of diseases can alter these patterns. One of 
the most common and easily recognized patterns is 
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, which is characterized by 
repeated cycles of gradually increasing then decreas-
ing ventilation, alternating with cessation of breathing 
(apnea). This periodic breathing is seen, for exam-
ple, in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, 
where the central neurons are not sufficiently sensi-
tive to rising CO2, particularly during sleep. By the time 
they begin to respond, CO2 levels may already be quite 
high. This causes hyperventilation, which reduces CO2 
levels below the threshold where breathing is required. 
The result is a period of apnea, until the CO2 levels 
again become quite high (Figure 40–10).
A similar pattern is seen in people who have car-
diac or pulmonary disease that increases the time it 
takes for the change in alveolar CO2 to register with 
the medulla. Cheyne-Stokes respiration often occurs 
in hospitalized patients with marginal cardiac or res-
piratory reserve when they fall asleep, thus reducing 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    997
Figure 40–10  Respiratory motor patterns can become 
unstable during sleep.
A. Sleep apnea (cessation of breathing) is a common problem 
that often goes undetected. The records here show blood oxy-
gen saturation (SaO2) and CO2 partial pressure (PCO2) during 
sleep in a healthy person and a patient with obstructive sleep 
apnea. In the healthy person, SaO2 remains near 100%, and 
PCO2 remains near 40 mm Hg during both rapid eye movement 
(REM) and non-REM sleep. In the patient with sleep apnea, 
reduced muscle tone (hypotonia) during sleep leads to collapse 
of the upper airway, resulting in obstruction and apnea. Repeti-
tive apnea at the rate of approximately once per minute causes 
the patient’s SaO2 to fall repetitively and dramatically. (The inset 
shows a period of approximately 80 seconds on an expanded 
scale. Ventilation [V] begins at the nadir of the SaO2 and again 
ceases when the blood oxygen increases.) During non-REM 
sleep, the patient’s PCO2 increases to near 60 mm Hg. During 
REM sleep, the SaO2 and PCO2 become even more abnormal, 
as worsening airway hypotonia causes greater obstruction. 
Many people with sleep apnea wake up repeatedly during the 
night because of the apnea, but the arousals are too brief for 
them to be aware that their sleep is interrupted. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Grunstein and Sullivan 1990.)
B. Breathing in most normal individuals becomes unstable dur-
ing sleep at high altitudes. The upper trace shows an example 
of a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern in a healthy person, 
during the first night after arriving at an altitude of 17,700 feet, 
where the low partial pressure of oxygen in the air reduces the 
blood SaO2 to approximately 75% to 80%. Repeated cycles 
of waxing and waning ventilation are separated by periods of 
apnea. Administration of supplemental oxygen results in a rapid 
return to a normal respiratory pattern. This abnormal pattern 
disappears in most people after they have acclimated to the 
altitude. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lahiri et al. 1984.)
SaO2 (%)
A
B
REM
Normal
Sleep
apnea
SaO2
V
20 s
Normal
Sleep
apnea
PCO2 (mm Hg)
1 hour
100
80
60
40
60
40
Tidal
volume
SaO2 (%)
100
75
50
20 s
Oxygen given
E
I
other behavioral drives for respiration. Although not 
dangerous in itself, it can indicate that there is a serious 
underlying cardiorespiratory problem that needs to be 
corrected.
Other inputs to the respiratory pattern generator 
come from the circuitry mediating particular behaviors, 
as breathing must be coordinated with many motor 
actions that share the same muscles. To accomplish 
this coordination, respiratory neurons in the medulla 
receive input from neuronal networks concerned with 
vocalization, swallowing, sniffing, vomiting, and pain. 
For example, the ventral respiratory group is connected 
with a part of the parabrachial complex in the pons 
termed the pontine respiratory group or pneumotaxic center. 
These pontine neurons coordinate breathing with 
behaviors such as chewing and swallowing. They can 
cause holding of the breath at full inspiration (called 
apneusis), which is required during eating and drink-
ing. The reserve of air in the lungs permits a cough, if 
necessary, to expel any food or drink that may enter 
the airway. Other neurons in the intertrigeminal zone, 
between the motor and principal sensory trigeminal 
nuclei, receive facial and upper airway sensory inputs 
and project to the ventrolateral medulla to temporarily 
stop breathing to protect against accidental inspiration 
of dust or water.
Voluntary motor pathways can take over the 
control of breathing during talking, eating, singing, 
swimming, or playing a wind instrument. Descending 
inputs cause hyperventilation at the onset of exercise, 
in anticipation of an increase in oxygen demand. In 
fact, this leads to a sustained drop in blood CO2 during 
exercise—the opposite of what would be expected for 
a negative feedback control system. Other descending 
inputs from the limbic system produce hyperventila-
tion in connection with pain or anxiety and, in some 
people, may be responsible for causing spontaneous 
panic attacks, characterized by hyperventilation and 
a feeling of suffocation. These various descending 
inputs allow efficient integration of breathing with 


===== Page 3 =====
998    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
other behaviors, but they ultimately must yield to 
the need to maintain blood gas homeostasis, as even 
a small increase in CO2 produces severe air hunger 
or dyspnea. Thus, the respiratory control system is a 
fascinating example of a brain stem pattern genera-
tor that must be sufficiently stable to ensure survival 
yet flexible enough to accommodate a wide variety of 
behaviors.
Monoaminergic Neurons in the Brain Stem 
Modulate Sensory, Motor, Autonomic, and 
Behavioral Functions
In addition to containing the primary sensory and motor 
nuclei of the cranial nerves and the reflex and pattern 
generator mechanisms that control basic behaviors, the 
brain stem also contains a set of modulatory cell groups. 
In a groundbreaking series of experiments in the 1970s, 
Hans Kuypers used the newly discovered method of 
retrograde transport of axonal tracers to identify the cell 
groups in the brain stem and diencephalon that contrib-
ute to modulation of spinal cord sensory and motor sys-
tems and those that send inputs directly to the cerebral 
cortex. To a surprising extent, these two sets of experi-
ments, starting at opposite ends of the neuraxis, identi-
fied a common substrate whose role it is to modulate 
circuitry at other levels of the nervous system, almost as 
if it were an “autonomic system” for the brain.
These cell groups have direct connections to the 
forebrain, brain stem, and spinal cord that regulate 
the overall level of function of their targets. Like the 
way serotonergic neurons set the overall sensitivity of 
CO2 reflexes, brain stem monoaminergic modulatory 
systems adjust the overall responsiveness of a wide 
variety of sensory systems by means of projections 
to sensory neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem, 
including nociceptive systems. Descending projections 
from these modulatory systems also control motor 
tone, which is critical for adjusting posture and gait as 
well as initiating finer movements. Ascending inputs 
to the forebrain control overall arousal as well as 
responses to rewarding situations. While these modu-
latory systems are not sufficient to accomplish motor, 
sensory, or cognitive tasks on their own, their ability 
to adjust the responsiveness of these systems plays an 
enormously influential role in overall behavior.
Many Modulatory Systems Use Monoamines as 
Neurotransmitters
The monoaminergic systems use decarboxylated deriv-
atives of the cyclic amino acids tyrosine, tryptophan, 
and histidine as neurotransmitters. They were among 
the first in the brain to be identified and mapped due 
to the property that some of them possess to fluoresce 
when exposed to formaldehyde. In the 1960s, Dahlstrom 
and Fuxe used this property to identify serotonergic, 
noradrenergic, and dopaminergic cell groups in the 
brain stem. In the 1970s, with the development of immu-
nohistochemical methods able to map the enzymes that 
synthesize monoamines, other investigators mapped 
neurons containing epinephrine and histamine.
The cell groups of these modulatory systems in 
general were unlike earlier identified nuclei in the 
brain. Rather than forming compact clusters of cell 
bodies, the monoaminergic cell groups tended to form 
columns that extended longitudinally through the 
brain stem and hypothalamus (see Figure 40–6). The 
monoamine systems were therefore designated with 
letters and numbers, to avoid confusion with other 
systems of nomenclature for the brain (Figure 40–11).
The first cell groups identified by Dahlstrom and 
Fuxe were simply identified alphabetically as the “A” 
cell groups, and then numbered sequentially from 
caudal to rostral. It was later determined that the A1–
A7 cell groups produce norepinephrine and the A8–
A14 groups produce dopamine. The A1, A3, and A5 
designations were applied to neurons located in the 
ventrolateral corner of the medullary and pontine teg-
mentum (the A3 group was quite small and the term is 
no longer used), while the A2, A4, A6, and A7 names 
were applied to cell groups located more dorsally, 
similar to the columns of motor neurons in the brain 
stem (Figure 40–11A). The A1 and A2 groups, located 
among the neurons of the nucleus ambiguus and the 
nucleus of the solitary tract (respectively), are mainly 
concerned with autonomic functions. Together, they 
modulate hypothalamic and brain stem systems that 
regulate the autonomic nervous system. The noradrener-
gic A4–A7 cell groups have widespread influence over 
sensory and motor systems, ranging from the cerebral 
cortex to the spinal cord, and provide important mod-
ulation of arousal and wakefulness.
The dopaminergic systems (Figure 40–11E) include 
the A8–A10 cell groups, located in the midbrain in and 
near the substantia nigra, that modulate motor systems 
as well as forebrain mechanisms of reward and moti-
vation. The A11 and A13 dopaminergic neurons, in the 
dorsal hypothalamus, provide input to sensory, motor, 
and autonomic systems in the brain stem and spinal 
cord. The A12, A14, and A15 neurons have a neuroen-
docrine role, including release of dopamine as a pitui-
tary release-inhibiting hormone for prolactin secretion. 
The A16 cell group modulates olfactory inputs, and the 
A17 neurons in the retina modulate vision.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    999
Figure 40–11  Locations and projections of monoaminergic 
and cholinergic neurons in the rat brain. (Abbreviations: 3V, 
third ventricle; AC, anterior commissure; AP, area postrema; AQ, 
Sylvian aqueduct; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BM, nucleus basalis 
of Meynert; BP, brachium pontis; CD, caudate; CP, cerebral 
peduncle; DBh, horizontal limb of the diagonal band; DR, dorsal 
raphe; FX, fornix; IC, inferior colliculus; LC, locus ceruleus; LDT, 
laterodorsal tegmental nucleus; MCP, middle cerebellar pedun-
cle; MGN, medial geniculate nucleus; MR, median raphe; MS, 
medial septum; MTT, mammillothalamic tract; NTS, nucleus 
tractus solitarius; OC, optic chiasm; PPT, pedunculopontine teg-
mental nucleus; PUT, putamen; Pyr, pyramidal tract; RM, raphe 
magnus; SC, superior colliculus; SCP, superior cerebellar pedun-
cle; SN, substantia nigra; STN, spinal trigeminal nucleus; TMN, 
tuberomammillary nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area.)
A. Noradrenergic neurons (A groups) and adrenergic neurons 
(C groups) are located in the medulla and pons. The A2 and 
C2 groups in the dorsal medulla are part of the nucleus of the 
solitary tract. The A1 and C1 groups in the ventral medulla are 
located near the nucleus ambiguus. Both groups project to 
the hypothalamus; some C1 neurons project to sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord and control cardiovas-
cular and endocrine functions. The A5, A6 (locus ceruleus), and 
A7 cell groups in the pons project to the spinal cord and modu-
late autonomic reflexes and pain sensation. The locus ceruleus 
also projects rostrally to the forebrain and plays an important 
role in arousal and attention.
B. All histaminergic neurons are located in the posterior lateral 
hypothalamus, mostly within the tuberomammillary nucleus. 
These neurons project to virtually every part of the neuraxis and 
play a major role in arousal.
C. Serotonergic neurons (B groups) are found within the medulla, 
pons, and midbrain, mostly near the midline in the raphe nuclei. 
Those within the medulla (the B1–B4 groups corresponding to 
the raphe magnus, raphe obscurus, and raphe pallidus) project 
throughout the medulla and spinal cord and modulate afferent pain 
signals, thermoregulation, cardiovascular control, and breathing. 
Those within the pons and midbrain (the B5–B9 groups in the 
raphe pontis, median raphe, and dorsal raphe) project throughout 
the forebrain and contribute to arousal, mood, and cognition.
Cerebellum
T
PT
Th
RF
A  Norepinephrine/Epinephrine
B  Histamine
C  Serotonin
DT
CT
EC
F
S
HF
CTX
CC
CTX
AO
OB
C
Noradrenergic projections
Adrenergic projections
A5
A1/C1
A2/C2
Spinal
cord
A7
A6
Paraventricular
nucleus
Supraoptic
hypothalamic
nucleus
AP
NTS (A2)
A1
Pyr
SCP
LC (A6)
MCP
A5
TMN
3V
CP
STN
RM (B2)
Pyr
AQ
IC
MR (B8)
BP
DR (B7)
Tuberomammillary nucleus
Histaminergic innervation
Cingulate
cortex
Cerebral cortex
Hypothalamus
Amygdala
Septum
Thalamus
Tuberomammillary nucleus
External capsule
Cingulate
bundle
Cerebral cortex
Cerebellum
B9
H
Th
HF
CD
B8
B7
B6 B4
B2
B1
B3
B5
Medial forebrain bundle
Serotonergic innervation


===== Page 5 =====
1000    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
D  Acetylcholine
E  Dopamine
AQ
PPT
LDT
BP
CD
PUT
MS
AC
VTA (A10)
SC
A11
MTT
ARC (A14)
FX
CP
OB
DBv
MaPo
A
LH
Th
VTA IPN
PPT
LDT
RF
Ha
Hi
DBh
MS
Caudate
and putamen
BM
Fornix
IC
BM
OC
DBh
MGN
SN (A9)
3V
Prefrontal
cortex
Cerebellum
Anterior
cingulate
cortex
Lateral
septum
Hippocampus
Caudate
and putamen
Pyriform
cortex
Retina
A17
A16
Thalamus
A15
A13
A11
A14
A12
Median eminence
Central
nucleus
(amygdala)
Entorhinal
cortex
Corpus
callosum
Habenula
A10
A8
A9
Striatum
Lateral parabrachial
nucleus
Nucleus
accumbens
Pituitary
Olfactory
bulb
Spinal
cord
Figure 40–11  (Continued) D. Cholinergic neurons (some-
times called Ch groups) are located in the pons, midbrain, and 
basal forebrain. Those in the pons and midbrain (mesopontine 
groups) are divided into a ventrolateral cluster (pedunculopon-
tine nucleus) and the dorsomedial cluster (laterodorsal teg-
mental nucleus). The mesopontine cholinergic neurons project 
to the brain stem reticular formation and the thalamus. Those 
in the basal forebrain are divided into the medial septum, the 
nuclei of the vertical and horizontal limbs of the diagonal band, 
and the nucleus basalis of Meynert. These neurons project 
throughout the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala. 
Both groups play an important role in arousal, and the basal 
forebrain groups are also involved in more selective attention.
E. Dopaminergic neurons are located in the midbrain and hypo-
thalamus. The dopaminergic cell groups were originally included 
with the noradrenergic cell groups and are still labeled as  
A groups (A8–A17). The A8 group is in the midbrain dorsally 
adjacent to the substantia nigra. The A9 cell group constitutes 
the substantia nigra pars compacta. These two groups of 
neurons project to the striatum and play an important role in 
initiation of movement. The A10 group is located in the ventral 
tegmental area just medial to the substantia nigra. These cells 
project to the frontal and temporal cortex and limbic structures 
of the basal forebrain and play a role in emotion and memory. 
The A11 and A13 cell groups in the zona incerta of the hypothal-
amus project to the lower brain stem and spinal cord and regu-
late sympathetic preganglionic neurons. The A12, A14, and A15 
cell groups are components of the neuroendocrine system. 
Some of them inhibit release of prolactin into the hypophysial 
portal circulation, and others control gonadotrophin secretion. 
Dopaminergic neurons are also found in the olfactory bulb (A16) 
and the retina (A17).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    1001
Figure 40–12  Monoaminergic neurons have similar firing 
patterns across the wake–sleep cycle.
A. When monoaminergic neurons are isolated from synaptic 
input, they fire spontaneously at a regular rate. This recording 
is from a noradrenergic neuron in the locus ceruleus. Action 
potentials are followed by a characteristic afterhyperpolarization 
followed by a slow depolarization to the next spike, producing a 
pacemaker-like activity (Chapter 10). Serotonergic and histamin-
ergic neurons exhibit similar spontaneous activity.
B. All three monoaminergic cell types show similar patterns of 
firing across the wake–sleep cycle. The plot shows that a locus 
ceruleus neuron in a rat fires fastest when the animal is awake 
(W), slows down as wakefulness wanes and during slow-wave 
sleep (SWS), and almost completely ceases to fire during rapid 
eye movement (REM) sleep. (Adapted, with permission from 
Aston-Jones and Bloom 1981. © Society for Neuroscience.)
The B cell groups, which had a slightly different 
color of fluorescence, were found to produce seroto-
nin. They are associated with the midline raphe cell 
groups in the pons and medulla (Figure 40–11C). 
The B1–B4 cell groups in the medulla mainly provide 
descending modulation of sensory, motor, and auto-
nomic neurons in the brain stem and spinal cord. The 
B5–B7 neurons in the pons mainly provide serotoner-
gic innervation of the thalamus, hypothalamus, and 
cerebral cortex. The functions of serotonin in modu-
lating these targets can be quite complex to decipher, 
mainly because there are at least 14 different seroto-
nin receptors, and different ones can be expressed by 
different cell types in a target area.
A few years after the A and B cell groups were 
named, immunohistochemical studies demonstrated 
that some medullary neurons have the enzymes to 
make dopamine and norepinephrine but do not fluo-
resce. These neurons, named cell groups C1–C3, were 
found to process these other catecholamines to adrena-
lin, or epinephrine. They are closely related to the A1–
A3 cell groups in the medulla (Figure 40–11A).
Histaminergic cell groups are mainly found in the 
tuberomammillary nucleus and adjacent areas of the 
posterior hypothalamus (near the mammillary body) 
and are named E1–E5 (Figure 40–11B). They are the 
sole source of histaminergic actions in the entire brain, 
from the cerebral cortex to the spinal cord, and are 
involved in a variety of arousal responses.
Although cholinergic neurons are not, strictly speak-
ing, monoaminergic, some of them also participate in 
modulatory systems, and these have been numbered 
Ch1–Ch6 (Figure 40–11D). This classification system 
did not include the many other cholinergic neurons in 
the nervous system, such as motor neurons or striatal 
interneurons, and is not used much anymore. Rather, 
scientists refer to the cholinergic neurons by their loca-
tion, eg, the pedunculopontine (Ch6) and laterodorsal 
tegmental (Ch5) neurons in the pons, which project 
widely from the cerebral cortex to the medulla, and the 
basal forebrain (Ch1–Ch4) groups, which project to the 
cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala.
Monoaminergic Neurons Share Many  
Cellular Properties
Neurons that use monoamines as neurotransmitters 
have many similar electrophysiological properties. 
For example, most continue to fire spontaneous action 
potentials in a highly regular pattern when isolated 
from their synaptic inputs in brain slice preparations. 
Their action potentials typically are followed by a slow 
membrane depolarization that leads to the next spike 
(Figure 40–12). The spontaneous regular firing pat-
tern of monoaminergic neurons is regulated by intrin-
sic pacemaker currents (Chapter 10). Tonic firing in 
vivo may be important for ensuring continuous deliv-
ery of monoamines to targets. For example, the basal 
ganglia depend on continuous exposure to dopamine 
from the neurons of the substantia nigra to facilitate 
motor responses.
The properties of monoaminergic neurons are 
suited to their unique and widespread modulatory 
roles in brain function. Indeed, some axon terminals 
of monoaminergic cells do not even form conven-
tional synaptic connections, instead releasing neuro-
transmitter diffusely to many targets at once. Most 
A  Firing pattern of a locus ceruleus neuron
B  Firing of a locus ceruleus neuron across wake-sleep
200 ms
20 mV
Mean rate (Hz) 
4
3
2
1
0
40
80 0
40
80 0
40
80 0
4
8
W
REM
SWS
W
% Stage
Sec


===== Page 7 =====
1002    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
monoaminergic neurotransmission occurs by means 
of metabotropic synaptic actions through G protein–
coupled receptors. Many monoaminergic neurons  
co-release neuropeptides, which have slow effects 
through other G protein–coupled receptors. Thus, 
although some monoaminergic synaptic actions involve 
fast synaptic mechanisms (Chapter 13), many involve 
slower metabotropic and neuromodulatory pathways 
as well (Chapter 14).
Autonomic Regulation and Breathing Are 
Modulated by Monoaminergic Pathways
Neurons in the adrenergic C1 group in the rostral vent-
rolateral medulla play a key role in maintaining resting 
vascular tone as well as adjusting vasomotor tone neces-
sitated by various behaviors. For example, an upright 
posture disinhibits neurons in the rostral ventrolateral 
medulla that directly innervate the sympathetic pregan-
glionic vasomotor neurons, thus increasing vasomotor 
tone to prevent a drop in blood pressure (the barorecep-
tor reflex). Neurons in the noradrenergic A5 group in 
the pons inhibit the sympathetic preganglionic neurons 
and play a role in depressor reflexes (eg, the fall in blood 
pressure in response to deep pain).
Serotonin regulates many different autonomic 
functions including gastrointestinal peristalsis, ther-
moregulation, cardiovascular control, and breathing. 
Electrical stimulation of serotonergic neurons within 
the medullary raphe nuclei increases heart rate and 
blood pressure. Serotonergic neurons in the medulla 
also project to neurons in the medulla and spinal cord 
that regulate breathing, as described earlier.
The role of serotonergic neurons as CO2 receptors 
may explain why defects in the serotonergic system 
have been linked to sudden infant death syndrome 
(SIDS) (Figure 40–13A). SIDS is the leading cause of 
postneonatal mortality in the Western world, respon-
sible for six infant deaths every day in the United 
States. A widely held theory holds that some SIDS 
cases are due to defective CO2 chemoreception, 
breathing, and arousal. A relatively high number of 
serotonergic neurons are found in the raphe nuclei of 
infants who die of SIDS, but these have an immature 
morphology, and they are associated with relatively 
low serotonin levels and low serotonergic receptor 
densities.
A plausible neurobiological mechanism for SIDS is 
that a defect in development of serotonergic neurons 
leads to reduced ability to detect a rise in partial pres-
sure of CO2 when airflow is obstructed during sleep, 
thus blunting the normal protective response, which 
includes arousal and increased ventilation (Figure 
40–13C). Infants sleeping face down would be unable 
to arouse sufficiently to change position when bedding 
blocks the airway. The Back to Sleep campaign, which 
encourages parents to place infants on their backs 
when put down to sleep, has reduced the incidence of 
SIDS by 50%.
Pain Perception Is Modulated by Monoamine 
Antinociceptive Pathways
Although pain is necessary for an animal to minimize 
injury, continued pain following an injury may be mal-
adaptive (eg, if the pain prevents vigorous escape from 
Figure 40–13  (Opposite) Serotonergic neurons have a role 
in the response to a rise in CO2 levels as well as sudden 
infant death syndrome.
A. Serotonergic neurons in the medulla are central respiratory 
chemoreceptors that are thought to stimulate breathing in 
response to an increase in arterial blood PCO2 (partial pres-
sure of CO2). The dendrites of these neurons wrap around 
large arteries and are stimulated by an increase in PCO2 (see 
Figure 40–9C). They project to and excite motor neurons in the 
medulla and spinal cord that control breathing.
B. Serotonergic neurons in the midbrain are also PCO2 sensors. 
Shown here is the increase in firing rate of a serotonergic neu-
ron from the dorsal raphe nucleus in response to an increase in 
PCO2 (monitored by the resultant decrease in external pH). This 
increase in firing rate may sensitize ascending arousal pathways 
from the parabrachial nucleus, which also receives input from 
other CO2 sensory pathways. This important response prevents 
suffocation during sleep when the airway is obstructed.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Richerson 2004. Copyright 
© 2004 Springer Nature.)
C. Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).
1. Triple risk hypothesis of SIDS. Infants are at risk to die from 
SIDS when three conditions coincide. First, the infant must be 
vulnerable because of an underlying abnormality of the brain 
stem, such as a genetic predisposition or an environmental 
insult (eg, exposure to cigarette smoke). Second, the baby 
must be in the stage of development (usually 2–6 months of 
age) when it may be difficult to change position to escape  
suffocation. Third, there also must be an exogenous stressor 
(eg, lying face down in a pillow). (Reproduced, with permis-
sion from, Filiano and Kinney 1994. © 1994 S. Karger AG.)
2. Proposed mechanism of SIDS. The combination of abnormal 
serotonergic neurons (eg, from exposure to cigarette smoke) 
and postnatal immaturity of neurons involved in respiratory 
control leads to the inability to respond effectively to airway 
obstruction (eg, from lying face down in a crib). The infant then 
does not wake up and turn its head or breathe faster, either 
of which would correct the problem. As a result, blood oxy-
genation decreases severely (hypoxia) while blood CO2 rises 
(hypercapnia).


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    1003
+
A  Serotonergic neurons
5 min
0.0
1.0
2.0
CO2-sensitive 
serotonergic
neuron
Lack of ventilatory
response
Severe hypercapnia/
hypoxia
Serotonergic
neuron dysfunction
Immature
brain stem 
Phrenic motor
neuron (to the 
diaphragm)
Artery
Medullary
respiratory
neuron
SIDS
Critical
developmental
period
Exogenous
stressor
Vulnerable
infant
B
Arousal
Breathing
+
A
B
Breathing instability
during sleep
Airway obstruction
Lack of arousal
Firing rate (Hz)
7.4
7.2
pH
Elevated
CO2
C  Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
1  Triple risk hypothesis
2  Proposed mechanism


===== Page 9 =====
1004    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
a predator). The monoaminergic systems include impor-
tant descending projections to the dorsal horn of the spi-
nal cord that modulate pain perception (Chapter 20).
The noradrenergic inputs to the spinal cord origi-
nate from the pontine cell groups A5–A7, with the 
locus ceruleus (A6) providing most of the input to the 
dorsal horn. Similarly, the serotonergic raphe nuclei 
in the medulla, particularly the nucleus raphe mag-
nus, project to the dorsal horn where they modulate 
the processing of information about noxious stimuli. 
Direct application of serotonin to dorsal horn neurons 
inhibits their response to noxious stimuli, and intrathe-
cal administration of serotonin attenuates the defensive 
withdrawal of the paw evoked by noxious stimuli. In 
addition, intrathecal administration of antagonists of 
serotonin receptors blocks the pain inhibition evoked 
by stimulation of the raphe nuclei.
Insight into the role of serotonin in pain process-
ing has been used in treating migraine headaches. In 
particular, the triptan agonists of 5-HT1D receptors 
have been found to be therapeutically effective. One 
of the possible mechanisms of action of this family of 
tryptamine-based drugs includes presynaptic inhibi-
tion of pain afferents from the meninges, preventing 
sensitization of central neurons. Drugs that block 
monoamine reuptake, including both traditional anti-
depressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
are effective in limiting pain in patients with chronic 
pain and migraine headaches.
Motor Activity Is Facilitated by  
Monoaminergic Pathways
The dopaminergic system is critical for normal motor 
performance. A massive projection ascends from the 
substantia nigra pars compacta to the striatum, where 
dopaminergic fibers act on striatal neuron receptors to 
release inhibition of motor responses (Chapter 38).
Patients with Parkinson disease in whom midbrain 
dopaminergic neurons have degenerated have trouble 
initiating movement and difficulty sustaining move-
ments. Such patients speak softly, write with small 
letters, and take small steps. Conversely, drugs that 
facilitate dopaminergic transmission in the striatum 
can result in unintended behaviors, ranging from motor 
tics (small muscle twitches), to chorea (large-scale, jerky 
limb movements), to complex cognitive behaviors (such 
as compulsive gambling or sexual activity).
As first shown by Sten Grillner, serotonergic neu-
rons play an important role in modulating motor pro-
grams. Drugs that activate serotonin receptors can 
induce hyperactivity, myoclonus, tremor, and rigid-
ity, all of which are part of the “serotonin syndrome.” 
Increases in the firing of raphe neurons have been 
observed in animals during repetitive motor activi-
ties such as feeding, grooming, locomotion, and deep 
breathing. Conversely, the firing of both serotonergic 
raphe and noradrenergic locus ceruleus neurons prac-
tically ceases during the atonia and lack of movement 
that occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
Noradrenergic cell groups in the pons also send 
extensive projections to motor cell groups. This modu-
latory input acts on presynaptic β- and α1-adrenergic 
receptors to facilitate excitatory inputs to motor neurons 
(Chapter 31). The sum of these effects is to facilitate 
motor neuron responses in stereotypic and repetitive 
behaviors such as rhythmic chewing, swimming, or 
locomotion. Conversely, increased β-adrenergic acti-
vation during stress can exaggerate motor responses 
and produce tremor. Drugs that block β-adrenergic 
receptors are used clinically to reduce certain types of 
tremor and are often taken by musicians prior to per-
formances to minimize tremulousness.
Ascending Monoaminergic Projections Modulate 
Forebrain Systems for Motivation and Reward
The forebrain is continuously bombarded with sen-
sory information and must determine which stimuli 
deserve attention. It must also decide which of many 
available behaviors should receive priority, based in 
part on experience—which behaviors have achieved 
rewarding outcomes in the past. The ascending mono-
aminergic systems play key roles in modulating all of 
these choices.
As noted earlier, dopaminergic inputs to the stria-
tum adjust the likelihood that a specific motor pattern 
or even a cognitive pattern will be expressed. Low 
dopamine levels reduce output from the direct path-
way striatal neurons (which release behaviors) and 
increase activity of indirect pathway striatal neurons 
(which inhibit behavior). Dopamine also has been 
linked to reward-based learning. Rewards are objects 
or events for which an animal will work (Chapter 42) 
and are useful in positively reinforcing behavior. Activ-
ity of dopaminergic neurons increases when a reward 
(such as food or juice) is unexpectedly given. But after 
animals are trained to expect a reward following a con-
ditioned stimulus, the activity of the neurons increases 
immediately after the conditioned stimulus rather than 
after the reward. This pattern of activity indicates that 
dopaminergic neurons provide a reward-prediction 
error signal, an important element in reinforcement 
learning. The importance of dopamine in learning is 
also supported by observations that lesions of dopa-
minergic systems prevent reward-based learning. 


