===== Page 1 =====
300    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Gray EG. 1963. Electron microscopy of presynaptic organelles 
of the spinal cord. J Anat 97:101–106.
Grenningloh G, Rienitz A, Schmitt B, et al. 1987. The 
strychnine-binding subunit of the glycine receptor shows 
homology with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Nature 
328:215–220.
Hamill OP, Bormann J, Sakmann B. 1983. Activation of 
multiple-conductance state chloride channels in spinal 
neurones by glycine and GABA. Nature 305:805–808.
Hestrin S, Nicoll RA, Perkel DJ, Sah P. 1990. Analysis of 
excitatory synaptic action in pyramidal cells using whole-
cell recording from rat hippocampal slices. J Physiol 
422:203–225.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1977. Structure of the synapse. In: ER 
Kandel (ed), Handbook of Physiology: A Critical, Comprehen-
sive Presentation of Physiological Knowledge and Concepts, 
Sect. 1 The Nervous System. Vol. 1, Cellular Biology of Neurons, 
Part 1, pp. 261–294. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological 
Society.
Hollmann M, O’Shea-Greenfield A, Rogers SW, Heinemann 
S. 1989. Cloning by functional expression of a member of 
the glutamate receptor family. Nature 342:643–648.
Jia H, Rochefort NL, Chen X, Konnerth A. 2010. Dendritic 
organization of sensory input to cortical neurons in vivo. 
Nature 464:1307–1312.
Kayser MS, Dalmau J. 2016. Anti-NMDA receptor enceph-
alitis, autoimmunity, and psychosis. Schizophr Res 
176:36–40.
Lang C, Barco A, Zablow L, Kandel ER, Siegelbaum SA, 
Zakharenko SS. 2004. Transient expansion of synapti-
cally connected dendritic spines upon induction of hip-
pocampal long-term potentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
101:16665–16670.
Larkum ME, Zhu JJ, Sakmann B. 1999. A new cellular mecha-
nism for coupling inputs arriving at different cortical lay-
ers. Nature 398:338–341.
Llinas R. 1988. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties 
of mammalian neurons: insights into central nervous sys-
tem function. Science 242:1654–1664.
Llinas R, Sugimori M. 1980. Electrophysiological properties 
of in vitro Purkinje cell dendrites in mammalian cerebel-
lar slices. J Physiol 305:197–213.
Markram H, Lubke J, Frotscher M, Sakmann B. 1997. Reg-
ulation of synaptic efficacy by coincidence of postsynap-
tic APs and EPSPs. Science 275:213–215.
Morgan SL, Teyler TJ. 2001. Electrical stimuli patterned after 
the theta-rhythm induce multiple forms of LTP. J Neuro-
physiol 86:1289–1296.
Palay SL. 1958. The morphology of synapses in the central 
nervous system. Exp Cell Res Suppl 5:275–293.
Pfeffer CK, Xue M, He M, Huang ZJ, Scanziani M. 2013. 
Inhibition of inhibition in visual cortex: the logic of con-
nections between molecularly distinct interneurons. Nat 
Neurosci 16:1068–1076.
Pritchett DB, Sontheimer H, Shivers BD, et al. 1989. Impor-
tance of a novel GABAA receptor subunit for benzodiaz-
epine pharmacology. Nature 338:582–585.
Redman S. 1979. Junctional mechanisms at group Ia syn-
apses. Prog Neurobiol 12:33–83.
Sakmann B. 1992. Elementary steps in synaptic transmission 
revealed by currents through single ion channels. Neuron 
8:613–629.
Schiller J, Schiller Y. 2001. NMDA receptor-mediated den-
dritic spikes and coincident signal amplification. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 11:343–348.
Sheng M, Hoogenraad C. 2007. The postsynaptic architecture 
of excitatory synapses: a more quantitative view. Ann Rev 
Biochem 76:823–847.
Sherrington CS. 1897. The central nervous system. In: M 
Foster (ed). A Text Book of Physiology, 7th ed. London: 
Macmillan.
Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi MP, Gouaux E. 2009. X-ray structure, 
symmetry and mechanism of an AMPA-subtype gluta-
mate receptor. Nature 462:745–756.
Sommer B, Köhler M, Sprengel R, Seeburg PH. 1991. RNA 
editing in brain controls a determinant of ion flow in 
glutamate-gated channels. Cell 67:11–19.
Stuart G, Spruston N, Häuser M (eds). 2016. Dendrites, 3rd 
ed. Oxford, England, and New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Yuste R. 2010. Dendritic Spines. Cambridge, MA and London, 
England: MIT Press.
Yuste R, Denk W. 1995. Dendritic spines as basic functional 
units of neuronal integration. Nature 375:682–684.


===== Page 2 =====
14
Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and 
Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers
Modulators Can Influence Circuit Function by Altering 
Intrinsic Excitability or Synaptic Strength
Multiple Neuromodulators Can Converge Onto the  
Same Neuron and Ion Channels
Why So Many Modulators?
Highlights
T
he binding of neurotransmitter to postsyn-
aptic receptors produces a postsynaptic poten-
tial either directly, by opening ion channels, or 
indirectly, by altering ion channel activity through 
changes in the postsynaptic cell’s biochemical state. As 
we saw in Chapters 11 to 13, the type of postsynap-
tic action depends on the type of receptor. Activation 
of an ionotropic receptor directly opens an ion channel 
that is part of the receptor macromolecule itself. In con-
trast, activation of metabotropic receptors regulates the 
opening of ion channels indirectly through biochemi-
cal signaling pathways; the metabotropic receptor and 
the ion channels regulated by the receptor are distinct 
macromolecules (Figure 14–1).
Whereas the action of ionotropic receptors is fast 
and brief, metabotropic receptors produce effects that 
begin slowly and persist for long periods, ranging 
from hundreds of milliseconds to many minutes. The 
two types of receptors also differ in their functions. 
Ionotropic receptors underlie fast synaptic signaling 
that is the basis of all behaviors, from simple reflexes to 
complex cognitive processes. Metabotropic receptors 
The Cyclic AMP Pathway Is the Best Understood  
Second-Messenger Signaling Cascade Initiated by  
G Protein–Coupled Receptors
The Second-Messenger Pathways Initiated by G Protein–
Coupled Receptors Share a Common Molecular Logic
A Family of G Proteins Activates Distinct Second-
Messenger Pathways
Hydrolysis of Phospholipids by Phospholipase C 
Produces Two Important Second Messengers, IP3 and 
Diacylglycerol
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Compose the Second Major 
Family of Metabotropic Receptors
Several Classes of Metabolites Can Serve as  
Transcellular Messengers
Hydrolysis of Phospholipids by Phospholipase A2 
Liberates Arachidonic Acid to Produce Other  
Second Messengers
Endocannabinoids Are Transcellular Messengers  
That Inhibit Presynaptic Transmitter Release
The Gaseous Second Messenger Nitric Oxide  
Is a Transcellular Signal That Stimulates Cyclic  
GMP Synthesis
The Physiological Actions of Metabotropic Receptors  
Differ From Those of Ionotropic Receptors
Second-Messenger Cascades Can Increase or Decrease 
the Opening of Many Types of Ion Channels
G Proteins Can Modulate Ion Channels Directly
Cyclic AMP–Dependent Protein Phosphorylation  
Can Close Potassium Channels
Second Messengers Can Endow Synaptic Transmission  
with Long-Lasting Consequences


===== Page 3 =====
302    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 14–1  Neurotransmitter actions can be divided into 
two groups according to the way receptor and effector 
functions are coupled.
A. Direct transmitter actions are produced by the binding of 
transmitter to ionotropic receptors, ligand-gated channels in 
which the receptor and ion channel are domains within a single 
macromolecule. The binding of transmitter to the receptor on 
the extracellular aspect of the receptor-channel protein directly 
opens the ion channel embedded in the cell membrane.
B. Indirect transmitter actions are caused by binding of trans-
mitter to metabotropic receptors, macromolecules that are 
separate from the ion channels they regulate. There are two 
families of these receptors. 1. G protein–coupled receptors acti-
vate guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins that engage 
a second-messenger cascade or act directly on ion channels. 
2. Receptor tyrosine kinases initiate a cascade of protein phos-
phorylation reactions, beginning with autophosphorylation (P) 
of the kinase itself on tyrosine residues.
P
Pore
Transmitter
Channel
Extracellular
side
A  Direct gating
B  Indirect gating
Cytoplasmic
side
1  G protein–coupled receptor
Second-messenger
cascade
G protein
Transmitter
Gate
2  Receptor tyrosine kinase
Transmitter
βγ
α
Second-messenger
cascade
modulate behaviors; they modify reflex strength, acti-
vate motor patterns, focus attention, set emotional 
states, and contribute to long-lasting changes in neural 
circuits that underlie learning and memory. Metabo-
tropic receptors are responsible for many of the actions 
of transmitters, hormones, and growth factors. The 
actions of these neuromodulators can produce remark-
able and dramatic changes in neuronal excitability and 
synaptic strength and, in so doing, can profoundly 
alter the state of activity in an entire circuit important 
for behavior.
Ionotropic receptors change the membrane poten-
tial quickly. As we have seen, this change is local at first 
but is propagated as an action potential along the axon 
if the change in membrane potential is suprathreshold. 
Activation of metabotropic receptors also begins as a 
local action that can spread to a wider region of the cell. 
The binding of a neurotransmitter with a metabotropic 
receptor activates proteins that in turn activate effec-
tor enzymes. The effector enzymes then often produce 
second-messenger molecules that can diffuse within a 
cell to activate still other enzymes that catalyze modifi-
cations of a variety of target proteins, greatly changing 
their activities.
There are two major families of metabotropic 
receptors: G protein–coupled receptors and receptor 
tyrosine kinases. We first describe the G protein–coupled 
receptor family and later discuss the receptor tyrosine 
kinase family.
The G protein–coupled receptors are coupled to an 
effector by a trimeric guanine nucleotide-binding pro-
tein, or G protein (Figure 14–1B). This receptor family 
comprises α- and β-adrenergic receptors for norepi-
nephrine, muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptors, 
γ-aminobutyric acid B (GABAB) receptors, certain glu-
tamate and serotonin receptors, all receptors for dopa-
mine, receptors for neuropeptides, odorant receptors, 
rhodopsin (the protein that reacts to light, initiating vis-
ual signals; see Chapter 22), and many others. Many of 
these receptors are thought to be involved in neurologi-
cal and psychiatric diseases and are key targets for the 
actions of important classes of therapeutic drugs.
G protein–coupled receptors activate a variety of 
effectors. The typical effector is an enzyme that pro-
duces a diffusible second messenger. These second 
messengers in turn trigger a biochemical cascade, 
either by activating specific protein kinases that phos-
phorylate the hydroxyl group of specific serine or 
threonine residues in various proteins or by mobiliz-
ing Ca2+ ions from intracellular stores, thereby initiat-
ing reactions that change the cell’s biochemical state. In 
some instances, the G protein or the second messenger 
acts directly on an ion channel.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    303
The Cyclic AMP Pathway Is the  
Best Understood Second-Messenger  
Signaling Cascade Initiated by  
G Protein–Coupled Receptors
The adenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate (cyclic 
AMP or cAMP) pathway is a prototypic example of a 
G protein–coupled second-messenger cascade. It was 
the first second-messenger pathway to be discovered, 
and our conception of other second-messenger path-
ways is based on it.
The binding of transmitter to receptors linked to 
the cAMP cascade first activates a specific G protein, Gs 
(named for its action to stimulate cAMP synthesis). In its 
resting state, Gs, like all G proteins, is a trimeric protein 
consisting of an α-, β-, and γ-subunit. The α-subunit is 
only loosely associated with the membrane and is usu-
ally the agent that couples the receptor to its primary 
effector enzyme. The β- and γ-subunits form a strongly 
bound complex that is more tightly associated with 
the membrane. As described later in this chapter, the 
βγ complex of G proteins can regulate the activity of 
certain ion channels directly.
In the resting state, the α-subunit binds a molecule 
of guanosine diphosphate (GDP). Upon the binding 
of ligand, a G protein–coupled receptor undergoes a 
conformational change that enables it to bind to the 
α-subunit, thereby promoting the exchange of GDP 
with a molecule of guanosine triphosphate (GTP). 
This leads to a conformational change that causes the 
α-subunit to dissociate from the βγ complex, thereby 
activating the α-subunit.
The particular class of α-subunit that is coupled to 
the cAMP cascade is termed αs, which stimulates the 
integral membrane protein adenylyl cyclase to cata-
lyze the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
to cAMP. When associated with the cyclase, αs also 
acts as a GTPase, hydrolyzing its bound GTP to GDP. 
When GTP is hydrolyzed, αs becomes inactive. It disso-
ciates from adenylyl cyclase and reassociates with the 
βγ complex, thereby stopping the synthesis of cAMP 
(Figure 14–2A). A Gs protein typically remains active 
for a few seconds before its bound GTP is hydrolyzed.
Once a G protein–coupled receptor binds a ligand, 
it can interact sequentially with more than one G protein 
macromolecule. As a result, the binding of relatively few 
molecules of transmitter to a small number of receptors 
can activate a large number of cyclase complexes. The 
signal is further amplified in the next step in the cAMP 
cascade, the activation of the protein kinase.
The major target of cAMP in most cells is the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (also called pro-
tein kinase A or PKA). This kinase, identified and 
characterized by Edward Krebs and colleagues, is a 
heterotetrameric enzyme consisting of a dimer of two 
regulatory (R) subunits and two catalytic (C) subunits. 
In the absence of cAMP, the R subunits bind to and 
inhibit the C subunits. In the presence of cAMP, each 
R subunit binds two molecules of cAMP, leading to a 
conformational change that causes the R and C subunits 
to dissociate (Figure 14–2B). Dissociation frees the C 
subunits to transfer the γ-phosphoryl group of ATP to 
the hydroxyl groups of specific serine and threonine 
residues in substrate proteins. The action of PKA is ter-
minated by phosphoprotein phosphatases, enzymes 
that cleave the phosphoryl group from proteins, pro-
ducing inorganic phosphate.
Protein kinase A is distantly related through evolu-
tion to other serine and threonine protein kinases that 
we shall consider: the calcium/calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinases and protein kinase C. These kinases 
also have regulatory and catalytic domains, but both 
domains are within the same polypeptide molecule 
(see Figure 14–4).
In addition to blocking enzymatic activity, the 
regulatory subunits of PKA also target the catalytic 
subunits to distinct sites within cells. Human PKA has 
two types of R subunits, RI and RII, each with two sub-
types: RIα, RIβ, RIIα, and RIIβ. The genes for each derive 
from a common ancestor but have different properties. 
For example, type II PKA (containing RII-type subunits) 
is targeted to the membrane by A kinase attachment 
proteins (AKAPs). One type of AKAP targets PKA to 
the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate 
receptor by binding both PKA and the postsynaptic 
density protein PSD-95, which binds to the cytoplas-
mic tail of the NMDA receptor (Chapter 13). In addi-
tion, this AKAP also binds a protein phosphatase, 
which removes the phosphate group from substrate 
proteins. By localizing PKA and other signaling com-
ponents near their substrate, AKAPs form local sign-
aling complexes that increase the specificity, speed, 
and efficiency of second-messenger cascades. Because 
AKAPs have only a weak affinity for RI subunits, most 
type I PKA is free in the cytoplasm.
Kinases can only phosphorylate proteins on ser-
ine and threonine residues that are embedded within 
a context of specific phosphorylation consensus sequences 
of amino acids. For example, phosphorylation by 
PKA usually requires a sequence of two contiguous 
basic amino acids—either lysine or arginine—followed  
by any amino acid, and then by the serine or threo-
nine residue that is phosphorylated (for example, 
Arg-Arg-Ala-Thr).
Several important protein substrates for PKA have 
been identified in neurons. These include voltage-gated 


===== Page 5 =====
Gs protein
βγ
αs
Transmitter
Extracellular side
Adenylyl cyclase
A  The cAMP cycle
B  Activation of protein kinase A
Cytoplasmic side
Receptor
GDP
Pi
ATP
cAMP
P
P
P
GTP
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
cAMP
cAMP
AMP
Phosphodiesterase
Regulatory
subunit
PKA
Bound cAMP
Active
catalytic
subunit
Inactive
catalytic
subunit
+ATP
Protein
(inactive)
Protein-P
(active)
Pi
Cellular
response
Protein
phosphatases
P
Figure 14–2  Activation of G protein–coupled receptors 
stimulates cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) pro-
duction and protein kinase A. (Adapted from Alberts et al. 
1994.)
A. The binding of a transmitter to certain receptors activates 
the stimulatory G protein (Gs), consisting of αs-, β-, and 
γ-subunits. When activated, the αs-subunit exchanges its bound 
guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP), causing αs to dissociate from the βγ complex. Next, αs 
associates with an intracellular domain of adenylyl cyclase, 
thereby stimulating the enzyme to produce cAMP from adeno-
sine triphosphate (ATP). The hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and 
inorganic phosphate (Pi) leads to dissociation of αs from the 
cyclase and its reassociation with the βγ complex. The cyclase 
then stops producing the second messenger. As transmitter 
dissociates from the receptor, the three subunits of the G pro-
tein reassociate, and the guanine nucleotide-binding site on the 
α-subunit is occupied by GDP.
B. Four cAMP molecules bind to the two regulatory subunits 
of protein kinase A (PKA), liberating the two catalytic subu-
nits, which are then free to phosphorylate specific substrate 
proteins on certain serine or threonine residues, thereby regu-
lating protein function to produce a given cellular response. 
Two kinds of enzymes regulate this pathway. Phosphodies-
terases convert cAMP to adenosine monophosphate (which 
is inactive), and protein phosphatases remove phosphate 
groups (P) from the substrate proteins, releasing inorganic 
phosphate, Pi. Phosphatase activity is, in turn, decreased by 
the protein inhibitor-1 (not shown), when it is phosphorylated 
by PKA.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    305
and ligand-gated ion channels, synaptic vesicle pro-
teins, enzymes involved in transmitter biosynthesis, 
and proteins that regulate gene transcription. As a 
result, the cAMP pathway has widespread effects on 
the electrophysiological and biochemical properties of 
neurons. We shall consider some of these actions later 
in this chapter.
The Second-Messenger Pathways Initiated  
by G Protein–Coupled Receptors Share a 
Common Molecular Logic
Approximately 3.5% of genes in the human genome 
code for G protein–coupled receptors. Although many 
of these are odorant receptors in olfactory neurons 
(Chapter 29), many others are receptors for well-
characterized neurotransmitters used throughout the 
nervous system. Despite their enormous diversity, all 
G protein–coupled receptors consist of a single poly-
peptide with seven characteristic membrane-spanning 
regions (serpentine receptors) (Figure 14–3A). Recent 
results from X-ray crystallography have provided 
detailed insights into the three-dimensional structure 
of these receptors in contact with their respective G 
proteins (Figure 14–3B).
The number of substances that act as second mes-
sengers in synaptic transmission is much fewer than 
the number of transmitters. More than 100 substances 
serve as transmitters; each can activate several types 
of receptors present in different cells. The few second 
messengers that have been well characterized fall into 
two categories, intracellular and transcellular. Intra-
cellular messengers are molecules whose actions are 
confined to the cell in which they are produced. Tran-
scellular messengers are molecules that can readily 
cross the cell membrane and thus can leave the cell in 
which they are produced to act as intercellular signals, 
or first messengers, on neighboring cells.
A Family of G Proteins Activates Distinct  
Second-Messenger Pathways
Approximately 20 types of α-subunits have been iden-
tified, 5 types of β-subunits, and 12 types of γ-subunits. 
G proteins with different α-subunits couple different 
classes of receptors and effectors and therefore have 
different physiological actions. For example, the inhib-
itory Gi proteins, which contain the αi-subunit, inhibit 
adenylyl cyclase and decrease cAMP levels. Other 
G proteins (Gq/11 proteins, which contain αq- or α11-
subunits) activate phospholipase C and probably other 
signal transduction mechanisms not yet identified. The 
Go protein, which contains the αo-subunit, is expressed 
at particularly high levels in the brain, but its exact 
targets are not known. Compared with other organs 
of the body, the brain contains an exceptionally large 
variety of G proteins. Even so, because of the limited 
number of classes of G proteins compared to the much 
larger number of receptors, one type of G protein can 
often be activated by different classes of receptors.
The number of known effector targets for  
G proteins is even more limited than the types of 
G proteins. Important effectors include certain ion 
channels that are activated by the βγ complex, ade-
nylyl cyclase in the cAMP pathway, phospholipase 
C in the diacylglycerol-inositol polyphosphate path-
way, and phospholipase A2 in the arachidonic acid 
pathway. Each of these effectors (except for the ion 
channels) initiates changes in specific target proteins 
within the cell, either by generating second messen-
gers that bind to the target protein or by activating a 
protein kinase that phosphorylates it.
Hydrolysis of Phospholipids by Phospholipase C 
Produces Two Important Second Messengers,  
IP3 and Diacylglycerol
Many important second messengers are generated 
through the hydrolysis of phospholipids in the inner 
leaflet of the plasma membrane. This hydrolysis is 
catalyzed by three enzymes—phospholipase C, D, 
and A2—named for the ester bonds they hydrolyze 
in the phospholipid. The phospholipases each can be 
activated by different G proteins coupled to different 
receptors.
The most commonly hydrolyzed phospholipid is 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), which 
typically contains the fatty acid stearate esterified 
to the glycerol backbone in the first position and the 
unsaturated fatty acid arachidonate in the second. 
Activation of receptors coupled to Gq or G11 stimu-
lates phospholipase C, which leads to the hydrolysis of 
PIP2 (specifically the phosphodiester bond that links 
the glycerol backbone to the polar head group) and 
production of two second messengers, diacylglycerol 
(DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3).
Diacylglycerol, which is hydrophobic, remains in 
the membrane when formed, where it recruits the cyto-
plasmic protein kinase C (PKC). Together with DAG 
and certain membrane phospholipids, PKC forms an 
active complex that can phosphorylate many protein 
substrates in the cell, both membrane-associated and 
cytoplasmic (Figure 14–4A). Activation of some iso-
forms of PKC requires elevated levels of cytoplasmic 
Ca2+ in addition to DAG.


===== Page 7 =====
G protein
Inactive
Ras-like
domain
GDP
GDP
α-helical
domain
Active
B  Interaction of receptor and G protein
A  Typical G protein–coupled receptor
GDP
GTP
P
P
NH2
Asp113
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
Gs binding
site
Ser
Ser
HOOC
HOOC
NH2
P
P
P
Figure 14–3  G protein–coupled receptors contain seven 
membrane-spanning domains.
A. The β2-adrenergic receptor shown here is representative 
of G protein–coupled receptors, including the β1-adrenergic 
and muscarinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptors and rhodopsin. 
It consists of a single subunit with an extracellular amino ter-
minus, intracellular carboxy terminus, and seven membrane-
spanning α-helixes. The binding site for the neurotransmitter 
lies in a cleft in the receptor formed by the transmembrane 
helixes. The amino acid residue aspartic acid (Asp)-113 par-
ticipates in binding. The part of the receptor indicated in 
brown associates with Gs protein α-subunits. Two serine (Ser) 
residues in the intracellular carboxy-terminal tail are sites for 
phosphorylation by specific receptor kinases, which helps 
inactivate the receptor. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Frielle et al. 1989.)
B. Models based on X-ray crystal structures of the β2-
adrenergic receptor (blue) interacting with the Gs protein in 
the inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound state and 
the active guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound state. A high-
affinity synthetic agonist is bound in the transmembrane region 
near the extracellular surface of the membrane (space-filling 
model). The αs-, β-, and γ-subunits of the inactive Gs protein 
are shown in brown, cyan, and purple, respectively. In the 
active state, αs (gold) undergoes a conformational change that 
enables it to interact with adenylyl cyclase. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Kobilka 2013. Copyright © 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    307
Figure 14–4  Hydrolysis of phospholipids in the cell mem-
brane activates three major second-messenger cascades.
A. The binding of transmitter to a receptor activates a G protein 
that activates phospholipase Cβ (PLCβ). This enzyme cleaves 
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) into the second 
messengers inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol 
(DAG). IP3 is water soluble and diffuses into the cytoplasm, 
where it binds to the IP3 receptor-channel on the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum, thereby releasing Ca2+ from internal stores. 
DAG remains in the membrane, where it recruits and activates 
protein kinase C (PKC). Membrane phospholipid is also a nec-
essary cofactor for PKC activation. Some isoforms of PKC also 
require Ca2+ for activation. PKC is composed of a single protein 
molecule that has both a regulatory domain that binds DAG 
and a catalytic domain that phosphorylates proteins on serine 
or threonine residues. In the absence of DAG the regulatory 
domain inhibits the catalytic domain.
B. The calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase is  
activated when Ca2+ binds to calmodulin and the calcium/ 
calmodulin complex then binds to a regulatory domain of the 
kinase. The kinase is composed of many similar subunits (only 
one of which is shown here), each having both regulatory and 
catalytic functions. The catalytic domain phosphorylates  
proteins on serine or threonine residues. (ATP, adenosine 
triphosphate; C, catalytic subunit; COOH, carboxy terminus; 
H2N, amino terminus; R, regulatory subunit.)
C
C
R
C
R
IP3
A  Protein kinase C
Receptor Transmitter
DAG
Ca2+
R
PKC
DAG
HOOC
H2N
Ca2+
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
HOOC
H2N
Calmodulin
Phosphoprotein
Cellular
response
Substrate protein
+
ATP
Phosphoprotein
Response
Substrate protein
+
ATP
B  Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase
G protein
Ca2+
Ca2+
βγ
GTP P
P
P
PLCβ
α
PIP2
IP3
IP3 receptor
R
C
The second product of the phospholipase C path-
way, IP3, stimulates the release of Ca2+ from intracel-
lular membrane stores in the lumen of the smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum. The membrane of the reticu-
lum contains a large integral membrane macromole-
cule, the IP3 receptor, which forms both a receptor for 
IP3 on its cytoplasmic surface and a Ca2+ channel that 
spans the membrane of the reticulum. When this mac-
romolecule binds IP3, the channel opens, releasing Ca2+ 
into the cytoplasm (Figure 14–4A).
The increase in intracellular Ca2+ triggers many bio-
chemical reactions and opens calcium-gated channels 


===== Page 9 =====
308    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
in the plasma membrane. Calcium can also act as a 
second messenger to trigger the release of additional 
Ca2+ from internal stores by binding to another inte-
gral protein in the membrane of the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum, the ryanodine receptor (so called 
because it binds the plant alkaloid ryanodine, which 
inhibits the receptor; in contrast, caffeine opens the 
ryanodine receptor). Like the IP3 receptor to which 
it is distantly related, the ryanodine receptor forms 
a Ca2+ channel that spans the reticulum membrane; 
however, cytoplasmic Ca2+, not IP3, opens the ryano-
dine receptor-channel.
Calcium often acts by binding to the small cyto-
plasmic protein calmodulin. An important function of 
the calcium/calmodulin complex is to activate calcium/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase). This 
enzyme is a complex of many similar subunits, each con-
taining both regulatory and catalytic domains within the 
same polypeptide chain. When the calcium/calmodulin 
complex is absent, the C-terminal regulatory domain of 
the kinase binds and inactivates the catalytic portion. 
Binding to the calcium/calmodulin complex causes con-
formational changes of the kinase molecule that unfet-
ter the catalytic domain for action (Figure 14–4B). Once 
activated, CaM kinase can phosphorylate itself through 
intramolecular reactions at many sites in the molecule. 
Autophosphorylation has an important functional effect: 
It converts the enzyme into a form that is independent 
of calcium/calmodulin and therefore persistently active, 
even in the absence of Ca2+.
Persistent activation of protein kinases is a gen-
eral and important mechanism for maintaining bio-
chemical processes that underlie long-term changes 
in synaptic function associated with certain forms of 
memory. In addition to the persistent activation of  
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, PKA 
can also become persistently active following a pro-
longed increase in cAMP because of a slow enzymatic 
degradation of free regulatory subunits through the 
ubiquitin pathway. The decline in regulatory subunit 
concentration results in the long-lasting presence of 
free catalytic subunits, even after cAMP levels have 
declined, leading to the continued phosphorylation of 
substrate proteins. PKC can also become persistently 
active through proteolytic cleavage of its regulatory 
and catalytic domains or through the expression of a 
PKC isoform that lacks a regulatory domain. Finally, 
the duration of phosphorylation can be enhanced by 
certain proteins that act to inhibit the activity of phos-
phoprotein phosphatases. One such protein, inhibi-
tor-1, inhibits phosphatase activity only when the 
inhibitor is itself phosphorylated by PKA.
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Compose  
the Second Major Family of  
Metabotropic Receptors
The receptor tyrosine kinases represent a distinct family 
of receptors from the G protein–coupled receptors. The 
receptor tyrosine kinases are integral membrane pro-
teins composed of a single subunit with an extracellu-
lar ligand-binding domain connected to a cytoplasmic 
region by a single transmembrane segment. The cyto-
plasmic region contains a protein kinase domain that 
phosphorylates both itself (autophosphorylation) and 
other proteins on tyrosine residues (Figure 14–5A). 
This phosphorylation results in the activation of a 
large number of proteins, including other kinases that 
are capable of acting on ion channels.
Receptor tyrosine kinases are activated when 
bound by peptide hormones, including epidermal 
growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 
nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF), and insulin. Cells also contain impor-
tant nonreceptor cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, such 
as the protooncogene src. These nonreceptor tyrosine 
kinases are often activated by interactions with recep-
tor tyrosine kinases and are important in regulating 
growth and development.
Many (but not all) of the receptor tyrosine kinases 
exist as monomers in the plasma membrane in the 
absence of ligand. Ligand binding causes two mono-
meric receptor subunits to form a dimer, thereby 
activating the intracellular kinase. Each monomer 
phosphorylates its counterpart at a tyrosine residue, an 
action that enables the kinase to phosphorylate other 
proteins. Like the serine and threonine protein kinases, 
tyrosine kinases regulate the activity of neuronal pro-
teins they phosphorylate, including the activity of 
certain ion channels. Tyrosine kinases also activate an 
isoform of phospholipase C, phospholipase Cγ, which 
like PLCβ cleaves PIP2 into IP3 and DAG.
Receptor tyrosine kinases initiate cascades of reac-
tions involving several adaptor proteins and other 
protein kinases that often lead to changes in gene tran-
scription. The mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP 
kinases) are an important group of serine-threonine 
kinases that can be activated by a signaling cascade ini-
tiated by receptor tyrosine kinase. MAP kinases are acti-
vated by cascades of protein-kinase reactions (kinase 
kinases), each cascade specific to one of three types 
of MAP kinase: extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK), p38 MAP kinase, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK). Activated MAP kinases have several important 
actions. They translocate to the nucleus where they 


