===== Page 1 =====
228    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
A-type current is formed primarily by Kv4 family 
α-subunits, which form channels that inactivate over a 
range of time scales from a few milliseconds to tens of 
milliseconds. Kv1 channels that include Kv1.4 subunits 
or the auxiliary subunit Kvβ1 also mediate an inactivat-
ing component of current, which is highly expressed in 
some nerve terminals as well as some cell bodies.
As is the case for Na+ channels and Cav3 family 
channels, A-type K+ current not only inactivates dur-
ing large depolarizations but is also subject to steady-
state inactivation by small depolarizations from rest, 
providing a mechanism by which its amplitude can be 
modulated by small voltage changes around resting 
potential (see Figure 10–15B).
Kv7 subunits form non-inactivating channels that 
require only small depolarizations from rest to be acti-
vated and can even be activated significantly at the 
resting potential. In some neurons, Kv7 channels are 
downregulated by the transmitter acetylcholine acting 
through muscarinic G protein–coupled receptors (thus 
the origin of an alternative name of “M-current”). Kv7 
channels typically activate relatively slowly, over tens 
of milliseconds, and provide little current during a sin-
gle action potential but tend to suppress firing of sub-
sequent action potentials (Chapter 14).
The KCNH gene family consists of three subfami-
lies of voltage-gated K+ channels (Kv10, Kv11, and 
Figure 10–13  Different voltage dependence and kinetics of 
major classes of mammalian voltage-activated potassium 
channels.
A. Simplified generalization of the voltage dependence and 
kinetics of the major voltage-gated K+ families. Because Kv1, 
Kv4, and Kv7 channels can be activated by relatively small 
depolarizations, they often help control action potential (AP) 
threshold. Kv2 and Kv3 channels require larger depolariza-
tions to be activated. Kv1, Kv3, and Kv4 channels are activated 
relatively rapidly, whereas Kv7 and Kv2 channels are activated 
more slowly.
B. Simplified generalization of the differing activation times 
of the major components of delayed rectifier K+ channels 
during an action potential. Kv1 channels require small depo-
larizations and are activated rapidly, sometimes significantly 
in advance of the action potential. Kv3 channels require large 
depolarizations and are activated late in the rising phase of 
the action potential and deactivated very rapidly thereafter. 
Kv2 channels are activated relatively slowly during the fall-
ing phase of the action potential and remain open during the 
afterhyperpolarization. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Johnston et al. 2010.)
–30 mV
–70 mV
–30 mV
0 mV
–70 mV
–30 mV
0 mV
–70 mV
–90 mV
Fast kinetics
Slow kinetics
High voltage-activated
(AP repolarization)
Delayed rectiﬁer activity during an AP
Low voltage-activated
(AP threshold-responses)
Kv3
Kv1
Kv1
Kv3
Kv2
Kv4
Kv2
Kv7
B
A
Kv12), which are also expressed in the brain. They 
influence resting potential, action potential threshold, 
and frequency and pattern of firing.
Voltage-Gated Hyperpolarization-Activated Cyclic 
Nucleotide-Gated Channels
Many neurons have cation channels that are slowly 
activated by hyperpolarization. This sensitivity to 
hyperpolarization is enhanced when intracellular 
cyclic nucleotides bind to the channel. Because these 
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 
(HCN) channels have only two of the four negative 
binding sites found in the selectivity filter of K+ chan-
nels, they are permeable to both K+ and Na+ and have 
a reversal potential around −40 to −30 mV. As a result, 
hyperpolarization from rest, as during strong synaptic 
inhibition or following an action potential, opens the 
channels to generate an inward depolarizing current 
referred to as Ih (see Figure 10–15D).
Gating of Ion Channels Can Be Controlled  
by Cytoplasmic Calcium
In a typical neuron, the opening and closing of certain 
ion channels can be modulated by various cytoplas-
mic factors, thus affording the neuron’s excitability 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    229
properties greater flexibility. Changes in the levels of 
such cytoplasmic factors can result from the activity of 
the neuron itself or from the influences of other neu-
rons (Chapters 14 and 15).
Intracellular Ca2+ concentration is one important 
factor that modulates ion channel activity. Although 
ionic currents through membrane channels during an 
action potential generally do not result in appreciable 
changes in the intracellular concentrations of most ion 
species, calcium is a notable exception to this rule. The 
concentration of free Ca2+ in the cytoplasm of a rest-
ing cell is extremely low, about 10−7 M, several orders 
of magnitude below the external Ca2+ concentration, 
which is approximately 2 mM. Thus, intracellular Ca2+ 
concentration may increase many-fold above its rest-
ing value as a result of voltage-gated Ca2+ influx.
Intracellular Ca2+ concentration controls the gating 
of a number of channels. Several kinds of channels are 
activated by increases in intracellular Ca2+. For example, 
the Ca2+-activated BK channels (named for their big  
single-channel conductance), which are widely expressed 
in neurons, are voltage-dependent K+ channels that 
require a very large, nonphysiological depolarization to 
open in the absence of Ca2+. The binding of Ca2+ to a site 
on the cytoplasmic surface of the channel shifts its volt-
age gating to allow the channel to open at more nega-
tive potentials. With the influx of Ca2+ during an action 
potential, BK channels can open and help repolarize the 
action potential. Another family of calcium-activated K+ 
channels, the SK channels (named for their small single-
channel conductance), are not voltage dependent but 
open only in response to increases in intracellular Ca2+. 
SK channels can open in response to relatively small 
changes in intracellular Ca2+ but gate slowly, so their 
activation gradually builds up as more Ca2+ enters the 
cell during repeated action potential firing. Some Ca2+ 
channels are themselves sensitive to levels of intracel-
lular Ca2+, becoming inactivated when intracellular Ca2+ 
increases as a result of entry through the channel itself.
As is described in later chapters, changes in the 
intracellular concentration of Ca2+ can also influence a 
variety of cellular metabolic processes, as well as neu-
rotransmitter release and gene expression.
Excitability Properties Vary Between  
Types of Neurons
Through the expression of a distinct complement of ion 
channels, the electrical properties of different neuronal 
types have evolved to match the dynamic demands of 
information processing. Thus, the function of a neuron 
is defined not only by its synaptic inputs and outputs 
but also by its intrinsic excitability properties.
Different types of neurons in the mammalian nerv-
ous system generate action potentials that have differ-
ent shapes and fire in different characteristic patterns, 
reflecting different expression of voltage-gated chan-
nels. For example, cerebellar Purkinje neurons and 
GABAergic cortical interneurons are associated with 
high levels of expression of Kv3 channels. The rapid 
activation of these channels produces narrow action 
potentials. In dopaminergic and other monoaminergic 
neurons, there is a high level of expression of voltage-
activated Ca2+ channels that open during the falling 
phase of the action potential. The inward Ca2+ current 
from these channels slows repolarization, resulting in 
broader action potentials.
In the squid axon, the action potential is followed 
by an afterhyperpolarization (see Figure 10–7). In some 
mammalian neurons, the afterhyperpolarization has 
slow components lasting tens or even hundreds of mil-
liseconds, generated by calcium-activated K+ channels 
or voltage-activated K+ channels with slow deactiva-
tion kinetics. Slow afterhyperpolarizations mediated 
by SK channels can be enhanced by repeated action 
potentials, reflecting buildup in intracellular Ca2+ 
concentrations.
In many pyramidal neurons in the cortex and 
hippocampus, the action potential is followed by an 
afterdepolarization, a transient depolarization that some-
times follows an earlier faster afterhyperpolarization. 
If the afterdepolarization is large enough, it can trigger 
a second action potential, resulting in all-or-none burst 
firing. The afterdepolarization can be caused by a vari-
ety of ionic currents, including Na+ and Ca2+ currents 
from a number of voltage-dependent channels.
The shape of the action potential in a neuron is not 
always invariant. In some cases it can be dynamically 
regulated either intrinsically (eg, by repetitive firing) or 
extrinsically (eg, by synaptic modulation) (Chapter 15).
The pattern of action potential firing evoked by 
depolarization varies widely between neurons. The 
input-output function of a neuron can be character-
ized by the frequency and pattern of action potential 
firing in response to a series of current injections of dif-
ferent magnitudes. In the mammalian cerebral cortex, 
glutamatergic pyramidal neurons typically fire rap-
idly at the beginning of the current pulse followed by  
progressive slowing of firing, a pattern known as 
adaptation (Figure 10–14A). In contrast, many GABAergic 
interneurons fire with very little change in frequency 
(Figure 10–14B). Other neurons have more complex 
firing patterns. Some pyramidal neurons in the cer-
ebral cortex tend to fire with an initial burst of action 
potentials (Figure 10–14C); “chattering” cells respond 
with repetitive brief bursts of high-frequency firing 
(Figure 10–14D).


===== Page 3 =====
230    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 10–14  Different firing patterns in four types of corti-
cal neurons. Three steps of depolarizing current, each of differ-
ent amplitude, were injected into each cell to evoke  
firing. (Adapted, with permission, from Nowak et al. 2003.)
A. A cortical neuron with a firing pattern typical of many gluta-
matergic cortical pyramidal neurons, illustrating characteristic 
adaptation.
B. A firing pattern typical of many GABAergic interneurons, 
illustrating maintained high-frequency repetitive firing.
C. Firing in an intrinsically bursting neuron, a subtype of pyrami-
dal neuron in cortical layer II/III.
D. Firing in a chattering cell, a subtype of pyramidal neuron in 
cortical layer V.
E. Firing frequency versus stimulus current for these four cell 
types, showing their different sensitivities to increasing stimu-
lus strength.
40 mV
40 mV
0.5 nA
1 nA
0.8 nA
0.8 nA
100 ms
Fast spiking
Stimulus current
Firing frequency
Chattering
Intrinsically bursting
Regular spiking
A
B
C
E
D
Chattering
Fast spiking
Intrinsically bursting
Regular spiking


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    231
The sensitivity of these four classes of neurons 
to excitatory input can also be characterized by their 
frequency–current relationships. The fast spiking neu-
rons are the most sensitive to increases in depolarizing 
excitatory current.
Some neurons can sustain repetitive firing at high 
frequencies up to 500 Hz. Such fast-spiking neurons 
occur throughout the mammalian central nervous sys-
tem, including many principal neurons in the auditory 
system, where neurons must respond to sound waves 
of very high frequencies. The ability to fire repetitively 
at high frequencies is correlated with high expression 
levels of Kv3 family channels, which produce rapid 
repolarization and close extremely rapidly following 
repolarization, resulting in a minimal afterhyperpo-
larization and a brief refractory period.
The different firing patterns of neurons can be 
understood in terms of the expression and gating prop-
erties of particular channels. For example, adaptation 
of firing frequency during a maintained current pulse 
can be produced by activation of particular Kv1 fam-
ily channels, which are strongly activated following 
an action potential and thus impede firing of a subse-
quent spike (Figure 10–15A). Because many channels 
are controlled by a process of inactivation that regu-
lates their availability for activation, synaptic inputs 
that produce small voltage changes around the resting 
potential can greatly modify the cell’s excitability. For 
example, in some neurons, a steady hyperpolarizing 
synaptic input makes the cell less excitable by reduc-
ing the extent of inactivation of the A-type K+ chan-
nels at the normal resting potential of the cell (Figure 
10–15B). In other neurons, such a steady hyperpolari-
zation makes the cell more excitable because it reduces 
the inactivation of Cav3 voltage-gated Ca2+ channels 
(Figure 10–15C).
A surprisingly large number of neurons in the 
mammalian brain fire spontaneously in the absence 
of any synaptic input. When such activity is regular 
and rhythmic, it is often referred to as “pacemak-
ing,” by analogy to the rhythmic spontaneous firing 
of the cardiac pacemaker in the sinoatrial node of the 
heart. Many neurons that release modulatory neu-
rotransmitters, such as dopamine, serotonin, nor-
epinephrine, and acetylcholine, fire spontaneously, 
typically at frequencies of 0.5 to 5 Hz, resulting in 
constant tonic release of transmitter in the target 
areas of the neuron.
One mechanism causing spontaneous firing is 
exemplified by neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
of the hypothalamus, which helps control the circadian 
rhythm of overall metabolism and the sleep–wake cycle. 
These neurons fire spontaneously, with faster firing 
during the daytime than the nighttime (Chapter 44).  
Pacemaking in these cells is driven in part by sub-
threshold persistent Na+ current, a small voltage-
dependent current which flows through Na+ channels 
at voltages as negative as −70 mV. This current can 
slowly depolarize the neuron to the point where a fast 
action potential fires (Figure 10–15E). In the same neu-
rons, there are non–voltage-dependent channels that 
conduct Na+ “leak” current, which depolarizes the 
cells into the voltage range where voltage-dependent 
persistent Na+ current is activated. The higher expres-
sion level in the cell membrane of such Na+ leakage 
channels during the daytime leads to the day–night 
difference in firing rate.
In dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, 
pacemaking is unusual in being driven partly by 
voltage-dependent Ca2+ currents. The continual entry 
of Ca2+ during the lifetime of the neurons may contrib-
ute to metabolic stress associated with death of these 
neurons in Parkinson disease (Chapter 63).
Excitability Properties Vary Between  
Regions of the Neuron
Different regions of a neuron have different types 
of ion channels that support the specialized func-
tions of each region. The axon, for example, func-
tions as a relatively simple relay line. In contrast, 
the input, integrative, and output regions of a neu-
ron typically perform more complex processing of 
the information they receive before passing it along 
(Chapter 3).
The trigger zone at the axon initial segment has 
the lowest threshold for action potential generation, 
in part because it has an exceptionally high density 
of voltage-gated Na+ channels. In addition, it typi-
cally has voltage-gated ion channels that are sensitive 
to relatively small deviations from the resting poten-
tial. These channels thus play a critical role in trans-
forming graded synaptic or receptor potentials into a 
train of all-or-none action potentials. Channels highly 
expressed at the axon initial segment of many neurons 
include Nav1.6, Kv1, Kv7, and low voltage-activated 
T-type Ca2+ channels.
Dendrites in many types of neurons have voltage-
gated ion channels, including Ca2+, K+, HCN, and Na+ 
channels (Chapter 13). When activated, these channels 
help shape the amplitude, time course, and propaga-
tion of the synaptic potentials to the cell body. In some 
neurons, the density of voltage-gated channels in the 
dendrites is sufficient to support local action poten-
tials, typically with relatively high threshold voltages. 


===== Page 5 =====
232    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
B  Delayed ﬁring
–55 mV
50 mV
50 ms
1 s
5 nA
0.5 nA
20
mV
–75 mV
Delay
Vm
Vm
Vm
IK,A
IKv1
Istim
IKv1
ICa
Ih
ICa
ICa
Istim
Istim
IK,A
Istim
1
2
1
2
A  Adaptation
D  Bursting neuron
E  Suprachiasmatic nucleus pacemaking
    neuron
+100 nM α-Dendrotoxin
Control
C  Potential-dependent
 
excitability
20
mV
20
mV
200 ms
500 ms
–60 mV
0.3 nA
200 ms
1
2
Plateau
potential
Voltage-dependent
Na+ current
Na+ leak current
Vm (mV)
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
I (pA)
–10
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
Figure 10–15  Regulation of firing pattern by a variety of 
voltage-gated channels.
A. Activation of Kv1 channels normally prevents firing of a sec-
ond action potential by increasing spike threshold in a mouse 
dorsal root ganglion neuron (1). Blocking Kv1 channels with 
the snake toxin α-dendrotoxin changes the firing pattern from 
strong adaptation to maintained repetitive firing in response to 
a steady stimulating current (Istim) (2). (Data from Pin Liu.)
B. Injection of a depolarizing current pulse (Istim) into a neuron in 
the nucleus tractus solitarius normally triggers an immediate train 
of action potentials (1). If the cell is first held at a hyperpolarized 
membrane potential, the spike train is delayed (2). The delay is 
caused when A-type K+ channels are activated by the depolarizing 
current pulse. The channels generate a transient outward K+ cur-
rent, IK,A, that briefly slows the approach of Vm to threshold. These 
channels typically are inactivated at the resting potential (–55 mV), 
but steady hyperpolarization removes the inactivation. (Adapted 
with permission, from Dekin and Getting 1987.)
C. A small depolarizing current pulse injected into a thalamic 
neuron at rest generates a subthreshold depolarization (1). If 
the membrane potential is held at a hyperpolarized level, the 
same current pulse triggers a burst of action potentials (2). 
The effectiveness of the current pulse is enhanced because 
the hyperpolarization causes a type of voltage-gated Ca2+ chan-
nel to recover from inactivation. Depolarizing inward current 
through these Ca2+ channels (ICa) generates a plateau potential 
of about 20 mV that triggers a burst of action potentials. The 
dashed line indicates the level of the normal resting poten-
tial. (Adapted with permission, from Llinás and Jahnsen 1982.)
   The data in parts B and C demonstrate that steady hyper-
polarization, such as might be produced by inhibitory synaptic 
input to a neuron, can profoundly affect the spike train pattern 
of a neuron. This effect varies greatly among cell types and 
depends on the presence or absence of particular types of 
voltage-gated Ca2+ and K+ channels.
D. In the absence of synaptic input, thalamocortical relay neu-
rons can fire spontaneously in brief bursts of action potentials. 
These bursts are produced by current through two types of 
voltage-gated ion channels. The gradual depolarization that 
leads to a burst is driven by inward current (Ih) through HCN 
channels, which open in response to hyperpolarization. The 
burst is triggered by an inward Ca2+ current through voltage-
gated Cav3 channels, which are activated at relatively low 
levels of depolarization. This Ca2+ influx generates sufficient 
depolarization to reach threshold and drive a brief burst of Na+-
dependent action potentials. The strong depolarization during 
the burst causes the HCN channels to close and inactivates the 
Ca2+ channels, allowing hyperpolarization to develop between 
bursts of firing. This hyperpolarization then opens the HCN 
channels, initiating the next cycle in the rhythm. (Adapted, with 
permission, from McCormick and Huguenard 1992.)
E. Neurons from the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothal-
amus generate spontaneous pacemaker potentials. Following 
an action potential, the neuron spontaneously depolarizes, 
first slowly and then more rapidly, resulting in another action 
potential. The depolarization is driven by two inward Na+  
currents during the interspike interval. One is “persistent 
Na+ current,” which flows through voltage-dependent sodium 
channels sensitive to block by tetrodotoxin, probably the same 
population of channels that underlie the much larger sodium 
current during the upstroke of the action potential. The sec-
ond current flows through non–voltage-activated sodium leak 
nonselective (NALCN) channels, which provide a steady con-
ductance pathway for Na+ and K+ ions. At negative voltages, 
Na+ driving force is large and K+ driving force is small, so the 
leak current is carried predominantly by Na+ ions. This inward 
current depolarizes the neuron to the point at which voltage-
dependent persistent Na+ current becomes dominant (around 
–60 mV). (Adapted, with permission, from Jackson et al. 2004. 
Copyright © 2004 Society for Neuroscience.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    233
With moderate synaptic stimulation, full-blown action 
potentials are first generated at the trigger zone at the 
initial segment of the axon and then propagate back 
into the dendrites, serving as a signal to the synaptic 
regions that the cell has fired.
Conduction of the action potential down the 
axon is mediated primarily by voltage-gated Na+ 
and K+ channels that function much like those in 
the squid axon. In myelinated axons, the nodes of 
Ranvier have a high density of Na+ channels but a 
low density of voltage-activated K+ channels. There 
is a higher density of voltage-activated K+ chan-
nels under the myelin sheath near the two ends of 
each internodal segment. The normal function of 
these K+ channels is to suppress generation of action 
potentials in portions of the axon membrane under 
the myelin sheath. In demyelinating diseases, these 
channels become exposed and thus may inhibit the 
ability of the bare axon to conduct action potentials 
(Chapters 9 and 57).
Presynaptic nerve terminals at chemical synapses 
have a high density of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, 
most commonly Cav2.1 (P/Q-type) channels, Cav2.2 
(N-type) channels, or a mixture of the two. Arrival of 
an action potential in the terminal opens these chan-
nels, causing an influx of Ca2+ that triggers transmitter 
release (Chapter 15).
Neuronal Excitability Is Plastic
The expression, localization, and functional state of 
voltage-gated ion channels controlling the rate and 
pattern of action potential firing in a particular neu-
ron are not always fixed, but can change in response 
to changes in the neuron’s synaptic input, its activity, 
or its environment, as well as in response to injury or 
disease. For example, synaptic input that causes chan-
nel phosphorylation via second messenger pathways 
can lead to transient changes in a channel’s functional 
properties, which in turn modulate cell excitability 
(Chapter 14). Plasticity can also occur on a longer time 
scale, such as when increased activity of a neuronal 
network as a whole leads to decreased excitability of 
individual neurons—a homeostatic feedback system. 
In some cases, activity-induced structural changes, 
such as change in length of the axon initial segment 
or its migration relative to the soma, can also affect 
excitability. The molecular mechanisms of homeostatic 
changes in neuronal excitability are not well under-
stood but likely involve intracellular calcium signaling 
pathways that control transcription or cellular traf-
ficking of specific ion channels. Dysfunction of such 
regulatory pathways may underlie some types of epi-
lepsy and hyperexcitability associated with conditions 
such as neuropathic pain.
Highlights
  1.  An action potential is a transient depolariza-
tion of membrane voltage lasting about 1 ms 
that is produced when ions move across the cell 
membrane through voltage-gated channels and 
thereby change the charge separation across the 
membrane.
  2.  The depolarizing phase of the action potential 
results from rapid, regenerative opening of 
voltage-activated Na+ channels. Repolarization 
is due to inactivation of Na+ channels and activa-
tion of K+ channels.
  3.  The sharp threshold for action potential gen-
eration occurs at a voltage at which inward Na+ 
channel current just exceeds outward currents 
through leak channels and voltage-gated K+ 
channels.
  4.  The refractory period reflects Na+ channel inacti-
vation and K+ channel activation continuing after 
the action potential. The refractory period limits 
the action potential firing rate.
  5.  The conformational changes of channel proteins 
underlying voltage-dependent activation and 
inactivation are not yet completely understood, 
but key regions involved in channel gating have 
been identified.
  6.  Voltage-gated sodium channels select for sodium 
on the basis of size, charge, and energy of hydra-
tion of the ion.
  7.  Most neurons express multiple kinds of voltage-
gated Na+, Ca2+, K+, HCN, and Cl− channels, with 
especially large diversity in the properties of K+ 
channels.
  8.  The diversity of voltage-dependent channels 
reflects the expression of multiple genes, forma-
tion of heteromeric channels from multiple gene 
products, alternative splicing of gene transcripts, 
mRNA editing, and combination of pore-forming 
subunits with a variety of accessory proteins.
  9.  Activity of some voltage-gated ion channels can 
be modulated by cytoplasmic Ca2+.
10.  The diversity in expression of voltage-gated ion 
channels results in differences in excitability 
properties of different types of neurons and in 
different regions of the same neuron.
11.  The regional expression and functional state of 
ion channels can be regulated in response to cell 


===== Page 7 =====
234    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
activity, changes in cell environment, or patho-
logical processes, resulting in plasticity of the 
intrinsic excitability of neurons.
 Bruce P. Bean 
  John D. Koester 
Selected Reading
Ahern CA, Payandeh J, Bosmans F, Chanda B. 2016. The 
hitchhiker’s guide to the voltage-gated sodium channel 
galaxy. J Gen Physiol 147:1–24.
Armstrong CM, Hille B. 1998. Voltage-gated ion channels 
and electrical excitability. Neuron 20:371–380.
Bezanilla F. 2008. How membrane proteins sense voltage. 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:323–332.
Duménieu M, Oulé M, Kreutz MR, Lopez-Rojas J. 2017. The 
segregated expression of voltage-gated potassium and 
sodium channels in neuronal membranes: functional 
implications and regulatory mechanisms. Front Cell Neu-
rosci 11:115.
Hille B. 2001. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Hodgkin AL. 1992. Chance & Design: Reminiscences of Science 
in Peace and War. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Johnston J, Forsythe ID, Kopp-Scheinpflug C. 2010. Going 
native: voltage-gated potassium channels controlling 
neuronal excitability. J Physiol 588:3187–3200.
Llinás RR. 1988. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties 
of mammalian neurons: insights into central nervous sys-
tem function. Science 242:1654–1664.
Rudy B, McBain C. 2001. Kv3 channels: voltage-gated K+ 
channels designed for high-frequency repetitive firing. 
Trends Neurosci 24:517–526.
Turrigiano GG, Nelson SB. 2004. Homeostatic plasticity in the 
developing nervous system. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:97–107.
Vacher H, Mohapatra DP, Trimmer JS. 2008. Localization and 
targeting of voltage-dependent ion channels in mamma-
lian central neurons. Physiol Rev 88:1407–1447.
References
Aplizar SA, Cho H, Hoppa M. 2019. Subcellular control of 
membrane excitability in the axon. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
57:117–125.
Armstrong CM, Gilly WF. 1979. Fast and slow steps in the 
activation of sodium channels. J Gen Physiol 59:691–711.
Battefeld A, Tran BT, Gavrilis J, Cooper EC, Kole MH. 2014. 
Heteromeric Kv7.2/7.3 channels differentially regulate 
action potential initiation and conduction in neocortical 
myelinated axons. J Neurosci 34:3719–3732.
Bauer CK, Schwarz JR. 2018. Ether-à-go-go K+ channels: 
effective modulators of neuronal excitability. J Physiol 
(Lond) 596:769–783.
Bender KJ, Trussell LO. 2012. The physiology of the axon ini-
tial segment. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:249–265.
Capes DL, Goldschen-Ohm MP, Arcisio-Miranda M,  
Bezanilla F, Chanda B. 2013. Domain IV voltage-sensor 
movement is both sufficient and rate limiting for fast inac-
tivation in sodium channels. J Gen Physiol 142:101–112.
Carrasquillo Y, Nerbonne JM. 2014. IA channels: diverse regu-
latory mechanisms. Neuroscientist 20:104–111.
Catterall WA. 1988. Structure and function of voltage-sensitive 
ion channels. Science 242:50–61.
Catterall WA. 2010. Ion channel voltage sensors: structure, 
function, and pathophysiology. Neuron 67:915–928.
Catterall WA. 2011. Voltage-gated calcium channels. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3:a003947.
Catterall WA, Few AP. 2008. Calcium channel regulation and 
presynaptic plasticity. Neuron 59:882–8901.
Cole KS, Curtis HJ. 1939. Electric impedance of the squid 
giant axon during activity. J Gen Physiol 22:649–670.
Dekin MS, Getting PA. 1987. In vitro characterization of neu-
rons in the vertical part of the nucleus tractus solitarius. 
II. Ionic basis for repetitive firing patterns. J Neurophysiol 
58:215–229.
Erisir A, Lau D, Rudy B, Leonard CS. 1999. Function of spe-
cific K+ channels in sustained high-frequency firing of 
fast-spiking neocortical interneurons. J Neurophysiol 
82:2476–2489.
Flourakis M, Kula-Eversole E, Hutchison AL, et al. 2015. A 
conserved bicycle model for circadian clock control of 
membrane excitability. Cell 162:836–848.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. 1952. A quantitative description of 
membrane current and its application to conduction and 
excitation in nerve. J Physiol 117:500–544.
Hodgkin AL, Katz B. 1949. The effect of sodium ions on the 
electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid. J Physiol 
108:37–77.
Isom LL, DeJongh KS, Catterall WA. 1994. Auxiliary subunits 
of voltage-gated ion channels. Neuron 12:1183–1194.
Jackson AC, Yao GL, Bean BP. 2004. Mechanism of spontane-
ous firing in dorsomedial suprachiasmatic nucleus neu-
rons. J Neurosci 24:7985–7998.
Joseph A, Turrigiano GG. 2017. All for one but not one for 
all: excitatory synaptic scaling and intrinsic excitability 
are coregulated by CaMKIV, whereas inhibitory syn-
aptic scaling is under independent control. J Neurosci 
37:6778–6785.
Kaczmarek LK. 2012. Gradients and modulation of K+ chan-
nels optimize temporal accuracy in networks of auditory 
neurons. PLoS Comput Biol 8:e1002424.
Kole MH, Ilschner SU, Kampa BM, Williams SR, Ruben PC, 
Stuart GJ. 2008. Action potential generation requires a 
high sodium channel density in the axon initial segment. 
Nat Neurosci 11:178–186.
Lee C-H, MacKinnon R. 2017. Structures of the human HCN1 
hyperpolarization-activated channel. Cell 168:111–120.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    235
Llinás R, Jahnsen H. 1982. Electrophysiology of mammalian 
thalamic neurones in vitro. Nature 297:406–408.
McCormick DA, Connors BW, Lighthall JW, Prince DA. 
1985. Comparative electrophysiology of pyramidal and 
sparsely spiny stellate neurons of the neocortex. J Neuro-
physiol 54:782–806.
McCormick DA, Huguenard JR. 1992. A model of electro-
physiological properties of thalamocortical relay neurons. 
J Neurophysiol 68:1384–1400.
Nowak LG, Azouz R, Sanchez-Vives MV, Gray CM,  
McCormick DA. 2003. Electrophysiological classes of cat 
primary visual cortical neurons in vivo as revealed by 
quantitative analyses. J Neurophysiol 89:1541–1566.
Pan X, Li Z, Zhou Q, et al. 2018. Structure of the human 
voltage-gated sodium channel Na(v)1.4 in complex with 
β1. Science 362:eaau2486.
Payandeh J, Scheuer T, Zheng N, Catterall WA. 2011. The 
crystal structure of a voltage-gated sodium channel. 
Nature 475:353–359.
Proft J, Weiss N. 2015. G protein regulation of neuronal 
calcium channels: back to the future. Mol Pharmacol 
87:890–906.
Puopolo M, Raviola E, Bean BP. 2007. Roles of subthresh-
old calcium current and sodium current in spontaneous 
firing of mouse midbrain dopamine neurons. J Neurosci 
27:645–656.
Sigworth FJ, Neher E. 1980. Single Na+ channel currents 
observed in cultured rat muscle cells. Nature 287:447–449.
Tai C, Abe Y, Westenbroek RE, Scheuer T, Catterall WA. 
2014. 
Impaired 
excitability 
of 
somatostatin- 
and  
parvalbumin-expressing cortical interneurons in a mouse 
model of Dravet syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111:E3139–E3148.
Tateno T, Harsch A, Robinson HP. 2004. Threshold firing 
frequency-current relationships of neurons in rat soma-
tosensory cortex: type 1 and type 2 dynamics. J Neuro-
physiol 92:2283–2294.
Vassilev PM, Scheuer T, Catterall WA. 1988. Identification 
of an intracellular peptide segment involved in sodium 
channel inactivation. Science 241:1658–1661.
Yamada R, Kuba H. 2016, Structural and functional plastic-
ity at the axon initial segment. Front Cell Neurosci 10:250.
Yang N, George AL Jr, Horn R. 1996. Molecular basis of 
charge movement in voltage-gated sodium channels. 
Neuron 16:113–122.
Yu FH, Catterall WA. 2003. Overview of the voltage-gated 
sodium channel family. Genome Biol 4:207.


===== Page 9 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


