===== Page 1 =====
356    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
expression of presynaptic Ca2+ channels and 
synaptotagmins. At some synapses, vesicles and 
Ca2+ channels appear aligned by an intricate 
structural network.
14.  Transmitter release can be modulated intrinsically 
or extrinsically as an aspect of synaptic plastic-
ity. Synaptic strength can be strongly influenced 
intrinsically by the pattern of firing in phenom-
ena known as “depression” and “facilitation.” In 
addition, extrinsic neuromodulators can alter the 
dynamics of release by regulation of Ca2+ channels 
or events downstream of Ca2+ entry.
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 
  Thomas C. Südhof 
  Richard W. Tsien 
Selected Reading
Katz B. 1969. The Release of Neural Transmitter Substances. 
Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Lonart G. 2002. RIM1: an edge for presynaptic plasticity. 
Trends Neurosci 25:329–332.
Meinrenken CJ, Borst JG, Sakmann B. 2003. Local routes 
revisited: the space and time dependence of the Ca2+ sig-
nal for phasic transmitter release at the rat calyx of Held. 
J Physiol 547:665–689.
Reid CA, Bekkers JM, Clements JD. 2003. Presynaptic Ca2+ 
channels: a functional patchwork. Trends Neurosci 
26:683–687.
Stevens CF. 2003. Neurotransmitter release at central syn-
apses. Neuron 40:381–388.
Südhof TC. 2014. The molecular machinery of neurotrans-
mitter release (Nobel lecture). Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 
53:12696–12717.
References
Acuna C, Liu X, Südhof TC. 2016. How to make an active 
zone: unexpected universal functional redundance 
between RIMs and RIM-BPs. Neuron 91:792–807.
Akert K, Moor H, Pfenninger K. 1971. Synaptic fine structure. 
Adv Cytopharmacol 1:273–290.
Bacaj T, Wu D, Yang X, et al. 2013. Synaptotagmin-1 and -7 
trigger synchronous and asynchronous phases of neuro-
transmitter release. Neuron 80:947–959.
Baker PF, Hodgkin AL, Ridgway EB. 1971. Depolarization and 
calcium entry in squid giant axons. J Physiol 218:709–755.
Bollmann JH, Sakmann B, Gerard J, Borst G. 2000. Calcium 
sensitivity of glutamate release in a calyx-type terminal. 
Science 289:953–957.
Borst JG, Sakmann B. 1996. Calcium influx and transmitter 
release in a fast CNS synapse. Nature 383:431–434.
Boyd IA, Martin AR. 1956. The end-plate potential in mam-
malian muscle. J Physiol 132:74–91.
Chung S, Li X, Nelson SB. 2002. Short-term depression at 
thalamocortical synapses contributes to rapid adaptation 
of cortical sensory responses in vivo. Neuron 34:437–446.
Couteaux R, Pecot-Dechavassine M. 1970. Vésicules synap-
tiques et poches au niveau des “zones actives” de la jonc-
tion neuromusculaire. C R Acad Sci Hebd Seances Acad 
Sci D 271:2346–2349.
Del Castillo J, Katz B. 1954. The effect of magnesium on the 
activity of motor nerve endings. J Physiol 124:553–559.
Dittman JS, Kreitzer AC, Regehr WG. 2000. Interplay 
between facilitation, depression and residual calcium at 
three presynaptic terminals. J Neurosci 20:1374–1385.
Enoki R, Hu YL, Hamilton D, Fine A. 2009. Expression of 
long-term plasticity at individual synapses in hippocam-
pus is graded, bidirectional, and mainly presynaptic: opti-
cal quantal analysis. Neuron 62:242–253.
Fatt P, Katz B. 1952. Spontaneous subthreshold activity at 
motor nerve endings. J Physiol 117:109–128.
Fawcett DW. 1981. The Cell, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Fernandez I, Araç D, Ubach J, et al. 2001. Three-dimensional 
structure of the synaptotagmin 1 C2B-domain: synap-
totagmin 1 as a phospholipid binding machine. Neuron 
32:1057–1069.
Fernandez JM, Neher E, Gomperts BD. 1984. Capacitance 
measurements reveal stepwise fusion events in degranu-
lating mast cells. Nature 312:453–455.
Fernandez-Chacon R, Konigstorfer A, Gerber SH, et al. 2001. 
Synaptotagmin I functions as a calcium regulator of 
release probability. Nature 410:41–49.
Geiger JR, Jonas P. 2000. Dynamic control of presynaptic 
Ca(2+) inflow by fast-inactivating K(+) channels in hip-
pocampal mossy fiber boutons. Neuron 28:927–939.
Geppert M, Goda Y, Hammer RE, et al. 1994. Synaptotagmin 
I: a major Ca2+ sensor for transmitter release at a central 
synapse. Cell 79:717–727.
Harlow LH, Ress D, Stoschek A, Marshall RM, McMahan UJ. 
2001. The architecture of active zone material at the frog’s 
neuromuscular junction. Nature 409:479–484.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1981. Structural changes in transmit-
ter release at the frog neuromuscular junction. J Cell Biol 
88:564–580.
Hille B. 2001. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Kaeser PS, Deng L, Wang Y, et al. 2011. RIM proteins tether 
Ca2+ channels to presynaptic active zones via a direct 
PDZ-domain interaction. Cell 144:282–295.
Kandel ER. 1981. Calcium and the control of synaptic strength 
by learning. Nature 293:697–700.
Katz B, Miledi R. 1967a. The study of synaptic transmission 
in the absence of nerve impulses. J Physiol 192:407–436.
Katz B, Miledi R. 1967b. The timing of calcium action during 
neuromuscular transmission. J Physiol 189:535–544.
Klein M, Shapiro E, Kandel ER. 1980. Synaptic plasticity and 
the modulation of the Ca2+ current. J Exp Biol 89:117–157.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    357
Kretz R, Shapiro E, Connor J, Kandel ER. 1984. Post-tetanic 
potentiation, presynaptic inhibition, and the modulation 
of the free Ca2+ level in the presynaptic terminals. Exp 
Brain Res Suppl 9:240–283.
Kuffler SW, Nicholls JG, Martin AR. 1984. From Neuron to 
Brain: A Cellular Approach to the Function of the Nervous 
System, 2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Lawson D, Raff MC, Gomperts B, Fewtrell C, Gilula NB. 1977. 
Molecular events during membrane fusion. A study of exo-
cytosis in rat peritoneal mast cells. J Cell Biol 72:242–259.
Liley AW. 1956. The quantal components of the mammalian 
end-plate potential. J Physiol 133:571–587.
Llinás RR. 1982. Calcium in synaptic transmission. Sci Am 
247:56–65.
Llinás RR, Heuser JE. 1977. Depolarization-release coupling 
systems in neurons. Neurosci Res Program Bull 15:555–687.
Llinás R, Steinberg IZ, Walton K. 1981. Relationship between 
presynaptic calcium current and postsynaptic potential in 
squid giant synapse. Biophys J 33:323–351.
Lynch G, Halpain S, Baudry M. 1982. Effects of high-frequency 
synaptic stimulation on glumate receptor binding studied 
with a modified in vitro hippocampal slice preparation. 
Brain Res 244:101–111.
Magee JC, Johnston D. 1997. A synaptically controlled, asso-
ciative signal for Hebbian plasticity in hippocampal neu-
rons. Science 275:209–213.
Magnus CJ, Lee PH, Atasoy D, Su HH, Looger LL, Sternson 
SM. 2011. Chemical and genetic engineering of selective 
ion channel-ligand interactions. Science 333:1292–1296.
Martin AR. 1977. Junctional transmission. II. Presynaptic 
mechanisms. In: ER Kandel (ed). Handbook of Physiology: A 
Critical, Comprehensive Presentation of Physiological Knowl-
edge and Concepts, Sect. 1 The Nervous System, Vol. 1 Cellular 
Biology of Neurons, Part 1, pp. 329–355. Bethesda, MD: 
American Physiological Society.
Monck JR, Fernandez JM. 1992. The exocytotic fusion pore. 
J Cell Biol 119:1395–1404.
Neher E. 1993. Cell physiology. Secretion without full fusion. 
Nature 363:497–498.
Nicoll RA. 1982. Neurotransmitters can say more than just 
“yes” or “no.” Trends Neurosci 5:369–374.
Park M, Penick EC, Edwards JG, Kauer JA, Ehlers MD. 2004. 
Recycling endosomes supply AMPA receptors for LTP. 
Science 305:1972–1975.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H deF. 1991. The Fine Structure of 
the Nervous System: Neurons and Supporting Cells, 3rd ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Redman S. 1990. Quantal analysis of synaptic potentials in neu-
rons of the central nervous system. Physiol Rev 70:165–198.
Rhee JS, Betz A, Pyott S, et al. 2002. Beta phorbol ester- and 
diacylglycerol-induced 
augmentation 
of 
transmitter 
release is mediated by Munc13s and not by PKCs. Cell 
108:121–133.
Rizo J, Südhof TC. 2002. Snares and Munc18 in synaptic vesi-
cle fusion. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:641–653.
Robitaille R, Adler EM, Charlton MP. 1990. Strategic loca-
tion of calcium channels at transmitter release sites of frog 
neuromuscular synapses. Neuron 5:773–779.
Schneggenburger R, Neher E. 2000. Intracellular calcium 
dependence of transmitter release rates at a fast central 
synapse. Nature 406:889–893.
Schoch S, Castillo PE, Jo T, et al. 2002. RIM1alpha forms a 
protein scaffold for regulating neurotransmitter release at 
the active zone. Nature 415:321–326.
Schoch S, Deak F, Konigstorfer A, et al. 2001. SNARE func-
tion analyzed in synaptobrevin/VAMP knockout mice. 
Science 294:1117–1122.
Schweizer FE, Betz H, Augustine GJ. 1995. From vesicle 
docking to endocytosis: intermediate reactions of exocy-
tosis. Neuron 14:689–696.
Smith SJ, Augustine GJ, Charlton MP. 1985. Transmission 
at voltage-clamped giant synapse of the squid: evidence 
for cooperativity of presynaptic calcium action. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 82:622–625.
Söllner T, Whiteheart SW, Brunner M, et al. 1993. SNAP 
receptors implicated in vesicle targeting and fusion. 
Nature 362:318–324.
Spruce AE, Breckenridge LJ, Lee AK, Almers W. 1990. Prop-
erties of the fusion pore that forms during exocytosis of a 
mast cell secretory vesicle. Neuron 4:643–654.
Sudhof TC. 2004. The synaptic vesicle cycle. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 27:509–547.
Südhof TC. 2013. Neurotransmitter release: the last millisec-
ond in the life of a synaptic vesicle. Neuron 80:675–690.
Sun J, Pang ZP, Qin D, Fahim AT, Adachi R, Südhof TC. 2007. 
A dual-Ca2+-sensor model for neurotransmitter release in a 
central synapse. Nature 450:676–682.
Sun JY, Wu LG. 2001. Fast kinetics of exocytosis revealed by 
simultaneous measurements of presynaptic capacitance 
and postsynaptic currents at a central synapse. Neuron 30: 
171–182.
Sutton RB, Fasshauer D, Jahn R, Brunger AT. 1998. Crystal 
structure of a SNARE complex involved in synaptic exo-
cytosis at 2.4 A resolution. Nature 395:347–353.
Takamori S, Holt M, Stenius K, et al. 2006. Molecular anat-
omy of a trafficking organelle. Cell 127:831–846.
von Gersdorff H, Matthews G. 1994. Dynamics of synaptic 
vesicle fusion and membrane retrieval in synaptic termi-
nals. Nature 367:735–739.
Wachman ES, Poage RE, Stiles JR, Farkas DL, Meriney SD. 
2004. Spatial distribution of calcium entry evoked by 
single action potentials within the presynaptic active 
zone. J Neurosci 24:2877–2885.
Wernig A. 1972. Changes in statistical parameters during 
facilitation at the crayfish neuromuscular junction. J Physiol 
226:751–759.
Whittaker VP. 1993. Thirty years of synaptosome research. J 
Neurocytol. 22:735–742.
Zenisek D, Horst NK, Merrifield C, Sterling P, Matthews G. 
2004. Visualizing synaptic ribbons in the living cell.  
J Neurosci 24:9752–9759.
Zhou Q, Zhou P, Wang AL, et al. 2017. The primed SNARE-
complexin-synaptotagmin complex for neuronal exocyto-
sis. Nature. 548:420–425.
Zucker RS. 1973. Changes in the statistics of transmitter 
release during facilitation. J Physiol 229:787–810.


===== Page 3 =====
16
Neurotransmitters
A Chemical Messenger Must Meet Four 
Criteria to Be Considered a Neurotransmitter
Before considering the biochemical processes involved 
in synaptic transmission, it is important to make clear 
what is meant by a chemical transmitter. The concept is 
empirical and has changed over the years with increased 
understanding of synaptic transmission and a corre-
sponding expansion of signaling agents. The concept that 
a released chemical could act as a transmitter was intro-
duced by the British physician George Oliver and his 
colleague Edward Albert Schaefer, who in 1894 reported 
that injection of an adrenal gland extract increases blood 
pressure (Sir Henry Dale claimed that Oliver discovered 
this by injecting the extract into his own son). The constit-
uent responsible was independently identified by three 
laboratories in 1897, and competing claims for priority 
provide one reason that this transmitter has 38 different 
names in the Merck Index, including adrenaline (as it was 
obtained from the adrenal gland) and epinephrine.
Experiments reported in 1904 by Thomas Elliott, 
a student in the lab of the physiologist John Langley, 
are generally credited as the first report of chemical 
neurotransmission. Elliott concluded that “adrenaline 
might then be the chemical stimulant liberated on each 
occasion when the impulse arrives at the periphery.” 
Not incidentally, Elliott also proposed as early as 1914 
that nerves could accumulate transmitter by an uptake 
system, suggesting that adrenal gland signaling might 
“depend on what could be picked up from the circulat-
ing blood and stored in its nerve endings,” although 
uptake mechanisms were not demonstrated until more 
than 40 years later.
A Chemical Messenger Must Meet Four Criteria to Be 
Considered a Neurotransmitter
Only a Few Small-Molecule Substances Act as Transmitters
Acetylcholine
Biogenic Amine Transmitters
Amino Acid Transmitters
ATP and Adenosine
Small-Molecule Transmitters Are Actively Taken Up Into 
Vesicles
Many Neuroactive Peptides Serve as Transmitters
Peptides and Small-Molecule Transmitters Differ in Several 
Ways
Peptides and Small-Molecule Transmitters Can Be 
Co-released
Removal of Transmitter From the Synaptic Cleft Terminates 
Synaptic Transmission
Highlights
C
hemical synaptic transmission can be 
divided into four steps: (1) synthesis and stor-
age of a transmitter substance, (2) release of 
the transmitter, (3) interaction of the transmitter with 
receptors at the postsynaptic membrane, and (4) 
removal of the transmitter from the synapse. In the 
previous chapters, we considered steps 2 and 3. We 
now turn to the initial and final steps of chemical syn-
aptic transmission: the synthesis and storage of trans-
mitter molecules and their removal from the synaptic 
cleft after synaptic action.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    359
In 1913, Arthur Ewins, working with Henry Dale, 
discovered acetylcholine (ACh) as a component of the 
ergot fungus. In 1921, Otto Loewi demonstrated that 
stimulation of the vagus nerve terminals in frog hearts 
released “vagustoff,” which was later shown to be ACh. 
Dale and Loewi later shared the Nobel Prize in 1946. 
The terms cholinergic and adrenergic were introduced 
to indicate that a neuron makes and releases ACh or 
norepinephrine (or epinephrine), respectively, the two 
substances first recognized as neurotransmitters. The 
term catecholaminergic, encompassing dopamine and 
the adrenergic transmitters, was derived from one of 
many natural sources, the catechu tree of India. Since 
that time, many other substances have been identified 
as transmitters.
The first secretory vesicles shown to accumulate 
and release neurotransmitters were the chromaffin 
vesicles of the adrenal gland, named in 1902 by Alfred 
Kohn due to their colorimetric reaction with chro-
mate. William Cramer later showed that these orga-
nelles accumulate epinephrine. More recently, Mark 
Wightman provided direct evidence that these vesicles 
released epinephrine using carbon fiber electrodes as 
an electrochemical detector to measure catecholamine 
molecules released following fusion of chromaffin ves-
icles with the plasma membrane.
As a first approximation, a neurotransmitter can 
be defined as a substance that is released by a neuron 
that affects a specific target in a specific manner. A tar-
get can be either another neuron or an effector organ, 
such as muscle or gland. As with many other opera-
tional concepts in biology, the concept of a transmitter 
is not precise. Although the actions of hormones and 
neurotransmitters are quite similar, neurotransmitters 
usually act on targets that are close to the site of trans-
mitter release, whereas hormones are released into the 
bloodstream to act on distant targets.
Neurotransmitters typically act on a target other 
than the releasing neuron itself, whereas substances 
termed autacoids act on the cell from which they are 
released. Nevertheless, at many synapses, transmit-
ters activate not only postsynaptic receptors but also 
autoreceptors at the presynaptic release site. Autore-
ceptors usually modulate synaptic transmission that is 
in progress, for example, by limiting further release of 
transmitter or inhibiting subsequent transmitter syn-
thesis. Receptors can also exist on presynaptic release 
sites that receive synaptic input from another neuron. 
These receptors function as heteroreceptors that regu-
late presynaptic excitability and transmitter release 
(Chapters 13 and 15).
Following release, the interaction of neurotrans-
mitters with receptors is typically transient, lasting for 
periods ranging from less than a millisecond to several 
seconds. Nevertheless, neurotransmitter actions can 
result in long-term changes within target cells lasting 
hours or days, often by activating gene transcription. 
Moreover, nonneural cells, including astrocytes and 
microglia, can also synthesize, store, and release neu-
rotransmitters, as well as express receptors that modu-
late their own function.
A limited number of substances of low molecular 
weight are generally accepted as classical neurotrans-
mitters, and these exclude many neuropeptides, as well 
as other substances that are not released by exocytosis. 
Even so, it is often difficult to demonstrate that a spe-
cific neurotransmitter operates at a particular synapse, 
particularly given the diffusion and rapid reuptake or 
degradation of transmitters at the synaptic cleft.
A classical neurotransmitter is considered to meet 
four criteria:
1.	 It is synthesized in the presynaptic neuron.
2.	 It is accumulated within vesicles present in pre-
synaptic release sites and is released via exocyto-
sis in amounts sufficient to exert a defined action 
on the postsynaptic neuron or effector organ.
3.	 When administered exogenously in reasonable 
concentrations, it mimics the action of the endog-
enous transmitter (for example, it activates the 
same ion channels or second-messenger pathway 
in the postsynaptic cell).
4.	 A specific mechanism usually exists for remov-
ing the substance from the extracellular environ-
ment. This may be the synaptic cleft in the case of 
“wired” or “private” neurotransmission (in which 
the action of the substance is limited to a single 
synapse) or the extrasynaptic space in the case of 
“volume” or “social” neurotransmission (in which 
the substance diffuses to multiple synapses).
The nervous system makes use of two main classes 
of chemical substances that fit these criteria for signal-
ing: small-molecule transmitters and neuropeptides. 
Neuropeptides are short polymers of amino acids pro-
cessed in the Golgi apparatus, where they are packaged 
in large dense-core vesicles (approximately 70–250 nm 
in diameter). Small-molecule transmitters are pack-
aged in small vesicles (~40 nm in diameter) that are 
usually electron-lucent. Vesicles are closely associated 
with specific Ca2+ channels at active zones and release 
their contents through exocytosis in response to a rise 
in intracellular Ca2+ evoked by an action potential 
(Chapter 15). Vesicle membrane is retrieved through 
endocytosis and recycled locally in the axon to pro-
duce new synaptic vesicles. Large dense-core vesicles 


===== Page 5 =====
360    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Table 16–1  Small-Molecule Neurotransmitter Substances 
and Their Precursors
Transmitter
Precursor
Acetylcholine
Choline
Biogenic amines
  Dopamine
  Norepinephrine
  Epinephrine
  Octopamine
  Serotonin
  Histamine
  Melatonin
Tyrosine
Tyrosine via dopamine
Tyrosine via norepinephrine
Tyrosine via tyramine
Tryptophan
Histidine
Tryptophan via serotonin
Amino acids
  Aspartate
  γ-Aminobutyric acid
  Glutamate
  Glycine
Oxaloacetate
Glutamine
Glutamine
Serine
Adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP)
Adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP)
Adenosine
ATP
Endocannabinoids
Phospholipids
Nitric oxide
Arginine
can contain both small-molecule transmitters and neu-
ropeptides and do not undergo local recycling follow-
ing full fusion with the plasma membrane.
Both types of vesicles are found in most neurons 
but in different proportions. Small synaptic vesicles 
are characteristic of neurons that use ACh, glutamate, 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and glycine as transmit-
ters, whereas neurons that use catecholamines and ser-
otonin as transmitters often have both small and large 
dense-core vesicles. The adrenal medulla—the tissue 
in which most discoveries on secretion were made and 
still widely used as a model for studying exocytosis—
contains only large dense-core vesicles that contain 
both catecholamines and neuroactive peptides.
Only a Few Small-Molecule Substances  
Act as Transmitters
A relatively small number of low-molecular-weight 
substances are generally accepted as neurotransmit-
ters. These include ACh, the excitatory amino acid glu-
tamate, the inhibitory amino acids GABA and glycine, 
amine containing amino acid derivatives, and adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) and its metabolites (Table 16–1). A 
small set of small molecules, such as the gas nitric oxide 
lipid metabolites are not released from vesicles and tend 
to break all of the classical rules (Chapter 14).
The amine messengers share many biochemical sim-
ilarities. All are charged small molecules that are formed 
in relatively short biosynthetic pathways and synthe-
sized either from essential amino acids or from precur-
sors derived from the major carbohydrate substrates 
of intermediary metabolism. Like other pathways of 
intermediary metabolism, synthesis of these neurotrans-
mitters is catalyzed by enzymes that, with the notable 
exception of dopamine β-hydroxylase, are cytosolic. 
ATP, which originates in mitochondria, is abundantly 
present throughout the cell.
As in any biosynthetic pathway, the overall syn-
thesis of amine transmitters typically is regulated at 
one rate-limiting enzymatic reaction. The rate-limiting 
step often is characteristic of one type of neuron and 
usually is absent in other types of mature neurons. The 
classical small-molecule neurotransmitters released 
from a particular neuron are thus determined by their 
presence in the cytosol due to synthesis and reuptake 
and to the selectivity of the vesicular transporter.
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine is the only low-molecular-weight amin-
ergic transmitter substance that is not an amino acid or 
derived directly from one. The biosynthetic pathway 
for ACh has only one enzymatic reaction, catalyzed by 
choline acetyltransferase (step 1 below):
(1)
Acetyl CoA + choline
Acetylcholine
CH3
CH2
C
O
CH2
(CH3)3 + CoA
+
N
O
This transferase is the characteristic and limiting 
enzyme in ACh biosynthesis. Nervous tissue cannot 
synthesize choline, which is derived from the diet and 
delivered to neurons through the bloodstream. The 
co-substrate, acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA), partici-
pates in many general metabolic pathways and is not 
restricted to cholinergic neurons.
Acetylcholine is released at all vertebrate neu-
romuscular junctions by spinal motor neurons 
(Chapter 12). In the autonomic nervous system, it is the 
transmitter released by all preganglionic neurons and by 
parasympathetic postganglionic neurons (Chapter 41).  
Cholinergic neurons form synapses throughout the 
brain; those in the nucleus basalis have particularly 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    361
widespread projections to the cerebral cortex. Acetyl-
choline (together with a noradrenergic component) is 
a principal neurotransmitter of the reticular activating 
system, which modulates arousal, sleep, wakefulness, 
and other critical aspects of human consciousness.
Biogenic Amine Transmitters
The terms biogenic amine or monoamine, although chem-
ically imprecise, have been used for decades to desig-
nate certain neurotransmitters. This group includes the 
catecholamines and serotonin. Histamine, an imida-
zole, is also often included with biogenic amine trans-
mitters, although its biochemistry is remote from the 
catecholamines and the indolamines.
Catecholamine Transmitters
The catecholamine transmitters—dopamine, norepi-
nephrine, and epinephrine—are all synthesized from 
the essential amino acid tyrosine in a biosynthetic path-
way containing five enzymes: tyrosine hydroxylase, 
pteridine reductase, aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, 
dopamine β-hydroxylase, and phenylethanolamine-
N-methyl transferase. Catecholamines contain a catechol 
nucleus, a 3,4-dihydroxylated benzene ring.
The first enzyme, tyrosine hydroxylase (step 1  
below), is an oxidase that converts tyrosine to  
l-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA):
CH2
HO
Tyrosine + O2
Pt-2H
Pt
(1)
(4)
L - DOPA
HO
C
COOH
H
NH2
This enzyme is rate-limiting for the synthesis of 
both dopamine and norepinephrine. A distinct path-
way is used to synthesize l-DOPA for production of 
the melanin pigments found throughout the plant and 
animal kingdoms, while the neuromelanin pigment 
found in some dopamine and norepinephrine neurons 
are metabolites of the oxidized neurotransmitters.
l-DOPA is present in all cells producing cat-
echolamines, and its synthesis requires a reduced 
pteridine cofactor, Pt-2H, which is regenerated from 
pteridine (Pt) by another enzyme, pteridine reduc-
tase, which uses nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH) (step 4 above). This reductase is not spe-
cific to neurons.
Based on the finding that individuals with Par-
kinson disease have lost dopamine neurons of the 
substantia nigra, l-DOPA has been used to restore 
dopamine and motor function in patients. l-DOPA, 
whether exogenous or produced by tyrosine hydroxy-
lase, is decarboxylated by a widespread enzyme 
known as aromatic amino acid decarboxylase, also 
called l-DOPA decarboxylase (step 2 below), to yield 
dopamine and carbon dioxide:
L - DOPA
CH2
CH2
HO
(2)
Dopamine
HO
NH2 + CO2
Interestingly, dopamine was initially thought to 
be present in neurons only as a precursor to norepi-
nephrine. That dopamine also functions as a neuro-
transmitter itself was demonstrated in 1957 by Aarvid 
Carlsson, who found that rabbits treated with the 
synaptic vesicle dopamine uptake blocker, reserpine, 
exhibited floppy ears, but that l-DOPA, under condi-
tions that produced dopamine but not norepinephrine, 
restored the normal erect ear posture.
In adrenergic neurons, the third enzyme in the 
sequence, dopamine β-hydroxylase (step 3 below), 
further converts dopamine to norepinephrine:
OH
Dopamine
CH
CH2
HO
(3)
Norepinephrine
HO
NH2
Unlike all other enzymes in the biosynthetic path-
ways of small-molecule neurotransmitters, dopamine 
β-hydroxylase is membrane-associated. It is bound 
tightly to the inner surface of aminergic vesicles as a 
peripheral protein. Consequently, norepinephrine is 
the only transmitter synthesized within vesicles.
In the central nervous system, norepinephrine is 
used as a transmitter by neurons with cell bodies in the 
locus coeruleus, a nucleus of the brain stem with many 
complex modulatory functions (Chapter 40). Although 
these adrenergic neurons are relatively few in number, 
they project widely throughout the cortex, cerebel-
lum, hippocampus, and spinal cord. In many cases, 
neurons that release norepinephrine can also release 
the precursor dopamine, and thus can act at neurons 
expressing receptors for dopamine or norepinephrine. 
In the peripheral nervous system, norepinephrine is 
the transmitter of the postganglionic neurons in the 
sympathetic nervous system (Chapter 41).
In addition to these four catecholaminergic biosyn-
thetic enzymes, a fifth enzyme, phenylethanolamine-
N-methyltransferase (step 5 below), methylates 


===== Page 7 =====
362    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
norepinephrine to form epinephrine (adrenaline) in 
the adrenal medulla:
OH
Norepinephrine
CH2
CH2
CH3
HO
(5)
Epinephrine
HO
NH
This reaction requires S-adenosyl-methionine as a 
methyl donor. The transferase is a cytoplasmic enzyme. 
Thus, for epinephrine to be formed, its immediate pre-
cursor norepinephrine must exit from vesicles into the 
cytoplasm. For epinephrine to be released, it must then 
be taken back up into vesicles. Only a small number of 
neurons in the brain use epinephrine as a transmitter.
The production of these catecholamine neuro-
transmitters is controlled by feedback regulation of 
the first enzyme in the pathway, tyrosine hydroxylase 
(Box 16–1). Not all cells that release catecholamines 
express all five biosynthetic enzymes, although cells 
that release epinephrine do. During development, 
the expression of the genes encoding these synthetic 
enzymes is independently regulated and the particular 
catecholamine that is produced by a cell is determined 
by which enzyme(s) in the step-wise pathway is not 
Box 16–1  Catecholamine Production Varies With Neuronal Activity
Norepinephrine neurotransmission is far more active 
during awake states than sleep or anesthesia, with locus 
coeruleus noradrenergic neurons nearly silenced dur-
ing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. The production 
of catecholamine is able to keep up with wide variations 
in neuronal activity because catecholamine synthesis 
is highly regulated. Circadian changes in extracellular 
dopamine in the striatum have been suggested to result 
from altered activity of the dopamine uptake transporter.
In autonomic ganglia, the amount of norepineph-
rine in postganglionic neurons is regulated transsynap-
tically. Activity in the presynaptic neurons, which are 
both cholinergic and peptidergic, first induces short-
term changes in second messengers in the postsynaptic 
adrenergic cells. These changes increase the supply of 
norepinephrine through the cAMP-dependent phos-
phorylation of tyrosine hydroxylase, the first enzyme in 
the catecholamine biosynthetic pathway.
Phosphorylation enhances the affinity of the hydroxy-
lase for the pteridine cofactor and diminishes feedback 
inhibition by end products such as norepinephrine. Phos-
phorylation of tyrosine hydroxylase lasts only as long as 
cAMP remains elevated, as the phosphorylated hydroxy-
lase is quickly dephosphorylated by protein phosphatases.
If presynaptic activity is sufficiently prolonged, how-
ever, other changes in the production of norepinephrine 
will occur. Severe stress to an animal results in intense 
presynaptic activity and persistent firing of the postsyn-
aptic adrenergic neuron, placing a greater demand on 
transmitter synthesis. To meet this challenge, the tyros-
ine hydroxylase gene is induced to increase transcription 
and thus production of the protein. Elevated amounts of 
tyrosine hydroxylase are observed in the cell body within 
hours after stimulation and at nerve endings days later.
This induction of increased levels of tyrosine 
hydroxylase begins with the persistent release of chemi-
cal transmitters from the presynaptic neurons and pro-
longed activation of the cAMP pathway in postsynaptic 
adrenergic cells, which activates the cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase (PKA). This kinase phosphorylates not 
only existing tyrosine hydroxylase molecules but also 
the transcription factor, cAMP response element bind-
ing protein (CREB).
Once phosphorylated, CREB binds a specific DNA 
enhancer sequence called the cAMP-recognition ele-
ment (CRE), which lies upstream (5′) of the gene for 
the hydroxylase. Binding of CREB to CRE facilitates 
the binding of RNA polymerase to the gene’s promoter, 
increasing tyrosine hydroxylase transcription. Induction 
of tyrosine hydroxylase was the first known example of 
a neurotransmitter altering gene expression.
Based on similarity in portions of the amino acid 
and nucleic acid sequences encoding three of the bio-
synthetic enzymes—tyrosine hydroxylase, dopamine 
β-hydroxylase, and phenylethanolamine-N-methyltrans-
ferase—it has been suggested that the three enzymes may 
have arisen from a common ancestral protein. Moreover, 
long-term changes in the synthesis of these enzymes are 
coordinately regulated in adrenergic neurons.
At first, this discovery suggested that the genes 
encoding these enzymes might be located sequentially 
along the same chromosome and be controlled by the 
same promoter, like genes in a bacterial operon. But in 
humans, the genes for the biosynthetic enzymes for nor-
epinephrine are not located on the same chromosome. 
Therefore, coordinate regulation is likely achieved by 
parallel activation through similar but independent 
transcription activator systems.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    363
expressed. Thus, neurons that release norepinephrine 
do not express the methyltransferase, and neurons that 
release dopamine do not express the transferase or 
dopamine β-hydroxylase. Some neurons that express 
tyrosine hydroxylase, and thus produce dopamine, 
do not express the vesicular monoamine transporter 
(VMAT), the transporter that accumulates dopamine 
in synaptic vesicles, and thus do not appear to release 
dopamine as a transmitter.
Of the four major dopaminergic nerve tracts, three 
arise in the midbrain (Chapters 40 and 43). Dopamin-
ergic neurons in the substantia nigra that project to the 
striatum are important for the control of movement 
and are affected in Parkinson disease and other disor-
ders of movement, but projections to the associative 
striatum have also been implicated more recently in 
dopamine dysfunction in schizophrenia. The mesolim-
bic and mesocortical tracts are critical for affect, emo-
tion, attention, and motivation and are implicated in 
drug addiction and schizophrenia. A fourth dopamin-
ergic tract, the tuberoinfundibular pathway, originates 
in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus and pro-
jects to the pituitary gland, where it regulates secretion 
of hormones (Chapter 41).
The synthesis of biogenic amines is highly regulated 
and can be rapidly increased. As a result, the amounts of 
transmitter available for release can keep up with wide 
variations in neuronal activity. Mechanisms for regu-
lating both the synthesis of catecholamine transmitters 
and the production of enzymes in the step-wise catecho-
lamine pathway are discussed in Box 16–1.
Trace amines, naturally occurring catecholamine 
derivatives, may also serve as transmitters. In inverte-
brates, the tyrosine derivatives tyramine and octopa-
mine (so called because it was originally identified in 
the octopus salivary gland) play key roles in numerous 
physiological processes including behavioral regula-
tion. Trace amine receptors also have been identified 
in mammals, where their functional role is still being 
characterized. In particular, trace amine-associated 
receptor 1 (TAAR1) has been shown to modulate 
aspects of biogenic amine neurotransmission as well 
as to play a role in the immune system.
Serotonin
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT) and the 
essential amino acid tryptophan from which it is 
derived belong to a group of aromatic compounds 
called indoles, with a five-member ring contain-
ing nitrogen joined to a benzene ring. Two enzymes 
are needed to synthesize serotonin: tryptophan (Trp) 
hydroxylase (step 1 below), an oxidase similar to 
tyrosine hydroxylase, and aromatic amino acid decar-
boxylase, also called 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) 
decarboxylase (step 2 below):
Try
CH2
CH2
HO
(1)
Serotonin
NH2
5-HTP
(2)
N
H
As with the catecholamines, the limiting reaction 
in serotonin synthesis is catalyzed by the first enzyme 
in the pathway, tryptophan hydroxylase. Tryptophan 
hydroxylase is similar to tyrosine hydroxylase not only 
in catalytic mechanism but also in amino acid sequence. 
The two enzymes are thought to stem from a common 
ancestral protein by gene duplication because the two 
hydroxylases are encoded by genes close together 
on the same chromosome (tryptophan hydroxylase, 
11p15.3-p14; tyrosine hydroxylase, 11p15.5). The sec-
ond enzyme in the pathway, 5-hydroxytryptophan 
decarboxylase, is identical to l-DOPA decarboxylase. 
Enzymes with similar activity, l-aromatic amino acid 
decarboxylases, are present in nonnervous tissues as well.
The cell bodies of serotonergic neurons are found 
in and around the midline raphe nuclei of the brain 
stem and are involved in regulating affect, attention, 
and other cognitive functions (Chapter 40). These cells, 
like the noradrenergic cells in the locus coeruleus, 
project widely throughout the brain and spinal cord. 
Serotonin and the catecholamines norepinephrine 
and dopamine are implicated in depression, a major 
mood disorder. Antidepressant medications inhibit 
the uptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopa-
mine, thereby increasing the magnitude and duration 
of the action of these transmitters, which in turn leads 
to altered cell signaling and adaptations (Chapter 61).
Histamine
Histamine, derived from the essential amino acid histi-
dine by decarboxylation, contains a characteristic five-
member ring with two nitrogen atoms. It has long been 
recognized as an autacoid, active when released from 
mast cells in the inflammatory reaction and in the con-
trol of vasculature, smooth muscle, and exocrine glands 
(eg, secretion of highly acidic gastric juice). Histamine 
is a transmitter in both invertebrates and vertebrates. It 
is concentrated in the hypothalamus, one of the brain 
centers for regulating the secretion of hormones 
(Chapter 41). The decarboxylase catalyzing its synthe-
sis (step 1 below), although not extensively analyzed, 
appears to be characteristic of histaminergic neurons.


===== Page 9 =====
364    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Histidine
(1)
CH2
CH2
Histamine
NH2 + CO2
N
HN
As described in the next section, the biogenic 
amines are loaded into synaptic and secretory vesicles 
by two transporters, VMAT1, mostly in peripheral cells, 
and VMAT2, mostly in the central nervous system. As 
the transporters are not selective for a given biogenic 
amine, a mixture of transmitters can be present. Some 
neurons co-release dopamine with norepinephrine, 
whereas secretory vesicles from the adrenal medulla 
can co-release epinephrine and norepinephrine.
Amino Acid Transmitters
In contrast to acetylcholine and the biogenic amines, 
which are not intermediates in general metabolic path-
ways and are produced only in certain neurons, the 
amino acids glutamate and glycine are not only neu-
rotransmitters but also universal cellular constituents. 
Because they can be synthesized in neurons and other 
cells, neither is an essential amino acid.
Glutamate, the neurotransmitter most frequently 
used at excitatory synapses throughout the central 
nervous system, is produced from α-ketoglutarate, an 
intermediate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle of inter-
mediary metabolism. After it is released, glutamate is 
taken up from the synaptic cleft by specific transporters 
in the membrane of both neurons and glia (see later). 
The glutamate taken up by astrocytes is converted  
to glutamine by the enzyme glutamine synthase. This 
glutamine is transported back into neurons that use 
glutamate as a transmitter, where it is hydrolyzed  
to glutamate by the enzyme glutaminase. Cytoplasmic 
glutamate is then loaded into synaptic vesicles by the 
vesicular glutamate transporter, VGLUT.
Glycine is the major transmitter used by inhibitory 
interneurons of the spinal cord. It is also a necessary 
cofactor for activation of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) glutamate receptors (Chapter 13). Glycine is 
synthesized from serine by the mitochondrial form of 
the serine hydroxymethyltransferase. The amino acid 
GABA is synthesized from glutamate in a reaction cat-
alyzed by glutamic acid decarboxylase (step 1 below):
CH2
CH2
H2N
CH
COOH
COOH
(1)
Glutamate
CH2
CH2
+ CO2
H2N
CH2
COOH
GABA
GABA is present at high concentrations through-
out the central nervous system and is detectable in 
other tissues. It is used as a transmitter by an impor-
tant class of inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord. 
In the brain, GABA is the major transmitter of a wide 
array of inhibitory neurons and interneurons. Both 
GABA and glycine are loaded into synaptic vesicles 
by the same transporter, VGAT, and thus can be co-
released from the same vesicles.
ATP and Adenosine
ATP and its degradation products (eg, adenosine) act 
as transmitters at some synapses by binding to several 
classes of G protein–coupled receptors (the P1 and P2Y 
receptors). ATP can also produce excitatory actions by 
binding to ionotropic P2X receptors. Caffeine’s stim-
ulatory effects depend on its inhibition of adenosine 
binding to the P1 receptors. Adenine and guanine and 
their sugar-containing derivatives are called purines; 
the evidence for transmission at purinergic receptors 
is especially strong for autonomic neurons that inner-
vate the vas deferens, bladder, and muscle fibers of the 
heart; for nerve plexuses on smooth muscle in the gut; 
and for some neurons in the brain. Purinergic trans-
mission is particularly important for nerves mediating 
pain (Chapter 20).
ATP released by tissue damage acts to transmit 
pain sensation through one type of ionotropic purine 
receptor present on the terminals of peripheral axons 
of dorsal root ganglion cells that act as nociceptors. 
ATP released from terminals of the central axons of 
these dorsal root ganglion cells excites another type 
of ionotropic purine receptor on neurons in the dor-
sal horn of the spinal cord. ATP and other nucleo-
tides also act at the family of P2Y G protein–coupled 
receptors to modulate various downstream signaling 
pathways.
Small-Molecule Transmitters Are Actively 
Taken Up Into Vesicles
Common amino acids act as transmitters in some neu-
rons but not in others, indicating that the presence of 
a substance in a neuron, even in substantial amounts, 
is not in itself sufficient evidence that the substance is 
used as a transmitter. For example, at the neuromus-
cular junction of the lobster (and other arthropods), 
GABA is inhibitory and glutamate is excitatory. The 
concentration of GABA is approximately 20 times 
greater in inhibitory cells than in excitatory cells, 


