===== Page 1 =====
1148    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Motor
neurons
Missing limb
(10% survive)
Normal
(50% survive)
Extra limb
(75% survive)
Normal
(50% survive)
Motor neuron generation (100%)
Paralysis
(75% survive)
Motor neuron death (apoptosis)
A  Removal of a developing 
 
 limb bud
C  Neuromuscular paralysis
 
 (curare treated)
B  Transplantation of 
 
 an extra limb bud
Figure 46–14  The survival of motor 
neurons depends on signals pro-
vided by their muscle targets.  The 
role of the muscle target in motor 
neuron survival was demonstrated by 
Viktor Hamburger in a classic series of 
experiments performed on the chick 
embryo. (Adapted from Purves and 
Lichtman 1985.)
A. A limb bud was removed from a 
2.5-day-old chick embryo soon after 
the arrival of motor nerves. A section 
of the lumbar spinal cord 1 week later 
reveals few surviving motor neurons 
on the deprived side of the spinal 
cord. The number of motor neurons 
on the contralateral side with an intact 
limb is normal.
B. An extra limb bud was grafted adja-
cent to a host limb prior to the normal 
period of motor neuron death. A sec-
tion of the lumbar spinal cord 2 weeks 
later shows an increased number of 
limb motor neurons on the side with 
the extra limb.
C. Blockade of nerve-muscle activity 
with the toxin curare, which blocks 
acetylcholine receptors, rescues many 
motor neurons that would otherwise 
die. Curare may act by enhancing the 
release of trophic factors from inac-
tive muscle.
dozen secreted factors that promote neuronal survival. 
The best-studied are related to NGF and are called the 
neurotrophin family.
There are four main neurotrophins: NGF itself, 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and neuro-
trophins-3 and -4 (NT-3 and NT-4). Other classes of pro-
teins that promote neuronal survival include members 
of the transforming growth factor β family, the inter-
leukin-6–related cytokines, fibroblast growth factors, 
and even certain inductive signals we encountered 
earlier (BMPs and hedgehogs). Other neurotrophic 
factors, notably members of the glial cell line–derived 
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family, are responsible for 
the survival of different types of sensory and sympa-
thetic neurons (Figure 46–16).
Neurotrophins interact with two major classes of 
receptors, the Trk receptors and p75. Neurotrophins pro-
mote cell survival through activation of Trk receptors. 
The Trk family comprises three membrane-spanning 
tyrosine kinases named TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC, each of 
which exists as a dimer (Figure 46–17).
Much is now known about the intracellular signal-
ing pathways activated by binding of neurotrophins to 
Trks. As with other tyrosine kinase receptors, the binding 
of neurotrophins to Trk receptors leads to dimerization of 
the Trk proteins. Dimerization results in phosphorylation 
of specific tyrosine residues in the activation loop of the 
kinase domain. This phosphorylation leads to a confor-
mational change in the receptor and to phosphorylation 
of tyrosine residues that serve as docking sites for adaptor 
proteins. The adaptors then trigger production of second 
messengers that both promote the survival of neurons 
and trigger their maturation. These divergent biological 
responses involve different intracellular signaling path-
ways: neuronal differentiation largely via the mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) enzymatic pathways 
and survival largely via the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase 
pathway (Figure 46–18).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1149
Figure 46–15  The neurotrophic factor 
hypothesis.
A. Neurons extend their axons to target 
cells, which secrete low levels of neuro-
trophic factors. (For simplicity, only one  
target cell is shown.) The neurotrophic  
factor binds to specific receptors and is 
internalized and transported to the cell  
body, where it promotes neuronal survival.
B. Neurons that fail to receive adequate 
amounts of neurotrophic factor die through  
a program of cell death termed apoptosis.
Figure 46–16  Particular neurotrophic factors promote the 
survival of distinct populations of dorsal root ganglion  
neurons.  Proprioceptive sensory neurons that innervate  
muscle spindles depend on neurotrophin-3 (NT-3); nociceptive 
neurons that innervate skin depend on nerve growth factor 
(NGF) and neurturin; mechanoreceptive neurons that innervate 
Merkel cells depend on NT-3; and those that innervate hair 
follicles depend on neurotrophin-4 and -5 (NT-4/-5) and brain-
derived neurotrophic factor. Motor neurons depend on glial 
cell line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and other fac-
tors. Sympathetic neurons depend on NGF, NT-3, and GDNF. 
(Adapted from Reichardt and Fariñas 1997.)
A
Neurons approach target
Degenerating neuron
Target source of
neurotrophic factor
Limited supply of 
neurotrophic factor
B
Skin
Free nerve
endings 
Hair
follicle
Merkel cell
Viscera
Sympathetic
ganglion
neuron
Cutaneous 
sensory
neurons 
Muscle sensory
neuron 
Motor
DRG
DRG
neuron
NT-3
NT-3
Muscle
spindle
GDNF
NGF
NT-3
NT-4/-5
NGF
GDNF


===== Page 3 =====
1150    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 46–17  Neurotrophins and their recep-
tors. Each of the three main neurotrophins 
interacts with a different transmembrane  
tyrosine kinase receptor (Trk). In addition, all 
three neurotrophins can bind to the low-affinity 
neurotrophin receptor p75. (Abbreviations: 
BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF, 
nerve growth factor; NT-3, neurotrophin-3.) 
A fourth neurotrophin, NT-4, is not shown. 
(Adapted from Reichardt and Fariñas 1997.)
Figure 46–18  Binding of nerve growth factor to the TrkA 
receptor activates alternative intracellular signaling path-
ways.  The binding of nerve growth factor (NGF) induces 
dimerization of the TrkA receptor, which triggers its phospho-
rylation at many different residues. Phosphorylation of TrkA 
results in the recruitment of the adaptor proteins SHC, GRB2, 
and SOS. The additional recruitment of FRS2 to this complex 
(left) activates a Ras kinase signaling pathway that promotes 
neuronal differentiation. In the absence of FRS2 (right), the 
complex activates a phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3-K) path-
way that promotes neuronal survival. (Abbreviations: Akt/PKB, 
protein kinase B; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; 
MEK, mitogen-activated/ERK kinase; P, phosphate.)
TrkA
TrkB
TrkC
p75
NGF
BDNF
NT-3
NGF BDNF NT-3
TrkA
SHC
SHC
SHC
SHC
SHC
FRS2
SOS
SOS
GRB2
GRB2
Ras
Raf
MEK
MAPK
Neuronal
differentiation
PI3-K
PKB
Akt
Neuronal
survival
P
P
P
P
NGF
In contrast to the specificity of Trk receptor interac-
tions, all neurotrophins bind the receptor p75 (Figure 
46–17). In some cases, p75 works along with Trk recep-
tors, tuning the affinity and specificity of Trks for their 
neurotrophin ligands and thereby contributing to neu-
ronal survival. However, p75 leads a double life. It can 
also bind unprocessed precursors of neurotrophins, 
called proneurotrophins, and it can associate with 
other membrane receptors called sortilins. Binding 
of proneurotrophins to the p75/sortilin complex pro-
motes neuronal death. Receptor p75 is a member of the 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor family and pro-
motes cell death by activating proteases of the caspase 
family, which we discuss below.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1151
Figure 46–19  Neurons and other cells express a conserved 
death program. Different cellular insults trigger a genetic cas-
cade that involves a series of death effector genes. These death 
genes and pathways have been conserved in the evolution 
of species from worms to humans. The core death pathway 
activates a set of proteolytic enzymes, the caspases. Caspases 
cleave many downstream and essential protein substrates 
(see Figure 46–20), resulting in the death of cells by a process 
termed apoptosis. Genetic analysis of the worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans indicates that the Ced-9 protein acts upstream and 
inhibits the activity of Ced-4 and Ced-3, two proteins that pro-
mote cell death. Many vertebrate homologs of Ced-9, the Bcl-2 
family of proteins, have been identified. Some of these pro-
teins, such as Bcl-2 itself, inhibit cell death, but others promote 
cell death by antagonizing the actions of Bcl-2. The Bcl-2 class 
proteins act upstream of Apaf-1 (a vertebrate homolog of  
Ced-4) and the caspases (vertebrate homologs of Ced-3).
Neurotrophin signaling is relayed from the axon 
terminal to the cell body of the neuron through a process 
that involves internalization of a complex of neurotro-
phin bound to Trk receptors. The retrograde transport 
of this complex occurs in a class of endocytotic vesi-
cles called signaling endosomes. The transport of these 
vesicles brings activated Trk receptors into cellular 
compartments able to activate signaling pathways and 
transcriptional programs essential for neuronal sur-
vival, maturation, and synaptic differentiation.
The picture is more complex for neurons in the 
central nervous system. The survival of motor neurons, 
for example, is not dependent on a single neurotrophic 
factor. Instead, different classes of motor neurons 
require neurotrophins, GDNF, and interleukin-6–like 
proteins expressed by muscles or peripheral glial cells. 
The survival of these neuronal classes depends on the 
exposure of axons to local neurotrophic factors.
Neurotrophic Factors Suppress a Latent Cell  
Death Program
Neurotrophic factors were once believed to promote 
the survival of neural cells by stimulating their metab-
olism in beneficial ways, hence their name. It is now 
evident, however, that neurotrophic factors suppress 
a latent death program present in all cells of the body, 
including neurons.
This biochemical pathway can be considered a sui-
cide program. Once it is activated, cells die by apopto-
sis (Greek, falling away): They round up, form blebs, 
condense their chromatin, and fragment their nuclei. 
Apoptotic cell deaths are distinguishable from necro-
sis, which typically results from acute traumatic injury 
and involves rapid lysis of cell membranes without 
activation of the cell death program.
The first clue that deprivation of neurotrophic fac-
tors kills neurons by unleashing an active biochemical 
program emerged from studies that assessed neuronal 
survival after inhibition of RNA and protein synthesis. 
Exposure of sympathetic neurons to protein synthesis 
inhibitors was found to prevent the death of sympa-
thetic neurons triggered by removal of NGF. These 
results sparked the idea that neurons have the ability 
to synthesize proteins that are lethal and that NGF pre-
vents their synthesis, thereby suppressing an endog-
enous cell death program.
Key insights into the biochemical nature of the 
endogenous cell death program emerged from genetic 
studies of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. During 
the development of C. elegans, a precise number of cells 
is generated and a fixed number of these cells die—the 
same number from embryo to embryo. The findings 
prompted a screen for genes that block or enhance 
cell death, which led to the identification of the cell 
death (ced) genes. Two of these genes, ced-3 and ced-4, 
are needed for the death of neurons; in their absence, 
every one of the cells destined to die instead survives. 
A third gene, ced-9, is needed for survival and works 
by antagonizing the activities of ced-3 and ced-4 (Figure 
46–19). Thus, in the absence of ced-9, many additional 
cells die, even though these deaths still depend on 
ced-3 and ced-4 activity.
The cell death pathway in C. elegans has been con-
served in mammals. Similar proteins and pathways 
control the apoptotic death of central and peripheral 
neurons, indeed of all developing cells. The worm 
ced-9 gene encodes a protein that is related to mem-
bers of the mammalian Bcl-2 family, which protect 
Death 
signal
Cell death
Humans
C. elegans
Egl-1
Ced-9
Ced-4
Ced-3
BAD
Bcl-2
Apaf-1
Caspase


===== Page 5 =====
1152    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 46–20  Neurotrophic factors suppress caspase  
activation and cell death. (Adapted from Jesenberger and 
Jentsch 2002.)
A. Two types of pathways trigger cell death: extrinsic activation 
of surface membrane death receptors and intrinsic activation of  
a mitochondrial pathway. Both pathways result in activation of 
caspases such as caspase-8 and caspase-9, which initiate a  
proteolytic cleavage cascade that converges at the level of  
caspase-3 activation. Cleavage of the caspase precursor 
removes the caspase prodomain and produces a proteolytically 
active enzyme conformation.
   The extrinsic pathway involves activation of death receptors 
by ligands such as tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 or  
Fas/CD95. The intrinsic pathway involves stress-induced signals 
such as DNA damage that initiate the release of cytochrome c 
from the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Cytochrome c 
binds to Apaf-1 and recruits and activates caspase-9.
B. Binding of neurotrophins to Trk receptors recruits the PI3 
kinase pathway and Akt and suppresses the cell death pathway 
by inhibiting caspase-9. This pathway is inhibited in developing 
neurons by neurotrophic factors, explaining why withdrawal of 
these factors leads to apoptosis. (Abbreviations: NGF, nerve 
growth factor; P, phosphate.)
Caspase-8
Intrinsic
death 
signal
DNA fragmentation
Chromatin condensation
Extrinsic
death 
signal
Cytochrome c
Mitochondria
Apaf-1
Caspase-9
Caspase-3
Cell death
Intrinsic
death 
signal
A
B
Cytochrome c
Mitochondria
Apaf-1
Caspase-9
Caspase-3
Cell death
Akt
PI3
DNA fragmentation
Chromatin condensation
TrkA
NGF
P
P
P
P
lymphocytes and other cells from apoptotic death. The 
worm ced-3 gene encodes a protein closely related to a 
class of mammalian cysteine proteases called caspases. 
The worm ced-4 gene encodes a protein that is func-
tionally related to a mammalian protein called apopto-
sis activating factor-1 (Apaf-1).
The mammalian apoptotic cell death pathway 
works in a way that resembles the worm pathway 
(Figure 46–20). The morphological and histochemical 
changes that accompany the apoptosis of mamma-
lian cells result from the activation of caspases, which 
cleave specific aspartic acid residues within cellular 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1153
proteins. Two classes of caspases regulate apoptotic 
death: the initiator and effector caspases. Initiator 
caspases (caspase-8, -9, and -10) cleave and activate 
effector caspases. Effector caspases (caspase-3 and -7) 
cleave other protein substrates, thus triggering the 
apoptotic process. Perhaps 1% of all proteins in the cell 
serve as substrates for effector caspases. Their cleav-
age contributes to neuronal apoptosis through many 
pathways: by activation of proteolytic cascades, inac-
tivation of repair, DNA cleavage, mitochondrial per-
meabilization, and initiation of phagocytosis.
The survival of mammalian neurons depends on 
the balance between antiapoptotic and proapoptotic 
members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins. Some Bcl-2 
proteins such as BAX and BAK increase the permeabil-
ity of the mitochondrial outer membranes, causing the 
release of proapoptotic proteins such as cytochrome c 
into the cytosol. The release of cytochrome c induces 
Apaf-1 to bind and activate caspase-9, leading to the 
cleavage and activation of effector caspases. The bind-
ing of neurotrophic factors to their tyrosine kinase 
receptors is thought to lead to the phosphorylation of 
protein substrates that promote Bcl-2–like activities 
(Figure 46–20B). Thus, withdrawal of neurotrophic 
factors from neurons changes the balance from 
antiapoptotic to proapoptotic members of the Bcl-2 
family, which triggers the neuron’s demise.
The caspase cell death program can also be acti-
vated by many cellular insults, including DNA dam-
age and anoxia. The activation of cell-surface death 
receptors such as Fas by extracellular ligands results in 
the activation of caspase-8 or -10 as well as the recruit-
ment of death effector proteins such as FADD. Recruit-
ment of an initiator caspase to the Fas-FADD complex 
then leads to activation of effector caspases. Because 
many neurodegenerative disorders result in apoptotic 
death, pharmacological strategies to inhibit caspases 
are under investigation.
Highlights
  1.  Stem cells near the ventricular surface of the neu-
ral tube divide to expand the neuroepithelium. 
Further divisions then generate the neurons 
and glia of the central nervous system as well as 
radial glia.
  2.  Processes of radial glia extend from the ventricu-
lar to the pial surface. Radial glial cells continue 
dividing to form neurons and astrocytes. In the 
cortex, they also serve as a scaffold on which 
newborn excitatory neurons migrate to appropri-
ate layers.
  3.  The choice between neuronal and glial fate is 
determined by signals from ligands of the Delta 
family to receptors of the Notch family on neigh-
boring cells. Initially, cells express both Notch 
and Delta. Activation of Notch leads to a glial 
fate, downregulating Delta, which in turn attenu-
ates Notch activity on the neighbors, promoting 
their differentiation into neurons.
  4.  As cortical principal (excitatory) neurons migrate 
along radial glia, they form cortical layers in an 
inside-out sequence (layer 6 forms before layer 5, 
and so on). Disruptions of migration are among 
the causes of intellectual disability and epilepsy.
  5.  Unlike excitatory neurons, forebrain interneu-
rons arise subcortically in ganglionic eminences 
and then migrate tangentially into the cortex, 
basal ganglia, and other forebrain structures.
  6.  Neural crest cells migrate from their source at 
the dorsal tip of the neural tube through somites 
and mesenchyme to form sensory and autonomic 
neurons and glia, as well as several nonneural 
cell types.
  7.  For principal neurons, interneurons, and periph-
eral neurons, intrinsic differences and cues 
encountered along the migratory path interact 
to induce expression of distinct combinations 
of transcription factors. The transcriptional pro-
grams then lead to diversification of the develop-
ing neurons into multiple classes and types.
  8.  The greater complexity of the primate, and par-
ticularly the human brain compared to those of 
lower mammals is due in part to a larger pool of 
neuronal progenitors, including a second type 
of radial glial cell.
  9.  A recent advance in the ability to study the 
human brain is the discovery that complex neu-
ronal ensembles called cerebral organoids can be 
generated from stem cells. Although they fail to 
acquire characteristics of the mature cortex, they 
enable analysis of some aspects of early brain 
development and its disorders and may be use-
ful in testing possible therapeutics.
10.  The neurotransmitters that neurons use are 
determined as part of the transcriptional pro-
gram that endows each neuronal type with its 
defining characteristics. However, extrinsic fac-
tors, including patterns of electric activity and 
hormonal milieu, can lead to transmitter switch-
ing in some cases.
11.  The nervous system generates up to twice as 
many neurons as survive in adulthood. The 
excess is eliminated by a cell death program that 
is conserved from invertebrates to humans.


===== Page 7 =====
1154    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
12.  Trophic factors play a crucial role in determining 
which neurons within a population live or die. 
They control survival by holding the cell death 
program in check. In some cases, neurons appear 
to compete for a limited supply of neurotrophic 
factors; the cell death program is activated in 
those that lose the competition.
13.  Multiple trophic factors are produced in the 
body, with each controlling the fate of only some 
neuronal types. The best-studied, called neu-
rotrophins (nerve growth factor, brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor, neurotrophin-3, and neuro-
trophin-4), bind to and activate kinases called Trk 
receptors.
 Joshua R. Sanes 
  Thomas M. Jessell 
Selected Reading
Di Lullo E, Kriegstein AR. 2017. The use of brain organoids 
to investigate neural development and disease. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 18:573–584.
Gleeson JG, Walsh CA. 2000. Neuronal migration disorders: 
from genetic diseases to developmental mechanisms. 
Trends Neurosci 23:352–359.
Lodato S, Arlotta P. 2015. Generating neuronal diversity in 
the mammalian cerebral cortex. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 
31:699–720.
Spitzer NC. 2017. Neurotransmitter switching in the devel-
oping and adult brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:1–19.
Wamsley B, Fishell G. 2017. Genetic and activity-dependent 
mechanisms underlying interneuron diversity. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 18:299–309.
Wilsch-Bräuninger M, Florio M, Huttner WB. 2016. Neocor-
tex expansion in development and evolution—from cell 
biology to single genes. Curr Opin Neurobiol 39:122–132.
References
Anderson DJ. 1997. Cellular and molecular biology of neural 
crest cell lineage determination. Trends Genet 13:276–280.
Bandler RC, Mayer C, Fishell G. 2017. Cortical interneuron 
specification: the juncture of genes, time and geometry. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 42:17–24.
Bershteyn M, Nowakowski TJ, Pollen AA, et al. 2017. Human 
iPSC-derived cerebral organoids model cellular features 
of lissencephaly and reveal prolonged mitosis of outer 
radial glia. Cell Stem Cell 20:435–449. 
Costa RO, Perestrelo T, Almeida RD. 2018. PROneurotro-
phins and CONSequences. Mol Neurobiol 55:2934–2951.
Detwiler SR. 1936. Neuroembryology: An Experimental Study. 
New York: Macmillan.
Doupe AJ, Landis SC, Patterson PH. 1985. Environmental 
influences in the development of neural crest derivatives: 
glucocorticoids, growth factors, and chromaffin cell plas-
ticity. J Neurosci 5:2119–2142.
Duband JL. 2006. Neural crest delamination and migration: 
integrating regulations of cell interactions, locomotion, 
survival and fate. Adv Exp Med Biol 589:45–77.
Florio M, Borrell V, Huttner WB. 2017. Human-specific 
genomic signatures of neocortical expansion. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 42:33–44. 
Furshpan EJ, Potter DD, Landis SC. 1982. On the transmitter 
repertoire of sympathetic neurons in culture. Harvey Lect 
76:149–191.
Giandomenico SL, Lancaster MA. 2017. Probing human brain 
evolution and development in organoids. Curr Opin Cell 
Biol 44:36–43.
Gray GE, Sanes JR. 1992. Lineage of radial glia in the chicken 
optic tectum. Development 114:271–283.
Guo J, Anton ES. 2014. Decision making during interneuron 
migration in the developing cerebral cortex. Trends Cell 
Biol 24:342–351.
Hamburger V. 1975. Cell death in the development of the lat-
eral motor column of the chick embryo. J Comp Neurol 
160:535–546.
Hamburger V, Levi-Montalcini R. 1949. Proliferation differ-
entiation and degeneration in the spinal ganglia of the 
chick embryo under normal and experimental conditions. 
J Exp Zool 111:457–501.
Hoshino M. 2006. Molecular machinery governing GABAergic 
neuron specification in the cerebellum. Cerebellum 5: 
193–198.
Howard MJ. 2005. Mechanisms and perspectives on differen-
tiation of autonomic neurons. Dev Biol 277:271–286.
Jesenberger V, Jentsch S. 2002. Deadly encounter: ubiquitin 
meets apoptosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 3:112–121. 
Lancaster MA, Renner M, Martin CA, et al. 2013. Cerebral 
organoids model human brain development and micro-
cephaly. Nature 501:373–379.
Landis SC. 1980. Developmental changes in the neurotrans-
mitter properties of dissociated sympathetic neurons: a 
cytochemical study of the effects of medium. Dev Biol 
77:349–361.
Le Douarin NM. 1998. Cell line segregation during periph-
eral nervous system ontogeny. Science 231:1515–1522.
Nowakowski 
TJ, 
Pollen 
AA, 
Sandoval-Espinosa 
C, 
Kriegstein AR. 2016. Transformation of the radial glia 
scaffold demarcates two stages of human cerebral cortex 
development. Neuron 91:1219–1227.
Olson EC, Walsh CA. 2002. Smooth, rough and upside-
down neocortical development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 
12:320–327.
Oppenheim RW. 1981. Neuronal cell death and some related 
regressive phenomena during neurogenesis: a selective 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1155
historical review and progress report. In: WM Cowan 
(ed). Studies in Developmental Neurobiology: Essays in Honor 
of Viktor Hamburger, pp. 74–133. New York: Oxford Univ. 
Press.
Purves D, Lichtman JW. 1985. Principles of Neural Development. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Qian X, Goderie SK, Shen Q, Stern JH, Temple S. 1998. 
Intrinsic programs of patterned cell lineages in isolated 
vertebrate CNS ventricular zone cells. Development 
125:3143–3152.
Reichardt LF. 2006. Neurotrophin-regulated signaling path-
ways. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 361:1545–1564.
Reichardt LF, Fariñas I. 1997. Neurotrophic factors and their 
receptors: roles in neuronal development and function. 
In: MW Cowan, TM Jessell, L Zipursky (eds). Molecular 
Approaches to Neural Development, pp. 220–263. New York: 
Oxford Univ. Press. 
Sánchez-Alcañiz JA, Haege S, Mueller W. 2011. Cxcr7 controls 
neuronal migration by regulating chemokine responsive-
ness. Neuron 69:77–90. 
Shah NM, Groves AK, Anderson DJ. 1996. Alternative neu-
ral crest cell fates are instructively promoted by TGF beta 
superfamily members. Cell 85:331–343.
Sun Y, Nadal-Vicens M, Misono S, et al. 2001. Neurogenin 
promotes neurogenesis and inhibits glial differentiation 
by independent mechanisms. Cell 104:365–376.
Wang Y, Li G, Stanco A, et al. 2011. CXCR4 and CXCR7 have 
distinct functions in regulating interneuron migration. 
Neuron 69:61–76.
Zeng H, Sanes JR. 2017. Neuronal cell-type classification: 
challenges, opportunities and the path forward. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 18:530–546.


===== Page 9 =====
47
The Growth and Guidance of Axons
We begin the chapter by discussing how certain 
neuronal processes become axons and others den-
drites. We then describe the growing axon, which 
may have to travel a long distance and ignore many 
inappropriate neuronal partners before terminating in 
just the right region and recognizing its correct syn-
aptic targets. We consider the strategies by which the 
axon overcomes these challenges. Finally, we illustrate 
general features of axonal guidance by describing the 
development of two well-studied axonal pathways: 
one that conveys visual information from the retina to 
the brain and another that conveys cutaneous sensory 
information from the spinal cord to the brain.
Differences Between Axons and Dendrites 
Emerge Early in Development
The processes of neurons vary enormously in their 
length, thickness, branching pattern, and molecular 
architecture. Nonetheless, most neuronal processes fit 
into one of two functional categories: axons and den-
drites. More than a century ago, Santiago Ramón y 
Cajal hypothesized that this distinction underlies the 
ability of neurons to transmit information in a par-
ticular direction, an idea he formalized as the law of 
dynamic polarization. Cajal wrote that “the transmis-
sion of the nerve impulse is always from the dendritic 
branches and the cell body to the axon.” In the decades 
before electrophysiological methods were up to the 
task, this law provided a means of analyzing neural 
circuits histologically. Although exceptions have been 
found, Ramón y Cajal’s law remains a basic principle 
Differences Between Axons and Dendrites Emerge  
Early in Development
Dendrites Are Patterned by Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors
The Growth Cone Is a Sensory Transducer and  
a Motor Structure
Molecular Cues Guide Axons to Their Targets
The Growth of Retinal Ganglion Axons Is Oriented in a 
Series of Discrete Steps
Growth Cones Diverge at the Optic Chiasm
Gradients of Ephrins Provide Inhibitory Signals  
in the Brain
Axons From Some Spinal Neurons Are Guided  
Across the Midline
Netrins Direct Developing Commissural Axons  
Across the Midline
Chemoattractant and Chemorepellent Factors  
Pattern the Midline
Highlights
I
n the two preceding chapters,  we saw how 
neurons are generated in appropriate numbers, at 
correct times, and in the right places. These early 
developmental steps set the stage for later events that 
direct neurons to form functional connections with tar-
get cells. To form connections, neurons have to extend 
long processes—axons and dendrites—which per-
mit connectivity with postsynaptic cells and synaptic 
input from other neurons. In this chapter, we examine 
how neurons elaborate axons and dendrites and how 
axons are guided to their targets.


