===== Page 1 =====
204    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
does not. A true resistor responds to a step change in 
current with a similar step change in voltage, but the 
neuron’s membrane potential rises and decays more 
slowly than the step change in current because of its 
capacitance (Figure 9–10).
To understand how the capacitance slows down 
the voltage response, recall that the voltage across a 
capacitor is proportional to the charge stored on the 
capacitor. To alter the voltage, charge Q must be added 
to or removed from the capacitor C:
ΔV = ΔQ/C.
To change the charge across the capacitor (the 
membrane lipid bilayer), there must be current across 
the capacitor (Ic). Since current is the flow of charge per 
unit time (Ic = ΔQ/Δt), the change in voltage across a 
capacitor is a function of the magnitude and duration 
of the current:
ΔV = Ic · Δt/C.
Thus, the magnitude of the change in voltage across 
a capacitor in response to a current pulse depends on 
the duration of the current, because time is required to 
deposit and remove charge from the capacitor.
If the membrane had only resistive properties, 
a step pulse of outward current would change the 
membrane potential instantaneously. Conversely, if 
the membrane had only capacitive properties, the 
membrane potential would change linearly with time 
∆Vm
a
b
63% ∆Vm
τ
Im
Ii
Ic
Ic
Ii
Im
Out
In
Time
0
Figure 9–10  The rate of change in the membrane potential 
is slowed by the membrane capacitance. The upper plot 
shows the response of the membrane potential (ΔVm) to a step 
current pulse (Im). The shape of the actual voltage response 
(red line) combines the properties of a purely resistive element 
(dashed line a) and a purely capacitive element (dashed line 
b). The time taken to reach 63% of the final voltage defines 
the membrane time constant, τ. The lower plot shows the two 
elements of the total membrane current (Im) during the current 
pulse: the ionic current (Ii) across the resistive elements of the 
membrane (ion channels) and the capacitive current (Ic).
in response to the same step of current. Because the 
membrane has both capacitive and resistive properties 
in parallel, the actual change in membrane potential 
combines features of the two pure responses. The ini-
tial slope of the change reflects a purely capacitive ele-
ment, whereas the final slope and amplitude reflect a 
purely resistive element (Figure 9–10, upper plot).
In the simple case of the spherical cell body of a 
neuron, the time course of the potential change is 
described by the following equation:
ΔVm (t) = ImRm(1 − e–t/τ),
where e is the base of the system of natural logarithms 
with a value of approximately 2.72, and τ is the mem-
brane time constant, given by the product of the mem-
brane resistance and capacitance (RmCm). The time 
constant can be measured experimentally as the time 
it takes the membrane potential to rise to 1 − 1/e, or 
approximately 63% of its steady-state value (Figure 9–10, 
upper plot). Typical values of τ for neurons range from 
20 to 50 ms. We shall return to the time constant in 
Chapter 13 where we consider the temporal summa-
tion of synaptic inputs in a cell.
Membrane and Cytoplasmic Resistance Affect  
the Efficiency of Signal Conduction
So far, we have considered the effects of the passive 
properties of neurons on signaling only within the cell 
body. Distance is not a factor in the propagation of a 
signal in the neuron’s soma because the cell body can 
be approximated as a sphere whose membrane voltage 
is uniform. However, a subthreshold voltage signal 
traveling along extended structures (dendrites, axons, 
and muscle fibers) decreases in amplitude with dis-
tance from the site of initiation because some charge 
leaks out of the resting membrane conductance as it 
flows along the dendrite or axon. To show how this 
attenuation occurs, we will consider how the geometry 
of a neuron influences the distribution of current.
If current is injected into a dendrite at one point, 
how will the membrane potential change along its 
length? For simplicity, consider how membrane poten-
tial varies with distance after a constant-amplitude cur-
rent pulse has been on for some time (t >> τ). Under 
these conditions, the membrane capacitance is fully 
charged, so membrane potential reaches a steady value. 
The variation of the potential with distance depends 
on the fraction of charge that leaks out of the dendrite 
compared to the fraction that flows inside the dendrite 
towards the soma. Since charge flows along the path of 
least resistance, this depends on the relative values of 
the membrane resistance in a unit length of dendrite rm 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 9 / Membrane Potential and the Passive Electrical Properties of the Neuron    205
Figure 9–11  The change in membrane potential along a 
neuronal process during electrotonic conduction decreases 
with distance.
A. Current injected into a neuronal process by a microelectrode 
follows the path of least resistance to the return electrode in 
the extracellular fluid. (The thickness of the arrows represents 
the magnitude of membrane current.)
B. The change in Vm decays exponentially with distance from 
the site of current injection. The distance at which ΔVm has 
decayed to 37% of its value at the point of current injection 
defines the length constant, λ.
(units of Ω · cm) and the axial resistance per unit length 
of dendrite ra (units of Ω/cm). The change in membrane 
potential along the dendrite becomes smaller with dis-
tance from the current electrode (Figure 9–11A). This 
decay with distance is exponential and expressed by
ΔV(x) = ΔV0 e–x /λ,
where λ is the membrane length constant, x is the dis-
tance from the site of current injection, and ΔV0 is the 
change in membrane potential produced by the cur-
rent at the site of injection (x = 0). The length constant 
is the distance along the dendrite to the site where ΔVm 
has decayed to 1/e, or 37% of its initial value (Figure 
9–11B). It is a measure of the efficiency of electrotonic 
conduction—the passive spread of voltage changes 
along the neuron—and is determined by the values of 
membrane and axial resistance as follows:
r
r
(
/ ).
m
a
λ =
The better the insulation of the membrane (that is, 
the greater rm) and the better the conducting properties 
Current generator
A
B
Extracellular
electrode
∆Vm
0
Distance (x)
λ
100%
37%
of the inner core (the lower ra), the greater the length 
constant of the dendrite. That is because current is able 
to spread farther along the inner conductive core of the 
dendrite before leaking across the membrane at some 
point x to alter the local membrane potential:
ΔV(x) = i(x) · rm.
The length constant is also a function of the diam-
eter of the neuronal process. Neuronal processes vary 
greatly in diameter, from as much as 1 mm for the 
squid giant axon to 1 μm for fine dendritic branches 
in the mammalian brain. For neuronal processes with 
similar ion channel surface densities (number of chan-
nels per unit membrane area) and cytoplasmic compo-
sition, thicker axons and dendrites have longer length 
constants than do narrower processes and hence can 
transmit passive electrical signals for greater distances. 
Typical values for neuronal length constants for unmy-
elinated axons range from about 0.5 to 1.0 mm. Myeli-
nated axons have longer length constants—up to about 
1.5 mm—because the insulating properties of myelin 
lead to an increase in the effective rm of the axon.
To understand how the diameter of a process 
affects the length constant, we must consider how the 
diameter (or radius) affects rm and ra. Both rm and ra 
are measures of resistance for a unit length of a neu-
ronal process of a given radius. The axial resistance 
ra of the process depends inversely on the number of 
charge carriers (ions) in a cross section of the process. 
Therefore, given a fixed cytoplasmic ion concentration, 
ra depends inversely on the cross-sectional area of the 
process 1/(π · radius2). The resistance of a unit length 
of membrane rm depends inversely on the total number 
of channels in a unit length of the neuronal process.
Channel density, the number of channels per μm2 
of membrane, is often similar among different-sized 
processes. As a result, the number of channels per unit 
length of a neuronal process increases in direct propor-
tion to increases in membrane area, which depends 
on the circumference of the process times its length; 
therefore, rm varies as 1/(2 · π · radius). Because rm/ra 
varies in direct proportion to the radius of the process, 
the length constant is proportional to the square root 
of the radius. In this analysis, we have assumed that 
dendrites have only passive electrical properties. As 
discussed in Chapter 13, however, voltage-gated ion 
channels endow most dendrites with active properties 
that modify their purely passive length constants.
The efficiency of electrotonic conduction has two 
important effects on neuronal function. First, it influ-
ences spatial summation, the process by which syn-
aptic potentials generated in different regions of the 


===== Page 3 =====
206    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
neuron are added together at the trigger zone of the 
axon (Chapter 13). Second, electrotonic conduction is a 
factor in the propagation of the action potential. Once 
the membrane at any point along an axon has been 
depolarized beyond threshold, an action potential is 
generated in that region. This local depolarization 
spreads passively down the axon, causing successive 
adjacent regions of the membrane to reach the thresh-
old for generating an action potential (Figure 9–12). 
Thus, the depolarization spreads along the length of the 
axon by local current driven by the difference in poten-
tial between the active and resting regions of the axon 
membrane. In axons with longer length constants, local 
current spreads a greater distance down the axon, and 
therefore, the action potential propagates more rapidly.
Large Axons Are More Easily Excited  
Than Small Axons
The influence of axonal geometry on action poten-
tial conduction plays an important role in a common 
neurological exam. In the examination of a patient for 
A
2
3
1
2
3
1
Direction of 
propagation
Distance
+50 mV
–60 mV
0 mV
+50 mV
–60 mV
0 mV
Vm
B
Vm
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
+
–
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
+
–
+
–
+
– –
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Figure 9–12  Electrotonic conduction contrib-
utes to propagation of the action potential.
A. An action potential propagating from right to 
left causes a difference in membrane potential 
between two adjacent regions of the axon. The 
difference creates a local-circuit current that 
causes the depolarization to spread passively. 
Current spreads from the more positive active 
region (2) to the less positive resting region 
ahead of the action potential (1), as well as to 
the less positive area behind the action potential 
(3). However, because there is also an increase 
in membrane K+ conductance in the wake of the 
action potential (Chapter 10), the buildup of posi-
tive charge along the inner side of the membrane 
in area 3 is more than balanced by the local 
efflux of K+, allowing this region of membrane to 
repolarize.
B. A short time later, the action potential has 
traveled down the axon and the process is 
repeated.
diseases of peripheral nerves, the nerve often is stim-
ulated by passing current between a pair of external 
cutaneous electrodes placed over the nerve, and the 
population of resulting action potentials (the compound 
action potential) is recorded farther along the nerve 
by a second pair of cutaneous voltage-recording elec-
trodes. In this situation, the total number of axons that 
generate action potentials varies with the amplitude of 
the current pulse (Chapter 57).
To drive a cell to threshold, a stimulating current 
from the positive electrode must pass through the cell 
membrane into the axon. There it travels along the 
axoplasmic core, eventually exiting the axon into the 
extracellular fluid through the membrane to reach 
the second (negative) electrode. However, most of 
the stimulating current does not even enter the axon, 
moving instead through neighboring axons or through 
the low-resistance pathway of the extracellular fluid. 
Thus, the axons into which current enters most easily 
are the ones most excitable.
In general, axons with the largest diameter have 
the lowest threshold for such excitation. The greater the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 9 / Membrane Potential and the Passive Electrical Properties of the Neuron    207
diameter of the axon, the lower is the axial resistance to 
the flow of current down the axon because the number 
of charge carriers (ions) per unit length of the axon is 
greater. Because more current enters the larger axon, 
the axon is depolarized more efficiently than a smaller 
axon. For these reasons, larger axons are recruited at 
low values of current; axons with smaller diameter are 
recruited only at relatively greater current strengths.
The fact that larger axons conduct more rapidly 
and have a lower current threshold for excitation aids 
in the interpretation of clinical nerve-stimulation tests. 
Neurons that convey different types of information 
(eg, motor versus sensory) often differ in axon diame-
ter and thus conduction velocity (Chapter 18). In addi-
tion, a specific disease may preferentially affect certain 
functional classes of axons. Thus, using conduction 
velocity as a criterion to determine which classes of 
axons have defective conduction properties can help 
one infer the neuronal basis for the neurological deficit.
Passive Membrane Properties and Axon Diameter 
Affect the Velocity of Action Potential Propagation
The passive spread of depolarization during conduc-
tion of the action potential is not instantaneous. In fact, 
electrotonic conduction is a rate-limiting factor in the 
propagation of the action potential. We can understand 
this limitation by considering a simplified equivalent 
circuit of two adjacent segments of axon membrane 
connected by a segment of axoplasm.
An action potential generated in one segment of 
membrane supplies depolarizing current to the adja-
cent membrane, causing it to depolarize gradually 
toward threshold (Figure 9–12). According to Ohm’s 
law, the larger the axoplasmic resistance, the smaller 
is the current between adjacent membrane segments 
(I = V/R) and thus the longer it takes to change the 
charge on the membrane capacitance of the adjacent 
segment.
Recall that, since ΔV = ΔQ/C, the membrane poten-
tial changes slowly if the current is small because ΔQ, 
equal to the magnitude of the current multiplied by 
time, changes slowly. Similarly, the larger the membrane 
capacitance, the more charge must be deposited on the 
membrane to change the potential across the membrane, 
so the current requires a longer time to produce a given 
depolarization. Therefore, the time it takes for depolari-
zation to spread along the axon is determined by both 
the axial resistance ra and the capacitance per unit length 
of the axon cm (units F/cm). The rate of passive spread 
of charge varies inversely with the product racm. If this 
product is reduced, the rate of passive spread increases 
and the action potential propagates faster.
Rapid propagation of the action potential is func-
tionally important, and two adaptations have evolved to 
increase it. One is an increase in the diameter of the axon 
core. Because ra decreases in proportion to the square of 
axon diameter, whereas cm increases in direct proportion 
to diameter, the net effect of an increase in diameter is a 
decrease in racm. This adaptation has been carried to an 
extreme in the giant axon of the squid, which can reach a 
diameter of 1 mm. No larger axons have evolved, presum-
ably because of the competing need to keep neuronal size 
small so that many cells can be packed into a limited space.
The second adaptation that increases conduction 
velocity is the wrapping of a myelin sheath around an 
axon (Chapter 7). This process is functionally equivalent 
to increasing the thickness of the axonal membrane by 
as much as 100-fold. Because the capacitance of a par-
allel-plate capacitor such as the membrane is inversely 
proportional to the thickness of the insulation, myeli-
nation decreases cm and thus racm. Each layer of myelin 
is extremely thin—only 80 Å. Therefore, myelination 
results in a proportionately much greater decrease in 
racm than does the same increase in the diameter of a 
bare axon core, because the many layers of membrane 
in the myelin sheath produce a large decrease in cm with 
a relatively small increase in overall axon diameter. For 
this reason, conduction in myelinated axons is faster 
than in nonmyelinated axons of the same diameter.
In a neuron with a myelinated axon, the action poten-
tial is triggered at the nonmyelinated initial segment 
of the axon. The inward current through this region of 
membrane is available to discharge the capacitance of the 
myelinated axon ahead. Even though the capacitance of 
the axon is quite small (because of the myelin insulation), 
the amount of current down the core of the axon from the 
trigger zone is not enough to discharge the capacitance 
along the entire length of the myelinated axon.
To prevent the action potential from dying out, 
the myelin sheath is interrupted every 1 to 2 mm by 
the nodes of Ranvier, bare patches of axon membrane 
approximately 1 μm in length (Chapter 7). Although the 
area of membrane at each node is quite small, the nodal 
membrane is rich in voltage-gated Na+ channels and 
thus can generate an intense depolarizing inward Na+ 
current in response to the passive spread of depolariza-
tion down the axon. These regularly distributed nodes 
thus periodically boost the amplitude of the action 
potential, preventing it from decaying with distance.
The action potential, which spreads quite rapidly 
along the internodal region because of the low capaci-
tance of the myelin sheath, slows down as it crosses 
the high-capacitance region of each bare node. Conse-
quently, as the action potential moves down the axon, it 
jumps quickly from node to node (Figure 9–13A). For this 


===== Page 5 =====
208    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Internode
Myelin
Node of
Ranvier
Demyelinated region
A  Normal axon
Distance along axon
Time between stimulus and
arrival of action potential
Nodal
region
Na+ channels
K+ channels
B  Demyelinated axon
Figure 9–13  Action potentials in myelinated nerves are 
regenerated at the nodes of Ranvier.
A. The densities of capacitive and ionic membrane currents 
(membrane current per unit area of membrane) are much 
higher at the nodes of Ranvier than in the myelin-insulated 
internodal regions. (The density of membrane current at 
any point along the axon is represented by the thickness of 
the arrows.) Because of the higher capacitance of the axon 
membrane at the nodes, the action potential slows down as 
it approaches each node and thus appears to skip rapidly from 
node to node as it propagates from left to right.
B. In regions of the axon that have lost their myelin, the  
spread of the action potential is slowed down or blocked. The 
local-circuit currents must discharge a larger membrane capaci-
tance, and because of the shorter length constant (caused by 
the low membrane resistance in demyelinated stretches of 
axon), they do not spread as well down the axon. In response 
to demyelination, additional voltage-gated Na+ and K+ ion 
channels are inserted into the membrane that is normally 
myelinated.
reason, the action potential in a myelinated axon is said 
to move by saltatory conduction (from the Latin saltare, to 
jump). Because ions flow across the membrane only at 
the nodes in myelinated fibers, saltatory conduction is 
also favorable from a metabolic standpoint. Less energy 
must be expended by the Na+-K+ pump to restore the Na+ 
and K+ concentration gradients, which tend to run down 
as the action potential is propagated.
The distribution of conduction velocities varies 
widely among neurons and even between different 
branches of an axon, depending on axon diameter 
and degree of myelination. Additional geometric fea-
tures of myelinated axons, such as internodal length 
and nodal diameter, can also affect velocity. Evolu-
tion has adapted conduction velocities to optimize 
the behavioral functions of each neuron. In general, 
axons that are involved in rapid sensory and motor 
computations generally have high rates of conduc-
tion. More specifically, in certain neural circuits in 
the auditory system, an optimal behavioral response 
depends on the precise temporal relationship of pre-
synaptic action potentials in two pathways that con-
verge on the same postsynaptic neuron (Chapter 28). 
In such cases, values of the geometrical parameters 
of myelinated axons in the two input pathways can 
result in different conduction velocities that compen-
sate for the differences in the input path lengths.
Various diseases of the nervous system are 
caused by demyelination, such as multiple sclerosis 
and Guillain-Barré syndrome. As an action potential 
goes from a myelinated region to a bare stretch of 
demyelinated axon, it encounters a region of rela-
tively high cm and low rm. The inward current gener-
ated at the node just before the demyelinated segment 
may be too small to provide the capacitive current 
required to depolarize the segment of demyelinated 
membrane to threshold. In addition, this local-circuit 
current does not spread as far as it normally would 
because it encounters a segment of axon that has a 
relatively short length constant resulting from its low 
rm (Figure 9–13B). These two factors can combine to 
slow, and in some cases actually block, the conduc-
tion of action potentials, causing devastating effects 
on behavior (Chapter 57).
Highlights
  1.  When the cell is at rest, passive fluxes of ions into 
and out of the cell through ion channels are bal-
anced, such that the charge separation across the 
membrane remains constant and the membrane 
potential is maintained at its resting value.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 9 / Membrane Potential and the Passive Electrical Properties of the Neuron    209
  2.  The permeability of the cell membrane for an ion 
species is proportional to the number of open 
channels that allow passage of that ion. Accord-
ing to the Goldman equation, the value of the 
resting membrane potential in nerve cells is 
determined by resting channels that conduct K+, 
Cl−, and Na+; the membrane potential is closest 
to the equilibrium (Nernst) potential of the ion 
or ions with the greatest membrane permeability.
  3.  Changes in membrane potential that generate 
neuronal electrical signals (action potentials, 
synaptic potentials, and receptor potentials) are 
caused by changes in the membrane’s relative 
permeabilities to these three ions and to Ca2+ ions.
  4.  Although the changes in permeability caused 
by the opening of gated ion channels change the 
net charge separation across the membrane, they 
typically produce only negligible changes in the 
bulk concentrations of ions.
  5.  The functional properties of a neuron can be 
described by an electrical equivalent circuit, 
which includes the membrane capacitance, the 
ionic conductances, the EMF–generating proper-
ties of ion channels, and cytoplasmic resistance. 
In this model, membrane potential is determined 
by the ion or ions with the greatest membrane 
conductances.
  6.  Ion pumps prevent the ionic batteries from run-
ning down due to passive fluxes through the 
ion channels. The Na+-K+ pump uses the chemi-
cal energy of one molecule of ATP to exchange 
three intracellular Na+ ions for two extracellular 
K+ ions, an example of primary active transport. 
Secondary active transport by cotransporters is 
powered by coupling the downhill ionic gradi-
ents of one or two types of ions to drive the uphill 
transport of another ion. The coupling may take 
the form of symtransport (in the same direction) 
or antitransport (opposite directions).
  7.  The Na+-Ca2+ antitransporter exchanges inter-
nal Ca2+ ion for external Na+ ions. There are two 
types of Cl− cotransporters in the cell membrane. 
The Cl−-K+ symtransporter, which transports Cl− 
and K+ out of the cell, maintains ECl at a relatively 
negative potential, and is the most common vari-
ant of Cl− transporter found in mature neurons. 
The Cl−-Na+-K+ symtransporter, which transports 
Cl–, Na+, and K+ into the cell, generates an ECl that 
is relatively positive. It is expressed in immature 
neurons and in certain adult neurons.
  8.  The details of the molecular transitions during 
primary and secondary active transport are an 
area of active investigation.
  9.  The nerve cell membrane has a relatively high 
capacitance per unit of membrane area. As a 
result, when a channel opens and ions begin 
to flow, the membrane potential changes more 
slowly than the membrane current.
10.  The currents that change the charge on the mem-
brane capacitance along the length of an axon 
or dendrite pass through a relatively poor con-
ductor—a thin column of cytoplasm. These two 
factors combine to slow down the conduction of 
voltage signals. Moreover, the various ion chan-
nels that are open at rest and that give rise to the 
resting potential also degrade the signaling func-
tion of the neuron, as they make the cell leaky 
and limit how far a signal can travel passively.
11.  To overcome the physical constraints on long-
distance signaling, neurons use sequential 
transient opening of voltage-gated Na+ and K+ 
channels to generate action potentials. The action 
potential is continually regenerated along the 
axon and thus conducted without attenuation.
12.  For pathways in which rapid signaling is particu-
larly important, conduction of the action poten-
tial is enhanced by myelination of the axon, an 
increase in axon diameter, or both. Conduction 
velocities can vary between or within axons in 
ways that optimize the timing of neuronal sig-
nals within a neuronal circuit.
John D. Koester  
Steven A. Siegelbaum 
Selected Reading
Clausen MV, Hilbers F, Poulsen H. 2017. The structure and 
function of the Na,K-ATPase isoforms in health and dis-
ease. Front Physiol 8:371.
Hille B. 2001. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Hodgkin AL. 1964. Saltatory conduction in myelinated nerve. 
In: The Conduction of the Nervous Impulse. The Sherrington 
Lecture, VII, pp. 47–55. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Jack JB, Noble D, Tsien RW. 1975. Electric Current Flow in 
Excitable Cells, pp. 1–4, 83–97, 131–224, 276–277. Oxford: 
Clarendon.
Johnston D, Wu M-S. 1995. Functional properties of den-
drites. In: Foundations of Cellular Neurophysiology, pp. 55–120. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koch C. 1999. Biophysics of Computation, pp. 25–48. New York: 
Oxford Univ. Press.


===== Page 7 =====
210    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
References
Debanne D, Campanac E, Bialowas A, Carlier E, Alcaraz G. 
2011. Axon physiology. Physiol Rev 91:555–602.
Ford MC, Alexandrova O, Cossell L, et al. 2015. Tuning of  
Ranvier node and internode properties in myelinated axons 
to adjust action potential timing. Nat Commun 6:8073.
Friedrich T, Tavraz NN, Junghans C. 2016. ATP1A2 mutations 
in migraine: seeing through the facets of an ion pump onto 
the neurobiology of disease. Front Physiol 7:239.
Gadsby DC. 2009. Ion channels versus ion pumps: the 
principal difference, in principle. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 
10:344–352.
Goldman DE. 1943. Potential, impedance, and rectification in 
membranes. J Gen Physiol 27:37–60.
Hodgkin AL, Katz B. 1949. The effect of sodium ions on the 
electrical activity of the giant axon of the squid. J Physiol 
108:37–77.
Hodgkin AL, Rushton WAH. 1946. The electrical con-
stants of a crustacean nerve fibre. Proc R Soc Lond Ser B 
133:444–479.
Huxley AF, Stämpfli R. 1949. Evidence for saltatory con-
duction in peripheral myelinated nerve fibres. J Physiol 
108:315–339.
Jorgensen PL, Hakansson KO, Karlish SJ. 2003. Structure and 
mechanism of Na,K-ATPase: functional sites and their 
interactions. Annu Rev Physiol 65:817–849.
Kaila K, Price T, Payne J, Puskarjov M, Voipio J. 2014. Cation-
chloride cotransporters in neuronal development, plastic-
ity and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:637–654.
Lytton J. 2007. Na+/Ca2+ exchangers: three mammalian gene 
families control Ca2+ transport. Biochem J 406:365–382.
Moore JW, Joyner RW, Brill MH, Waxman SD, Najar-Joa M. 
1978. Simulations of conduction in uniform myelinated 
fibers: relative sensitivity to changes in nodal and inter-
nodal parameters. Biophys J 21:147–160.
Nernst W. [1888] 1979. Zur Kinetik der in Lösung befindli-
chen Körper. [On the kinetics of substances in solution.] 
Z Physik Chem 2:613–622, 634–637. English translation 
in: GR Kepner (ed). 1979. Cell Membrane Permeability and 
Transport, pp. 174–183. Stroudsburg, PA: Dowden, 
Hutchinson & Ross.
Ren D. 2011. Sodium leak channels in neuronal excitability 
and rhythmic behaviors. Neuron 72:899–911.
Seidl AH, Rubel EW, Barría A. 2014. Differential conduction 
velocity regulation in ipsilateral and contralateral collat-
erals innervating brainstem coincidence detector neurons. 
J Neurosci 34:4914–4919.
Stokes DL, Green NM. 2003. Structure and function of the cal-
cium pump. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 32:445–468.
Toyoshima C, Flemming F. 2013. New crystal structures of 
PII-type ATPases: excitement continues. Curr Op Struct 
Biol 23:507–514.


===== Page 8 =====
10
Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential
N
erve cells are able to carry  electrical 
signals over long distances because the 
long-distance signal, the action potential, is 
continually regenerated and thus does not attenuate as 
it moves down the axon. In Chapter 9, we saw how an 
action potential arises from sequential changes in the 
membrane’s permeability to Na+ and K+ ions and how 
the membrane’s passive properties influence the speed 
at which the action potential is conducted. In this 
chapter, we describe in detail the voltage-gated ion 
channels that are critical for generating and propagat-
ing action potentials and consider how these channels 
are responsible for important features of a neuron’s 
electrical excitability.
Action potentials have four properties impor-
tant for neuronal signaling. First, they can be initi-
ated only when the cell membrane voltage reaches 
a threshold. As we saw in Chapter 9, in many nerve 
cells, the membrane behaves as a simple resistor in 
response to small hyperpolarizing or depolarizing 
current steps. The membrane voltage changes in a 
graded manner as a function of the size of the cur-
rent step according to Ohm’s law, ΔV = ΔI · R (in 
terms of conductance, ΔV = ΔI/G). However, as 
the size of the depolarizing current increases, the 
membrane voltage will eventually reach a thresh-
old, typically at around −50 mV, at which an action 
potential can be generated (see Figure 9–2C). Second, 
the action potential is an all-or-none event. The size 
and shape of an action potential initiated by a large 
depolarizing current is the same as that of an action 
potential evoked by a current that just surpasses the 
The Action Potential Is Generated by the Flow of Ions 
Through Voltage-Gated Channels
Sodium and Potassium Currents Through Voltage-Gated 
Channels Are Recorded With the Voltage Clamp
Voltage-Gated Sodium and Potassium Conductances  
Are Calculated From Their Currents
The Action Potential Can Be Reconstructed From the 
Properties of Sodium and Potassium Channels
The Mechanisms of Voltage Gating Have Been Inferred  
From Electrophysiological Measurements
Voltage-Gated Sodium Channels Select for Sodium on the 
Basis of Size, Charge, and Energy of Hydration  
of the Ion
Individual Neurons Have a Rich Variety of  
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels That Expand  
Their Signaling Capabilities
The Diversity of Voltage-Gated Channel Types is 
Generated by Several Genetic Mechanisms
Voltage-Gated Sodium Channels
Voltage-Gated Calcium Channels
Voltage-Gated Potassium Channels
Voltage-Gated Hyperpolarization-Activated Cyclic 
Nucleotide-Gated Channels
Gating of Ion Channels Can Be Controlled by  
Cytoplasmic Calcium
Excitability Properties Vary Between Types of Neurons
Excitability Properties Vary Between Regions  
of the Neuron
Neuronal Excitability Is Plastic
Highlights


===== Page 9 =====
212    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
threshold.1 Third, the action potential is conducted 
without decrement. It has a self-regenerative feature 
that keeps the amplitude constant, even when it is con-
ducted over great distances. Fourth, the action poten-
tial is followed by a refractory period. For a brief time 
after an action potential is generated, the neuron’s abil-
ity to fire a second action potential is suppressed. The 
refractory period limits the frequency at which a nerve 
can fire action potentials, and thus limits the information-
carrying capacity of the axon.
These four properties of the action potential—
initiation threshold, all-or-none amplitude, conduc-
tion without decrement, and refractory period—are 
unusual for biological processes, which typically 
respond in a graded fashion to changes in the envi-
ronment. Biologists were puzzled by these properties 
for almost 100 years after the action potential was first 
recorded in the mid-1800s. Finally, in the late 1940s 
and early 1950s, studies of the membrane properties of 
the giant axon of the squid by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew 
Huxley, and Bernard Katz provided the first quantita-
tive insight into the mechanisms underlying the action 
potential.
The Action Potential Is Generated by the Flow 
of Ions Through Voltage-Gated Channels
An important early insight into how action potentials 
are generated came from an experiment performed by 
Kenneth Cole and Howard Curtis that predated the 
studies by Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz. While record-
ing from the giant axon of the squid, they found that the 
conductance of the membrane increases dramatically 
during the action potential (Figure 10–1). This discov-
ery provided evidence that the action potential results 
from a dramatic increase in the ion permeability of the 
cell membrane. It also raised two central questions: 
Which ions are responsible for the action potential, and 
how is the permeability of the membrane regulated?
Hodgkin and Katz provided a key insight into 
this problem by demonstrating that the amplitude of 
the action potential is reduced when the external Na+ 
Figure 10–1  The action potential results from an increase in 
ion conductance of the axon membrane. This historic record-
ing from an experiment conducted in 1939 by Kenneth Cole 
and Howard Curtis shows the oscilloscope record of an action 
potential superimposed on a simultaneous record of axonal 
membrane conductance.
Action potential
Membrane conductance
1The all-or-none property describes an action potential that is gener-
ated under a specific set of conditions. The size and shape of the 
action potential can be affected by changes in membrane proper-
ties, ion concentrations, temperature, and other variables, as dis-
cussed later in the chapter. The shape can also be affected slightly 
by the current that is used to evoke it, if measured near the point of 
stimulation.
concentration is lowered, indicating that Na+ influx is 
responsible for the rising phase of the action potential. 
They proposed that depolarization of the cell above the 
threshold for an action potential causes a brief increase 
in the cell membrane’s Na+ conductance, during which 
the Na+ conductance overwhelms the K+ conductance 
that predominates in the cell at rest, thereby driving 
the membrane potential towards ENa. Their data also 
suggested that the falling phase of the action potential 
was caused by a later increase in K+ permeability.
Sodium and Potassium Currents Through  
Voltage-Gated Channels Are Recorded  
With the Voltage Clamp
This insight of Hodgkin and Katz raised a further ques-
tion. What mechanism is responsible for regulating the 
changes in the Na+ and K+ permeabilities of the mem-
brane? Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley reasoned that 
the Na+ and K+ permeabilities were regulated directly 
by the membrane voltage. To test this hypothesis, they 
systematically varied the membrane potential in the 
squid giant axon and measured the resulting changes 
in the conductance of voltage-gated Na+ and K+ chan-
nels. To do this, they made use of a new apparatus, the 
voltage clamp, developed by Kenneth Cole.
Prior to the availability of the voltage-clamp tech-
nique, attempts to measure Na+ and K+ conductance 
as a function of membrane potential had been lim-
ited by the strong interdependence of the membrane 
potential and the gating of Na+ and K+ channels. For 
example, if the membrane is depolarized sufficiently 
to open some voltage-gated Na+ channels, the influx 
of Na+ through these channels causes further depolari-
zation. The additional depolarization causes still more 


