===== Page 1 =====
1396    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–2  The discrimination of flutter-vibration fre-
quency was the first perceptual decision studied in the cen-
tral nervous system. A 20-Hz vibratory stimulus is applied to 
the finger on the right hand; following a delay period of several 
seconds, a second vibratory stimulus is applied. The monkey 
indicates whether the second vibration (f2) was at a higher or 
lower frequency than that of the first stimulus (f1) by pushing 
the left or right button with the other hand. The plots show that 
the proportion of trials in which the monkey decided that the 
comparison stimulus was greater than the reference depended 
on the magnitude and sign of the difference. With larger differ-
ences, the monkey almost always chose correctly, but when 
the difference was small, the choices were often incorrect. 
(Adapted from Romo and Salinas 2001.)
about whether the stimulus is present or absent but 
whether the vibration rate is fast or slow. On every trial 
of the experiment, the monkey experienced a reference 
frequency, f1, equal to 20 cycles per second (Hz). The 
pressure cycles are too fast to count; they feel more like 
a buzzing. The reference was then turned off, and after 
a few seconds, a second test stimulus, f2, was applied. 
The frequency of f2 was chosen from a range of values 
from 10 to 30 Hz. The monkey was rewarded for indi-
cating whether the test frequency was higher or lower 
than the f1 reference.
We can represent the process conceptually using the 
same type of signal and noise distributions we drew for 
the detection problem (Figure 56–1D). Here, the “noise-
only” distribution represents a quantity that is sampled 
in association with the 20-Hz reference, whereas the red 
distribution represents a quantity that is sampled in 
association with a test stimulus with a flutter frequency 
10
15
20
25
30
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency of comparison stimulus (Hz)
Base (f1)
Comparison (f2)
Percent
of choices
f2 > f1
500 ms
500 ms
f1=20 Hz
Stimulator
Push buttons
Push
button
greater than 20 Hz. Mountcastle favored the idea that the 
brain obtained two samples of evidence—one accompa-
nying the 20-Hz reference and the second from the test. 
The decision, higher or lower, could arise by evaluating 
the inequality—greater than or less than—or, equiva-
lently, by subtracting the two samples and answering 
based on the sign of the difference. This was a terrific 
insight, but the neural recordings were out of step with 
the theory. Mountcastle’s neural recordings explained 
the monkey’s ability to detect vibratory stimulation as 
a function of intensity and frequency (Chapter 17)—a 
yes/no decision—but they were unable to explain the 
mechanism for the comparison between the two alter-
natives, whether f2 is greater or less than f1.
Two key elements were missing. First, to evaluate f2 
versus f1, the brain needs a representation of frequency. 
Mountcastle found neurons in the somatosensory cortex 
and thalamus with firing rates that were phase-locked 
to frequencies of the flutter, and they could measure the 
reliability of this frequency locking, but they did not 
find neurons that were tuned to particular frequencies 
less than or greater than 20 Hz. Second, both represen-
tations need to be available at the same time in order 
to compare them. However, the neural responses to f1 
lasted only as long as the flutter vibration. Mountcas-
tle failed to observe neural responses that conveyed the 
representation of the reference frequency through the 
delay period up to the time that the test stimulus was 
presented. It was therefore impossible to study the neu-
ral operations corresponding to the decision process, 
which seemed to require some trace of the reference 
stimulus during analysis of the test.
These obstacles were overcome using a simpler 
task design and a different sensory modality. Inspired 
by Mountcastle, William Newsome trained monkeys 
to decide whether a field of dynamic random dots had 
a tendency to move in one direction or its opposite (eg, 
left or right). The random dot motion stimulus is con-
structed such that at one easy extreme all dots share the 
same direction of motion, say to the right. At the other 
easy extreme, all dots move to the left, and in between, 
the direction can be difficult to discern because many 
dots contribute only noise (Figure 56–3A).
Unlike the flutter vibration task, where a decision 
is rendered difficult by making the comparison fre-
quencies more similar, the two directions of motion 
remain fixed and opposite for all levels of difficulty. 
The two directions were rendered less distinct by 
degrading the signal-to-noise ratio of the random dots. 
Each random dot appears only briefly, and then either 
reappears at a random location or at a displacement to 
support a consistent direction and speed. The probabil-
ity of the latter (displacement) determines the motion 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1397
Figure 56–3  In the random dot motion discrimination task, 
the observer decides if the net motion of dots is in one 
direction or its opposite (eg, right or left).
A. The monkey maintains its gaze on a cross while viewing 
the random dot motion display. When the stimulus and fixation 
cross are extinguished, the monkey indicates its decision by 
shifting the gaze to the left or right choice targets and receives 
a reward if the decision is correct.
B. The difficulty of the decision is controlled by the coherence 
of dot motion. Each dot appears for only a few milliseconds at 
a random location and then reappears 40 ms later, either at a 
new random location or at a displacement consistent with a 
chosen speed and direction. The probability that a dot present 
at time t1 undergoes displacement in the same direction at t2 
establishes the motion strength (% coherence). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Britten et al. 1992. Copyright © 1992 
Society for Neuroscience.)
C. The decision is more likely to be correct when the motion is 
stronger.
0
3
6
13
25
50
100
50
100
Motion strength (% coherence)
Percent correct
C
B
A
Motion onset
Fixation
Saccade
0% coherence
50% coherence
100% coherence
strength, which is commonly expressed on a 0 to 100 
scale, termed the percentage coherence. At the most 
difficult extreme, 0% coherence, all dots are plotted at 
random locations in each successive frame, giving the 
appearance of dancing snowflakes with no dominant 
direction. At intermediate levels of difficulty, the danc-
ing snowflakes give rise to a weak sense that the wind 
might be blowing them ever so slightly to the right or 
left. Any one dot is unlikely to be displaced more than 
once, so there is no feature to track.
This simple stimulus was originally developed 
by Anthony Movshon to promote a decision strategy 
that would benefit from integrating visual informa-
tion across its spatial extent and as a function of time. 
Moreover, it satisfied another desideratum: The same 
neurons should inform the decision at all levels of 
difficulty. For a left versus right decision, direction-
selective neurons in the visual cortex that are, say, sen-
sitive to leftward motion emit signals that are relevant 
to the decision at all levels of difficulty. That would not 
be the case if difficulty were controlled by the angu-
lar difference between the two directions. Another 
advantage of this task over the vibration-flutter task 
is that there is only one stimulus presentation. There 
is no need to remember anything between a refer-
ence and a test stimulus. Finally, humans and mon-
keys perform this task at nearly identical levels. They 
answer perfectly for the strong-motion trials and make 
more errors when the strength of motion is reduced  
(Figure 56–3C). This establishes a platform for a quan-
titative reconciliation of decisions and neural activity. 
Is there a way to explain the likelihood that a decision 
will be accurate from measurements of the signal-to-
noise ratio in the appropriate sensory neurons?
Neurons in Sensory Areas of the Cortex 
Supply the Noisy Samples of Evidence to 
Decision-Making
In higher mammals and primates, neurons that 
respond differentially to the direction of motion are 
first encountered in the primary visual cortex (area V1). 
They are a subset of the orientation-tuned simple 


===== Page 3 =====
1398    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
and complex cells discovered by Hubel and Wiesel 
(Chapter 22). These neurons project to a secondary 
visual cortical area, area MT.1
Area MT contains a complete map of the contralat-
eral visual field, and almost all the neurons in area MT 
are direction selective. Neurons with similar direction 
preferences cluster together so that MT contains a map 
of both space and motion direction at each point in the 
visual field. Their receptive fields are larger than those 
of V1 neurons, and some manifest properties that are 
not evident in V1 (eg, pattern motion; Chapter 23), 
but most respond as if they integrate signals from V1 
that share the same direction selectivity over a larger 
patch of the visual field. In Newsome’s experiments, 
the random dot motion stimulus was contained in a 
circular aperture that matched the size of an MT neu-
ron’s receptive field. It was thus possible to measure 
the response of a neuron perfectly situated to convey 
evidence to the decision process on single trials.
It seemed possible that the neurons with receptive 
fields aligned to the random dot motion stimulus and 
a firing preference for one or the other direction under 
consideration might contribute the evidence used to 
make the decision. Indeed, we can begin to under-
stand the monkey’s perception of motion by apply-
ing the same signal-to-noise considerations to the MT 
neural responses. We consider two types of direction-
selective neurons (Figure 56–4). One type responds 
better to rightward motion than to leftward motion, 
and it yields higher firing rates when the rightward 
motion is stronger. It also responds above baseline to 
the 0% coherence stimulus because the random noise 
contains all motion directions including leftward and 
rightward, and it yields lower firing rates (compared 
to 0% coherence) when the leftward motion is stronger 
(Figure 56–4B). The other type of neuron responds well 
to leftward motion. It exhibits the same pattern as the 
right-preferring type, only with the direction prefer-
ences reversed. The neural responses are noisy, so the 
firing rates on any trial or in any epoch may be concep-
tualized as a random draw from one of the distributions 
in Figure 56–4C. These distributions can be interpreted 
in two ways. The two curves might represent the possi-
ble firing rates of a rightward-preferring neuron when 
weak motion is to the right or left, respectively. They 
might also represent the possible firing rates of right- 
and left-preferring neurons, respectively, to the same 
weak rightward stimulus.
Because the responses of the two classes of neurons 
are available at the same time, we are able to character-
ize the evidence as the difference between the firing 
rates of the left- and right-preferring neurons. (The 
brain in fact relies on the difference between the aver-
ages from many left- and many right-preferring neu-
rons.) We refer to such a quantity as a decision variable 
because the decision could be made by applying a cri-
terion to this difference. Here, the criterion would be at 
zero. Thus, if the decision variable is positive, answer 
right; if it is negative, answer left.
Notice that when the stimulus is purely random 
(0% coherence), there is no correct answer. The mon-
key is rewarded randomly by the experimenter on a 
random half of the trials, and the monkey answers 
right and left with about equal probability. This is not 
because the monkey is guessing but because fluctua-
tion in the random dot motion stimulus and the noisy 
firing rates of the right- and left-preferring neurons 
lead to variability in the evidence used to make the 
decision. This makes sense because the right- and left-
preferring neurons respond equivalently to this type of 
stimulus. On some trials, the right-preferring neurons 
respond more than the left-preferring neurons, and the 
brain interprets this as evidence for rightward motion. 
On other trials, the left-preferring neurons respond 
more and the monkey chooses left.
Neuroscientists have been able to use a network 
of small populations of neurons to model the relation 
between the accuracy of an animal’s choice versus 
motion strength, known as the psychometric function. 
The success of such models gives support to the idea 
that the signal and noise properties of cortical neu-
rons can explain the fidelity of a perceptual decision, 
just as Mountcastle had hoped. This achievement was 
possible because of a clever experimental design that 
allowed the same neuron to participate in decisions 
across a wide range of difficulty. But are these neurons 
actually used to make the decision? Do they actually 
supply the noisy evidence that the monkey uses to 
make its decision?
We now know that they do. Because of the colum-
nar organization of direction-selective neurons in area 
MT, it is possible to apply small currents through a 
microelectrode to excite a cluster of neurons sharing the 
same receptive field property. Newsome and colleagues 
placed the electrode in the middle of a cluster of neu-
rons with receptive fields that were exactly aligned to 
the random dot motion stimulus. He reasoned that at 
weak stimulating currents the majority of stimulated 
1The letters MT stand for middle temporal, a sulcus in the species 
of New World monkey in which the area was first discovered. This 
sulcus does not exist in Old World monkeys and humans, but the 
homologous area does, and it retains its original name. Area MT is 
sometimes referred to as area V5 (the fifth visual area) in humans. 
The name is unimportant, but the area is!


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1399
A  Single trial responses from a right-preferring neuron
B  Firing rate depends on motion strength and direction
C  Noisy evidence for left and right are conceptualized as random samples
     from probability distributions
MT
Firing
rate
Motion strength
0
25
50
75
100
Pre-stimulus activity
Right-preferring
neuron
Choose 
right
Choose 
left
Left-preferring
neuron
Firing rate
∆ Firing rate (R–L)
5 spikes/s
5 spikes/s
Strong
motion
Weak
motion
Preferred direction (right)
Nonpreferred direction (left)
Responses to
weak rightward
motion
400 ms
Response of left-preferring
neurons to rightward motion
Response of right-preferring
neurons to rightward motion
Motion
begins
Motion
begins
Receptive
ﬁeld
–30
0
30
Figure 56–4  Neurons in area MT provide noisy  
evidence bearing on the direction of motion.
A. Responses from a right-preferring neuron during 
the discrimination task. The random dot movie is in 
the receptive field of the neuron. The panels in the left 
column of the 2 × 2 panel display show the neuron’s 
responses to motion in its preferred direction, and 
panels in the right column show its responses to the 
nonpreferred direction. The panels in the top row show 
the neuron’s responses to strongly coherent motion, 
and the bottom panels show the responses to weakly 
coherent motion. In each panel, the time of each action 
potential (spike) is represented by a small vertical tick 
mark. Each row of spikes in a panel shows the neu-
ron’s response to the motion stimulus in a single trial. 
(Adapted with permission from Mazurek et al. 2003.)
B. The mean firing rate varies as a function of motion 
strength. The neuron increases its firing rate above 
baseline even in response to the 0% coherence 
stimulus because the dynamic random dots contain all 
directions of motion, including the neuron’s preferred 
direction. The firing rate then increases with stronger 
rightward motion. It decreases, relative to the  
response to 0% coherence, with stronger leftward 
motion. The responses of this right-preferring neuron  
to leftward motion are mirrored by the responses of a 
left-preferring neuron to rightward motion.
C. Probability distributions of the firing rates from 
left-preferring and right-preferring neurons to weak 
rightward motion. The right-preferring neuron tends 
to respond more, but the overlap of the distributions 
shows that it is possible for the left-preferring neuron 
to respond more than the right-preferring neuron on 
any given trial. These same considerations apply to 
the pooled signals from populations of right- and left-
preferring neurons. The plot on the right shows the 
distribution of the difference between firing rates of the 
left-preferring neuron and the right-preferring neuron 
measured in response to the same stimulus over many 
trials. The decision is to choose right if this difference is 
positive and to choose left if it is negative. This rule would 
lead to correct rightward choices on 80% of the trials.


===== Page 5 =====
1400    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–5  Artificial activation of neurons that respond 
preferentially to rightward motion causes a monkey to 
decide that motion is rightward. In the experiment, an elec-
trode is placed in the middle of a patch of neurons in area  
MT that prefer the same direction of motion, say rightward. 
The random dot motion is shown in the receptive field of these 
neurons. A weak alternating current is applied on half of the 
trials during the presentation of the random dots movie. The 
amount of current activates about 200 to 400 neurons within 50 to 
100 μm of the electrode tip. On trials with microstimulation, the 
monkey is more likely to choose the preferred direction of  
the simulated neurons. The effect is most pronounced when the 
decision is more difficult (middle red arrow). (Adapted, with 
permission, from Ditterich, Mazurek, and Shadlen 2003.)
–50
–25
0
25
50
0
25
50
75
100
Percent rightward choices
Motion strength (% coherence)
With
microstimulation
Without
microstimulation
Stronger
leftward
motion
Stronger
rightward
motion
neurons were likely to share the same receptive field 
and the same direction preference. Newsome had the 
monkey decide between this direction and its oppo-
site. For example, if these neurons preferred rightward 
motion, the weak currents caused the monkey to decide 
more often in favor of right (Figure 56–5).
We now refer to such weak stimulation, designed 
to affect a cluster of neurons within a 50- to 100μm 
radius, as microstimulation. Notably, microstimulation 
did not cause a hallucination of visual motion. It biased 
the monkey’s decisions, which were guided mainly by 
the random dot motion stimulus. The monkey did not 
respond when the stimulus was not shown, and micro-
stimulation did not affect the monkey’s decisions when 
the random dots were presented at a location of the 
visual field outside the receptive field of the stimulated 
neurons. The microstimulation exerted its largest effect 
on choices when the motion strength was weakest. The 
stimulated neurons simply added a small amount of 
evidence for rightward motion, which is effectively 
evidence against leftward motion, as discussed below.
The microstimulation experiment shows that the 
direction-selective neurons in area MT contribute 
evidence to the perceptual decision. However, the 
stimulated neurons do not necessarily need to affect 
the decision directly; they only have to participate in 
a neural circuit that lies in a causal chain. In addition, 
many more neurons in MT were not affected by the 
electrical stimulation but nonetheless responded to  
the same random dot patch in the same direction-
selective manner. They are in other columns with 
receptive fields that are not centered on the stimulus 
but overlap it. If the electrode is moved to stimulate 
these neurons, they too cause the monkey to choose the 
preferred direction more often. These findings imply 
that in any one experiment the microstimulation only 
affects a small fraction of the neurons that contribute 
to the decision. Most respond at their usual firing rates 
to the random dot motion. The microstimulation only 
changes the total signal that the brain uses to make its 
decision by a small amount. No wonder the effect is 
only evident when the decision is difficult.
There is an important principle to be learned here. 
Had Newsome used only the easier conditions, the elec-
trical stimulation would have yielded a null effect, and 
thus, the causal relationship between the neural activ-
ity and behavior would not have been established. The 
same pattern of effects has recently been established 
using techniques to turn neurons off. Silencing induces 
a bias in choices against the direction of the silenced 
neurons, but this too is only apparent on trials when 
the motion is difficult. Without evidence for sufficiency 
or necessity, a neuroscientist might conclude that the 
neurons in MT do not cause changes in perceptual deci-
sions. This would be a mistake, notably one that is likely 
to be made in any experiment in which perturbations 
are restricted to a subset of the neurons involved in a 
computation. That is the rule, not the exception, for 
studies of higher cortical functions. It is only mitigated 
by studying behavior in conditions when a small differ-
ence to the total pool of neural signals might make a dif-
ference, as in the difficult (low signal-to-noise) regime 
employed in Newsome’s experiments.
To summarize so far, the perceptual decision arises 
from a simple decision rule: the application of a criterion to 
the noisy evidence supplied by noisy direction-selective 
neurons in the visual cortex. We have characterized the 
noisy evidence as a single number: the difference in the 
mean firing rates from two opposing pools of direction-
selective neurons. This account leaves out two important 
points: The operations that establish the decision variable 
must be carried out by neurons that receive information 
directly or indirectly from area MT, and these operations 
take time. As we will see, time is the key to understanding 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1401
decision-making, and it is also the factor that relates 
decision-making to higher cognitive function.
Accumulation of Evidence to a Threshold 
Explains the Speed Versus Accuracy Trade-Off
The decision rule considered so far is appropriate if the 
brain received only a brief snapshot of the motion, say 
for a tenth of a second. However, decision-making nor-
mally takes some time, so that when the viewing dura-
tion is longer, decisions tend to be more accurate. In 
fact, the strength of motion that is required to support 
75% accuracy, termed the sensory threshold, decreases 
as a function of viewing duration. With more time, 
the decision-maker can achieve this level of accuracy 
with a weaker motion strength. Put another way, the 
sensitivity to weak motion improves as a function of 
viewing duration, t. Indeed, the sensitivity improves 
as a function of the square root of time ( t), which is 
the rate of improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio 
that one obtains by accumulating or averaging. The 
suggestion then is that the difference in firing rates of 
left- and right-preferring direction-selective neurons 
supplies the momentary evidence to another process 
that accumulates this noisy evidence as a function of 
time—in this case, two processes that accumulate evi-
dence for left and right, respectively.
The accumulation of noisy evidence follows a path 
comprising random steps in both the positive and neg-
ative direction on top of a constant bias determined by 
the coherence and direction of the moving dots. This is 
termed a biased random walk or drift plus diffusion pro-
cess (Figure 56–6). Because evidence for left is evidence 
against right (and vice versa), the two random walks 
are anticorrelated, albeit imperfectly so. The accumula-
tions evolve with time and continue to do so until the 
stimulus is turned off or until one of the accumulations 
reaches an upper stopping bound, which determines 
the answer, left or right. Even the 0% coherence (pure 
noise) stimulus will reach a stopping bound eventu-
ally, but it is equally likely that the left or right accumu-
lation will do so. When the random dot motion favors 
one direction, it is more likely that the corresponding 
accumulation determines the choice, and increasingly 
so with stronger motion. Such accumulations of noisy 
evidence are dynamic versions of the decision variable. 
The decision rule remains similar: Choose right if there 
is more evidence for right than left, and vice versa. The 
stopping bounds also explain another important fea-
ture of the decision—the time it takes to make it.
This simple idea thus explains the observed trade-
off between the speed and accuracy of a decision. It 
specifies the exact relationship between the probability 
that each motion strength will lead to a correct choice 
and the amount of time that is taken, on average, to 
respond, termed the reaction time (Figure 56–6C). If the 
stopping bounds are close to the starting point of the 
accumulation, the decision will be based on very little 
evidence—fast but error prone. If the stopping bounds 
are further from the starting point, more accumulated 
evidence is needed to stop—slower but more likely to 
be correct. If the flow of information is cut off before 
either bound has been reached, the decision-maker 
may feel she has not yet reached an answer, but may 
nonetheless answer based on the accumulation that is 
closer to its stopping bound. This mechanism, termed 
bounded evidence accumulation, explains the effect of task 
difficulty on choice accuracy and the associated reac-
tion times on a variety of perceptual tasks. It explains 
the degree of confidence that a decision-maker has in 
a decision and why such confidence depends on both 
the amount of evidence and deliberation time. It also 
explains the rate of improvement in accuracy when 
the experimenter controls viewing duration by t, men-
tioned above, and it explains why this improvement 
saturates with longer viewing durations. The brain 
stops acquiring additional evidence when the accumu-
lated evidence reaches a stopping bound.
Neurons in the Parietal and Prefrontal Association 
Cortex Represent a Decision Variable
Neurons in several parts of the brain, including the 
parietal and prefrontal cortices, change their firing rates 
to represent the accumulation of evidence—in the case 
of visual motion from area MT—bearing on the direc-
tion decision. The neurons that represent the accumu-
lation differ from sensory neurons in two important 
ways. First, they can continue to respond for several 
seconds after a sensory stimulus has come and gone. 
Moreover, they seem to be capable of holding a firing 
rate at one level and then increasing or decreasing that 
level when new information arrives. This is exactly the 
type of feature one would like to see in a neuron that 
represents the accumulation of evidence. Second, such 
neurons tend to be associated with circuits that control 
the behavioral response that the monkey has learned 
to use to communicate its decision. Such neurons were 
first identified for their capacity to maintain persistent 
activity in the absence of a sensory stimulus or ongo-
ing action. They were therefore thought to play a role 
in working (short-term) memory, planning an action, 
or maintaining attention at a location in the visual field 
(Figure 56–7).


===== Page 7 =====
1402    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 56–6  The speed and accuracy of a decision are 
explained by a process of evidence accumulation.
A. A decision and the time it takes to reach it are both 
explained by the accumulation of evidence, as a function of 
time, until there is sufficient evidence to terminate the deci-
sion in favor of one or the other choice. The cartoon illustrates 
a decision for rightward motion because the “choose right” 
accumulation was the first to reach the stopping bound (thick 
gray lines). Because the evidence is noisy, the accumulations 
resemble biased random walks, also known as drift-diffusion 
processes. For the decision between left and right motion, 
there are two accumulations. The one shown on the left accu-
mulates evidence for left and against right. The one shown on 
the right accumulates evidence for right and against left. For 
this process, the bias (or drift rate) is the mean of the evidence 
samples depicted by the distribution of differences (right minus 
left) in Figure 56–4C. The process is a random walk because 
even if the motion is rightward, left-preferring neurons in area 
MT might respond more than right-preferring neurons at any 
instant. The two processes tend to evolve in an anticorrelated 
fashion because the random dot motion stimulus supplies the 
same noisy samples of evidence to both accumulations via 
the visual cortex. They are not perfectly anticorrelated because 
right- and left-preferring neurons introduce additional noise. 
Were the anticorrelation perfect (eg, if all the noise comes from 
the motion stimulus), the two processes could be represented 
by one accumulation that terminates at either an upper or lower 
stopping bound.
B. In a choice-reaction time task, the decision-maker reports 
a decision whenever ready with an answer. In this case, the 
monkey signals its choice by the direction of a saccade.
C. Graphs show a typical data set. In addition to the  
proportion of correct choices, the reaction time (RT), the time 
from onset of motion to the beginning of the eye movement 
response, also depends on the strength of motion. The total 
length of RT is the time to reach a decision, explained by the 
process in A, plus the time required to convey sensory  
information from the stimulus to the neurons that compute 
the decision and the time required to convert the decision to 
a motor response. (Adapted, with permission, from Gold and 
Shadlen 2007.)
0
2.5
5
10
20
40
400
500
600
700
800
900
Mean RT (ms)
Motion strength (% coherence)
50
75
100
Percent correct
Behavior
B
Saccade
Motion
onset
Targets
appear
Fixation
A
Choose RIGHT
Accumulated
evidence for
RIGHT 
Choose LEFT 
Accumulated
evidence for
LEFT   
C


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 56 / Decision-Making and Consciousness    1403
It seemed possible that neurons whose activity rep-
resents a plan to act might also represent the formation 
of that plan during decision making. For example, if a 
monkey has learned to answer “rightward” by moving 
its hand to a target on a touch screen, the neurons of 
interest will tend to be active in association with that 
movement and they will decrease their activity if the 
monkey plans to reach to the opposite “leftward” tar-
get. Those neurons project to brain areas that command 
reach movements. If the monkey has learned to answer 
with an eye movement, the neurons that help to plan 
eye movements to the choice-target represent the deci-
sion variable. Such neurons have been studied exten-
sively in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP). Indeed, 
these LIP neurons provided neuroscientists with the 
first view of a decision process as it unfolds in time.
Neurons that represent the evolving decision 
increase their firing rates gradually as the evidence 
mounts for one of the choices, and they decrease 
gradually when the evidence favors the other option 
(Figure 56–8). Their firing rates, plotted as a function 
of time, approximate a ramp: a baseline rate plus a 
constant multiplied by time, where the constant is pro-
portional to the strength of the momentary evidence 
(eg, the average difference in the firing rates of the 
right- and left-preferring MT neurons). This captures 
the average firing rates across many trials, but it leaves 
out the critical point that the decision variable is an 
accumulation of both signal and noise. The signal is 
the mean of the difference. The noise is the variance—
that is, the spread around the mean. The accumulated 
noise is obscured by the averaging in Figure 56–8, but 
it is apparent in the variability of firing rates across 
multiple decisions.
The responses start at a common level and evolve 
as the brain acquires more and more information, until 
something stops the process. A neural signature of the 
stopping rule is apparent in the responses aligned to 
the eye movement itself. The firing rate appears to 
reach the same level on trials that take as little as a 
few tenths of a second and trials that take as much as 
a full second. The level is achieved less than a tenth 
of a second before the eyes start to move. Of course, 
it takes less time to achieve this level if the firing rates 
are increasing at a rapid pace (eg, solid red trace in 
Figure 56–8). This suggests that the brain terminates 
the decision when the representation of accumulated 
evidence reaches a threshold. That is exactly what the 
bounded accumulation framework predicts. There 
appears to be no common level of activity in neurons 
that signal a rightward movement when the monkeys 
choose the opposite direction. Instead, another popu-
lation of neurons that accumulate evidence for left (and 
against right) reaches their threshold and terminates the 
decision process when the monkey answers left (Figure 
56–6A). The neurons that favor the right choice simply 
stop accumulating evidence at a time determined by the 
left choice neurons. This explains why the downward 
traces in Figure 56–8 do not reach a common level of 
activity around the time of the eye movement. It is not 
yet known where in the brain the threshold operation is 
applied. Computational theorists have proposed that a 
likely candidate is the striatum, a brain area involved in 
selecting between competing actions (Chapter 38), but 
there are many other candidate structures, including 
movement areas of the cortex and brainstem.
Area LIP is not the only part of the brain that repre-
sents the accumulation of evidence toward a decision, 
and LIP itself is not limited to making decisions about 
random dot motion. Many neurons in the parietal and 
prefrontal cortex exhibit persistent firing. In fact, the 
first brain areas shown to exhibit this type of activity 
were in the frontal lobe, rostral to the primary motor 
cortex, and some neurons with this property were 
found in the motor cortex itself. The persistent activ-
ity was thought to represent working memory for a 
location in space or a rule, category, or plan of action, 
as discussed in Chapter 52. But these neurons are also 
capable of representing graded levels of activity, sug-
gesting a capacity to represent more analog quantities, 
like an evolving decision variable, the expected value 
of making an action, or working memory of a sensory 
quality, as we next consider.
Twenty years after Mountcastle published his 
studies of flutter-vibration discrimination, his stu-
dent Ranulfo Romo rejuvenated this line of research 
by focusing on neurons in the prefrontal cortex, which 
had the kind of persistent activity we have been dis-
cussing. Romo modified the task. The monkeys were 
still presented with two vibrating stimuli, separated by 
a delay, and were required to decide whether the vibra-
tion frequency of the second stimulus (f2) was greater 
or less than the vibration frequency of the first stimu-
lus (f1). However, instead of using the same 20-Hz ref-
erence stimulus on all trials, the flutter frequency was 
varied across trials. He found that many neurons in the 
prefrontal cortex respond in a graded and persistent 
manner to the frequency of the first flutter-vibration 
stimulus during the delay period while the monkey 
awaited the second stimulus. Some neurons increased 
their firing rate as a function of the vibration frequency 
of f1, while others were more active with lower fre-
quencies. These persistent neural responses were not 
observed by Mountcastle in his original studies. There 
is evidence that a decision variable is constructed in 
the ventral premotor cortex, where neurons respond 


===== Page 9 =====
1404    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
A  Lateral intraparietal area
C  Anterior intraparietal area
B  Medial intraparietal area
Receptive ﬁeld 
characteristics
Attention
sensitive,
preparation
to look
Eye movement
after delay
Eye movement
after delay
Retina-centered,
preparation
to reach
Object-speciﬁc
viewing, grasping
AIP
MIP
LIP
Other 
object
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Attend
Attend
Attend
Attend
See
Grasp
Grasp
Grasp
See
See
S
S
S
S
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
E
S
G
G
S
S
G
1 s
E
to the difference, f2 – f1. This is challenging to study 
because the decision variable does not evolve over a 
long time scale. There is no need to acquire many sam-
ples of evidence. All that is needed is an estimate of f2 
and the application of a threshold. The flutter-vibration 
task complements the motion decision task by dem-
onstrating the diverse functions of persistent activity. 
In the motion task, the persistence supports the com-
putation of the decision variable—the accumulated 
evidence bearing on the decision alternatives. In the 
flutter-vibration task, the persistent activity represents 
a sensory quality—the frequency of the reference 
stimulus—through a delay period.
Perceptual Decision-Making Is a Model for 
Reasoning From Samples of Evidence
Most of the decisions animals and humans make 
are not about weak or noisy sensory stimuli. They 
are about activities, purchases, propositions, and 
menu items. They are informed by knowledge and 


