===== Page 1 =====
892    Part V / Movement
Figure 36–7  Postural responses can be 
learned and retained with practice.
A. Displacement of body center mass 
(CoM, gold oscillation) in response to 
forward and backward platform oscilla-
tions of varying amplitudes (gray) as a 
healthy subject learns to reduce postural 
instability.
B. Displacement of the body CoM by 
forward–backward surface oscillations is 
reduced across training sessions on  
day 1, and this improvement is retained 
on day 2 in healthy control subjects.  
People with multiple sclerosis also learn 
to reduce CoM displacements but do not 
retain this improvement the next day. 
The mean and standard error of group 
changes in gain (CoM/surface displace-
ment) are compared. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Gera et al. 2016.)
learning. For example, when subjects practice stand-
ing on an oscillating surface, they gradually learn to 
decrease the extent of the displacement of their center 
of mass, and much of this improvement is retained the 
next day (Figure 36–7). Patients with neurological dis-
orders, such as multiple sclerosis or Parkinson disease, 
who have significantly impaired postural responses 
can often learn to improve their postural control with 
practice, although they may need more practice than 
normal to retain the improvements (Figure 36–7).
Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for 
Voluntary Movement
Voluntary movements can also destabilize postural 
orientation and equilibrium. For example, rapidly lift-
ing the arms forward while standing produces forces 
that extend the hips, flex the knees, and dorsiflex the 
ankles, moving the body’s center of mass forward 
relative to the feet. The nervous system has advance 
knowledge of the effects of voluntary movement on 
postural alignment and stability and activates antici-
patory postural adjustments, often in advance of the 
primary movement (Figure 36–8A).
Anticipatory postural adjustments are specific 
to biomechanical conditions. When a freely standing 
subject rapidly pulls on a handle fixed to the wall, the 
leg muscles (gastrocnemius and hamstrings) are acti-
vated before the arm muscles (Figure 36–8B). When the 
0.04
Body CoM
Platform
5
10
15
Time (s)
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
15
Multiple 
sclerosis 
Control 
Training
(day 1) 
Retention
(day 2)
CoM / platform displacement
Displacement
A
B
Backward
Forward
subject performs the same pull while his shoulders are 
propped against a rigid bar, no anticipatory leg muscle 
activity occurs because the nervous system relies on 
the support of the bar to prevent the body from mov-
ing forward. When the handle is pulled in response to 
an external cue, the arm muscles are activated faster in 
the supported condition than in the freestanding con-
dition. Thus, voluntary arm muscle activation is nor-
mally delayed when the task requires active postural 
stability.
Another common preparatory postural adjustment 
occurs when one begins to walk. The center of mass 
is accelerated forward and laterally by the unweight-
ing of one leg. This postural adjustment appears to be 
independent of the stepping program that underlies 
ongoing locomotion (Chapter 33). Similarly, a forward 
shift of the center of mass precedes the act of standing 
on the toes. A subject is unable to remain standing on 
his toes if he simply activates the calf muscles without 
moving his center of mass forward; he rises onto his 
toes only momentarily before gravity restores a flat-
footed stance. Moving the center of mass forward over 
the toes before activating the calf muscles aligns it over 
the anticipated base of support and thus stabilizes the 
toe stance.
Postural equilibrium during voluntary movement 
requires control not only of the position and motion 
of the body’s center of mass but also of the angu-
lar momentum about the center of mass. A diver can 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    893
0
–0.2
0.4
0.2
100
50
0
0
–50
–100
0
1.0
–1.0
0.5
–0.5
5%
95% MPF
95%
5% MPF
A  Ankle force precedes pulling force during 
 
voluntary arm pull
B  Postural muscles are recruited only when needed
Unsupported stance
Supported stance
BIC
GAS
HAM
Time (s)
Time (s)
Max. pulling force (%)
Ankle torque (nm)
BIC
GAS
HAM
GAS
HAM
BIC
BIC
C  Center of mass position is controlled during 
 
walking by foot placement 
Left toe off 
(step 1)
Left heel down 
(step 3)
Right toe off 
(step 2)
Right heel down 
(step 4)
CoM at time of:
Path of 
the CoM
Foot placement
during stepping
1
2
3
4
Direction of
progression
(increasing time)
Single
Single
Limb
support
Double
Double
Rigid support
GAS
HAM
Figure 36–8  Anticipatory postural adjustments precede  
voluntary movement.
A. The postural component of a voluntary arm pull increases in 
amplitude and lead time as the pulling force increases. In this 
experiment, subjects were asked to pull on a handle attached to 
the wall by a wire. Subjects stood on a force plate and, at a signal, 
pulled rapidly on the handle to reach a specified peak force varying 
between 5% and 95% of maximum pulling force. Each pull was 
preceded by leg muscle activation that produced a rotational force, 
or torque, about the ankle joints. The larger the pulling force, the 
larger and earlier was the ankle torque. Traces are aligned at the 
onset of the pulling force on the handle at time zero. (Abbreviation: 
MPF, maximum pulling force.) (Adapted, with permission, from Lee, 
Michaels, and Pai 1990.)
B. Postural adjustments accompany voluntary movement only when 
needed. As in part A, subjects were asked to pull on a handle fixed 
to a wall. Electromyogram traces are aligned at time zero, the onset 
of activity in the arm muscle (biceps brachii, BIC). During unsup-
ported stance, the leg muscles—hamstrings (HAM) and gastroc-
nemius (GAS)—are activated prior to the arm muscle to prevent 
the body from rotating forward during the arm pull. The red arrow 
shows the onset of leg gastrocnemius activation, the gray arrow 
that of the arm biceps brachii. When the subject was supported by a 
rigid bar at the shoulder, the anticipatory leg muscle activity was not 
necessary because the body could not rotate forward. Arm activa-
tion was earlier when anticipatory postural muscle activity was not 
needed. Shaded areas indicate anticipatory postural responses (red) 
and the initial arm muscle activation (brown). (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Cordo and Nashner 1982.)
C. During walking, the trajectory of the center of mass (CoM) is 
controlled by foot placement. The body’s center of mass is between 
the feet, moving forward and from side to side as the subject walks 
forward. When the body is supported by only one leg (single sup-
port phase), the CoM is outside the base of support and moves 
toward the lifting limb. People do not fall while walking because the 
placement of the foot on the next step decelerates the CoM and 
propels it back toward the midline. (Adapted from MacKinnon and 
Winter 1993.)


===== Page 3 =====
894    Part V / Movement
perform elaborate rolls and twists of the body about 
the center of mass while airborne, although the trajec-
tory of his center of mass is fixed once he leaves the 
board. During voluntary movements, postural adjust-
ments control the body’s angular momentum by antic-
ipating rotational forces.
Posture Control Is Integrated With Locomotion
During walking and running, the body is in a constant 
state of falling as the center of mass moves forward 
and laterally toward the leg that is in the swing phase 
(Figure 36–8C). During walking, the center of mass is 
within the base of support only when both feet are on 
the ground, the double stance phase, which is only 
one-third of a gait cycle. When one foot is supporting 
the body, the center of mass moves forward in front of 
the foot, always medial to the base of support.
Falling is prevented during walking and running 
by moving the base of support forward and laterally 
under the falling center of mass. Postural equilibrium 
during gait relies on the placement of each step to con-
trol the speed and trajectory of the center of mass. The 
nervous system plans foot placement several steps in 
advance using visual information about the terrain 
and surrounding environment.
The main postural challenge during walking is con-
trolling the center of mass of the upper body over the 
moving legs, especially in the lateral direction. Exces-
sive lateral displacement of the trunk and excessive 
lateral foot placement variability are signs of postural 
instability during locomotion. Patients with abnormal 
postural stability during gait may nevertheless exhibit 
normal automatic and anticipatory postural adjust-
ments, postural sway in stance under different sensory 
conditions, and orientation to vertical, suggesting that 
postural control and gait have different nervous sys-
tem circuits.
Somatosensory, Vestibular, and Visual 
Information Must Be Integrated and 
Interpreted to Maintain Posture
Because information about motion from any one sensory 
system may be ambiguous, multiple modalities must 
be integrated in postural centers to determine what 
orientation and motion of the body are appropriate. The 
influence of any one modality on the postural control 
system varies according to the task and biomechanical 
conditions.
According to prevailing theory, sensory modalities 
are integrated to form an internal representation of the 
body housed within the parietal cortex that the nerv-
ous system uses to plan and execute motor behaviors. 
Over time, this internal representation must adapt to 
changes associated with early development, aging, 
and injury.
Somatosensory Signals Are Important for Timing 
and Direction of Automatic Postural Responses
Many types of somatosensory fibers trigger and shape 
the automatic postural response. The largest fibers, 
those in group I (12–20 μm in diameter), appear to be 
essential for normal response latencies. The longer 
latency, slower rise time, and lower amplitude of the 
EMG response following destruction of the group I fibers 
reflect a loss of acceleration information encoded by 
muscle spindle primary receptors (Figure 36–9A). The 
largest and most rapidly conducting sensory fibers are 
the Ia afferents from muscle spindles and Ib afferents 
from Golgi tendon organs, as well as some fibers from 
cutaneous mechanoreceptors (Chapter 18). Group I 
fibers provide rapid information about the biomechan-
ics of the body including responses to muscle stretch, 
muscle force, and directionally specific pressure on 
the foot soles. However, group II fibers from muscle 
spindles and cutaneous receptors may also play a role 
in shaping automatic postural responses. Although 
they may be too slow to generate the earliest part of 
the response, they likely encode center of mass veloc-
ity and position.
Both proprioceptive and cutaneous inputs pro-
vide cues about postural orientation. During upright 
stance, for example, muscles lengthen and shorten as 
the body sways under the force of gravity, generating 
proprioceptive signals related to load, muscle length, 
and velocity of stretch. Joint receptors may detect com-
pressive forces on the joints, whereas cutaneous recep-
tors in the sole of the foot respond to motion of the 
center of pressure and to changes in ground reaction 
force angle as the body sways. Pressure receptors near 
the kidneys are sensitive to gravity (somatic gravicep-
tion) and are used by the nervous system to help detect 
upright or tilted postures. All of these signals contrib-
ute to the neural map of the position of body segments 
with respect to each other and the platform surface and 
may contribute to the neural computation of center of 
mass motion.
The large-diameter, fast somatosensory fibers 
from muscle spindles are critical for maintaining bal-
ance during stance. When these axons die, as occurs 
in some forms of peripheral neuropathy, automatic 
postural responses to movement of a platform are 
delayed, retarding the ground reaction force. As a 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    895
A  Delay in postural response
B  Delay in development of force at the ground and
    return of center of mass 
0
200
400
600
800
1000 ms
–200
2 cm
8 cm/s
1 N
Platform
Position
Acceleration
CoM
Velocity
Position
Control
Large-diameter 
afferents destroyed
GRFh
Return of CoM
to origin
4 cm
0.2 g
Control
1 mV
Gluteus medius EMG
0
200
400 ms
Platform
position
EMG onset
EMG
EMG
Onset of 
corrective 
force
Peak displacement of CoM
Large-diameter 
afferents
destroyed
Large-diameter afferents
Figure 36–9  (Left) Loss of large-diameter somatosensory 
fibers delays automatic postural responses. Electromyo-
grams (EMGs) of postural responses to horizontal motion of 
a moveable platform were recorded in a cat before and after 
destruction of the large-diameter (group I) somatosensory 
fibers throughout the body by vitamin B6 intoxication. Motor 
neurons and muscle strength are not affected by the loss of the 
somatosensory fibers, but afferent information about muscle 
length and force is diminished. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from J. Macpherson.)
A. The postural response in the gluteus medius evoked by hori-
zontal motion of the support platform is significantly delayed 
after destruction of group I fibers. This delay of approximately 
20 ms induces ataxia and difficulty in maintaining balance.
B. Destruction of group I fibers delays activation of the hind 
limb. This delay slows the restoration of the center of mass 
(CoM) and the recovery of balance following platform displace-
ment. The delay in onset of the horizontal component of the 
ground reaction force (GRFh) results in a greater peak displace-
ment of the CoM and a delay in its return to its origin relative to 
the paws.
result, the center of mass moves faster and farther from 
the initial position and takes longer to return (Figure 
36–9). Because it is more likely that the center of mass 
will move outside the base of support, balance is pre-
carious and a fall may occur. Accordingly, individu-
als with large-fiber peripheral neuropathy in the legs 
experience ataxia and difficulties with balance.
Vestibular Information Is Important for Balance on 
Unstable Surfaces and During Head Movements
The otolithic organs of the vestibular apparatus provide 
information about the direction of gravity, whereas the 
semicircular canals measure the velocity of head rota-
tion (Chapter 27). Vestibular information thus informs 
the nervous system about how much the body is tilted 
with respect to gravity as well as whether it is swaying 
forward, backward, or sideways.
Somatosensory and vestibular information about 
the gravitational angle of the body is combined to ori-
ent the body with respect to gravity and other inertial 
forces. To maintain balance while riding a bike in a cir-
cular path at high speed, for example, the body and 
bike must be oriented with respect to a combination 
of gravitational and centripetal forces (Figure 36–10A).
Unlike somatosensory inputs, vestibular signals 
are not essential for the normal timing of balance reac-
tions. Instead, they influence the directional tuning of a 
postural response by providing information about the 
orientation of the body relative to gravity. In humans 
and experimental animals lacking functional vestibu-
lar afferent pathways, the postural response to angular 
motion or tilt of the support surface is opposite to the 


===== Page 5 =====
896    Part V / Movement
A  Orienting to gravito-inertial force
B  Orienting to rotating visual ﬁeld
Figure 36–10  The postural system orients the body to  
various external reference frames.
A. When traveling at high speed along a curved path, a cyclist 
orients to the gravito-inertial force (angle A), the vector sum of 
the force caused by gravity and the centripetal force caused 
by acceleration along the curved path. (Used, with permission, 
from Joseph Daniel, Story Arts Media, LLC. Previously  
published in McMahon and Bonner 1983.)
B. The postural system can interpret rightward rotation of 
objects occupying a large region of the visual field as the body 
tilting to the left. In compensation for this illusion of motion, the 
subject tilts to the right, adopting a new postural vertical orien-
tation that is driven by the visual system. The red dashed line 
indicates gravitational vertical. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Brandt, Paulus, and Straube 1986.)
normal response. Rather than resisting the tilt, subjects 
lacking vestibular signals do the opposite and accen-
tuate the tilt through their own muscular activity. In 
contrast, the response to horizontal translation motion 
of a platform has the appropriate directional tuning 
and latency, even in the acute stage prior to vestibular 
compensation.
Why does the absence of vestibular signals cause 
difficulty with tilt but not with linear motion? The 
answer lies in how the nervous system determines 
the direction of vertical. Gravity is the main force that 
causes the body to fall. As the support surface tilts, 
healthy subjects orient to gravity using vestibular 
information to remain upright. In contrast, subjects 
without vestibular function use somatosensory inputs 
to orient themselves to the support surface and conse-
quently fall downhill as the surface tilts. During linear 
motion, however, gravitational and surface vertical 
are collinear, and somatosensory signals are sufficient 
to compute the correct postural response. Although 
visual inputs also provide a vertical reference, visual 
processing is too slow to participate in the automatic 
postural response to rapid tilt, especially soon after the 
loss of vestibular function.
Without vestibular information, the response to 
linear motion of the support surface is larger than nor-
mal (hypermetria), leading to overbalancing and insta-
bility. Hypermetria is a major cause of ataxia when 
vestibular information is lost. Vestibular hypermetria 
may result from reduced cerebellar inhibition of the 
motor system, for the loss of vestibular inputs reduces 
the drive to the inhibitory Purkinje cells.
Humans and cats are quite ataxic immediately 
after loss of the vestibular apparatus. The head and 
trunk show marked instability, stance and gait are 
broad-based, and walking follows a weaving path 
with frequent falling. Instability is especially great on 
turning the head, probably because trunk motion can-
not be distinguished from head motion using soma-
tosensory information alone. Cats and humans lacking 
vestibular inputs produce motor output that results in 
them actively pushing themselves toward the side of 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    897
a voluntary head turn, likely because somatosensory 
inputs that encode trunk and head motion are mis-
interpreted in the absence of vestibular inputs. The 
postural system erroneously senses that the body is 
falling to the side away from the head tilt and gener-
ates a response in the opposite direction, resulting in 
imbalance.
Immediately following vestibular loss, neck 
muscles are abnormally activated during ordinary 
movements and often the head and trunk are moved 
together as a unit. After several months, routine move-
ment becomes more normal through vestibular com-
pensation, which may involve greater reliance on the 
remaining sensory information. However, more chal-
lenging tasks are hampered by a residual hypermetria, 
stiffness in head–trunk control, and instability, espe-
cially when visual and somatosensory information is 
unavailable for postural orientation. Vestibular infor-
mation is critical for balance when visual information 
is reduced and the support surface is not stable, for 
example, at night on a sandy beach or on a boat deck.
Visual Inputs Provide the Postural System With 
Orientation and Motion Information
Vision reduces body sway when standing still and pro-
vides stabilizing cues, especially when a new balanc-
ing task is attempted or balance is precarious. Skaters 
and dancers maintain stability while spinning by fix-
ing their gaze on a point in the visual field. However, 
visual processing is too slow to significantly affect the 
postural response to a sudden and unexpected distur-
bance of balance. Vision does play an important role 
in anticipatory postural adjustments during voluntary 
movements, such as planning where to place the feet 
when walking over obstacles.
Vision can have a powerful influence on postural 
orientation, evident when watching a movie scene 
filmed from the perspective of a moving viewer and 
projected on a large screen. Simulated rides in a roller 
coaster or airplane can induce strong sensations of 
motion along with activation of postural muscles. An 
illusion of movement is induced when sufficiently 
large regions of the visual field are stimulated, as when 
a large disk in front of a standing subject is rotated. 
The subject responds to this illusion by tilting his body; 
clockwise rotation of the visual field is interpreted by 
the postural system as the body falling to the left, to 
which the subject compensates by leaning to the right 
(Figure 36–10B). The rate and direction of optic flow—
the flow of images across the retina as people move 
about—provide clues about body orientation and 
movement.
Information From a Single Sensory Modality Can 
Be Ambiguous
Any one sensory modality alone may provide ambigu-
ous information about postural orientation and body 
motion. The visual system, for example, cannot dis-
tinguish self-motion from object motion. We have all 
experienced the fleeting sensation while sitting in a 
stationary vehicle of not knowing whether we are 
moving or the adjacent vehicle is moving.
Vestibular information can also be ambiguous for 
two reasons. First, vestibular receptors are located in the 
head and therefore provide information about accelera-
tion of the head but not about the rest of the body. The 
postural control system cannot use vestibular informa-
tion alone to distinguish between the head tilting on 
a stationary trunk and the whole body tilting by rota-
tion at the ankles, both of which activate the semicir-
cular canals and otolith organs. Additional information 
from somatosensory receptors is required to resolve this 
ambiguity. The otolith organs also cannot distinguish 
between acceleration owing to gravity and linear accel-
eration of the head. Tilting to the left, for example, can 
produce the same otolithic stimulation as acceleration of 
the body to the right (Figure 36–11).
Studies suggest that there are neural circuits that 
can disambiguate the head-tilt component of a lin-
ear acceleration by using a combination of canal and 
otolith inputs. Output from this circuit may allow the 
postural system to determine the orientation of grav-
ity relative to the head regardless of head position and 
motion. The distinction between tilt and linear motion 
is especially important while standing on an unstable 
or a tilting surface.
Somatosensory inputs may also provide ambigu-
ous information about body orientation and motion. 
When we stand upright, mechanoreceptors in the soles 
of our feet and proprioceptors in muscles and joints 
signal the motion of our body relative to the support 
surface. But somatosensory inputs alone cannot distin-
guish between body and surface motion, for example, 
whether ankle flexion stems from forward body sway 
or tilting of the surface. Our common experience is that 
the ground beneath us is stable and that somatosen-
sory inputs reflect movements of the body’s center of 
mass as we sway. But surfaces may move relative to 
the earth, such as a boat’s deck, or may be pliant under 
our weight, like a soft or spongy surface. Therefore, 
somatosensory information must be integrated with 
vestibular and visual inputs to give the nervous sys-
tem an accurate picture of the stability and inclination 
of the support surface and of our body’s relationship 
to earth vertical.


===== Page 7 =====
898    Part V / Movement
Figure 36–11  Vestibular inputs regarding body posture and 
motion can be ambiguous.  The postural system cannot dis-
tinguish between tilt and linear acceleration of the body based 
on otolith inputs alone. The mechanoreceptors of the vestibular 
system are hair bundles that bend in response to shearing 
forces, thus changing the firing rate of the tonically active sen-
sory afferents. The same shearing force can result from tilting 
of the head (left), which exposes the hair cells to a portion of 
the acceleration (a) owing to gravity (Fg), or from horizontal  
linear acceleration of the body (right).
Subject tilts head left
Increased ﬁring of afferents
Subject is moved right
Increased ﬁring 
of afferents
Fg
a
a
The Postural Control System Uses a Body Schema 
That Incorporates Internal Models for Balance
Because of the mechanical complexity of the body, 
with its many skeletal segments and muscles, the nerv-
ous system requires a detailed representation of the 
body and its interaction with the environment. To exe-
cute the simple movement of raising your hand and 
touching your nose with your index finger while your 
eyes are closed, your nervous system must know the 
characteristics (length, mass, and connections) of each 
segment of the arm, the shoulder, and head as well as 
the orientation of your arm with respect to the gravity 
vector and your nose. Thus, information from multiple 
sensory systems is integrated into a central representa-
tion of the body, often called the body schema.
The body schema for postural control, as developed 
by Viktor Gurfinkel, is not simply a sensory map like 
the somatotopic representation of the skin in primary 
sensory cortex. Instead, it incorporates internal models 
of the body’s relationship with the environment. The 
body schema is used to compute appropriate anticipa-
tory and automatic postural reactions to maintain bal-
ance and postural orientation. A simplified example of 
such an internal model is one in which the body is rep-
resented as a single segment hinged at the foot (Figure 
36–12A). The internal model generates an estimate of 
the orientation of the foot in space, which also serves 
as an estimate of the orientation of the support surface, 
a variable that cannot be directly sensed.
Henry Head, a neurologist working in the early 
part of the 20th century, described the body schema 
as a dynamic system in which both spatial and tem-
poral features are continually updated, a concept that 
remains current. To allow adequate planning of move-
ment strategies, the body schema must incorporate not 
only the relationship of body segments to space and to 
each other but also the mass and inertia of each seg-
ment and an estimate of the external forces acting on 
the body including gravity.
The body schema integrates sensory information 
from the somatosensory, vestibular, and visual systems 
to orient the body to vertical. Even in the dark, peo-
ple can accurately reorient a projected line to a vertical 
position (visual vertical) and they can reorient them-
selves to vertical when sitting on a tilting swing (gravi-
tational vertical). Visual vertical and gravitational 
vertical are independent of each other. Patients with 
asymmetrical vestibular function show abnormal vis-
ual vertical but normal gravitational vertical, whereas 
patients with hemi-neglect from stroke show abnormal 
gravitational vertical but normal visual vertical.
Another component of the body schema is a model 
of the sensory information expected as a result of a 
movement. Disorientation or motion sickness may 
result when the actual sensory information received 
by the nervous system does not match the expected 
sensory information, as in the microgravity environ-
ment of space flight. With continued exposure to the 
new environment, however, the model is gradually 
updated until expected and actual sensory information 
agree and the person is no longer spatially disoriented.
The internal model for balance control must be 
continually updated, both in the short term, as we 
use experience to improve our balance strategies, and 
in the long term, as we age and our bodies change in 
shape and size. One way the body schema is updated 
is by changing the relative sensitivity or weighting of 
each sensory system.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    899
0
0.5
1.0
Platform tilt (deg)
RMS body sway (deg)
0
0.5
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
Platform tilt (deg)
Vestibular
Somatosensory
Control
Weighting
FS
BS
BF
bs
bf 
Vestibular
Somatosensory
fs
Internal model
Sensory
signals
Estimate of
physical reality
(foot in space)
Gravitational
vertical
1
2
0
2
4
6
8
BS
BF
Physical 
reality
bs – bf
Vestibular 
loss subject
1.5
A  Internal model for estimating physical reality
B  Dynamic weighting of sensory inputs
Body sway angle
Platform 
tilt angle
Figure 36–12  Many types of sensory signals are integrated 
and weighted in an internal model that optimizes balance 
and orientation. (Adapted from Peterka 2002.)
A. The simple example of a person standing on a tilted sur-
face illustrates how the nervous system might estimate 
physical variables that are not sensed directly. The physical 
variables are body tilt with respect to earth vertical or body-
in-space (BS), and body angle relative to the foot (BF). The 
angle of the foot in space (FS) is simply the difference BS 
− BF. The neural estimate of body in space (bs) comes from 
vestibular and other receptors that detect tilt of the body 
relative to gravity. The neural estimate of body angle to foot 
(bf) comes from somatosensory signals related to ankle joint 
angle. The internal model for estimating physical reality, bs − 
bf, produces a neural estimate of the foot in space (fs). Such 
estimates of the physical world are continually updated based 
on experience.
B. Sensory information is weighted dynamically to maintain 
balance and orientation under varying conditions. The figure 
illustrates findings from an experiment in which human 
subjects stood blindfolded on a platform that slowly rotated 
continuously in the toes-up or toes-down direction at ampli-
tudes of up to 8° (peak to peak). 1. Comparison of body sway 
during surface oscillations in a subject with loss of vestibular 
function and a group of control subjects. Body-sway angle is 
measured relative to gravitational vertical during platform tilt 
and expressed as root mean square (RMS) sway in degrees. 
The dashed line represents equal platform and body sway; 
for example, for a platform tilt of 4°, an equal amount of body 
sway is 1° RMS. In control subjects, the body and platform 
sway are equal for small platform tilts up to 2°, suggesting 
that people normally use somatosensory signals to remain 
perpendicular to the platform (minimizing changes in ankle 
angle). With larger platform tilts, body sway does not increase 
much beyond 0.5° RMS. In contrast, subjects with vestibular 
loss sway even more than the platform (1.5° RMS of body tilt 
at 4° of platform tilt) and cannot remain standing at platform 
tilts above 4°. Thus, when both vestibular and visual signals are 
absent, a person attempts to maintain his position only relative 
to the support surface and has difficulty maintaining balance 
as that surface moves. 2. In control subjects, as platform tilt 
increases, the influence of somatosensory input decreases 
with increasing platform tilt while the influence of vestibular 
input increases. At larger tilt angles, the greater influence of 
vestibular input minimizes the degree of body sway away from 
gravitational vertical.


===== Page 9 =====
900    Part V / Movement
Control of Posture Is Task Dependent
The senses and muscles used to control posture vary, 
depending on task constraints and requirements. For 
example, when vestibular and somatosensory infor-
mation is altered while working on a space station, 
vision is used to orient the body to tasks, and the goal 
of postural equilibrium changes from preventing falls 
due to gravity to preventing unintended collision with 
objects due to inertia. A healthy nervous system very 
quickly adapts to changing tasks, goals, and environ-
ments by modifying its relative dependence upon dif-
ferent sensory information and by using different sets 
of muscles to optimize achieving the goals of both pos-
ture control and voluntary movements.
Task Requirements Determine the Role of  
Each Sensory System in Postural Equilibrium  
and Orientation
The postural control system must be able to change the 
weighting of different sensory modalities to accommo-
date changes in the environment and movement goals. 
Subjects standing on a firm stable surface tend to rely 
primarily on somatosensory information for postural 
orientation. When the support surface is unstable, sub-
jects depend more on vestibular and visual informa-
tion. However, even when the support surface is not 
stable, light touch with a fingertip on a stable object 
is more effective than vision in maintaining postural 
orientation and balance. Vestibular information is par-
ticularly critical when visual and somatosensory infor-
mation is ambiguous or absent, such as when skiing 
downhill or walking below deck on a ship.
The changeable weighting of individual sensory 
modalities was demonstrated in an experiment in 
which subjects were blindfolded and asked to stand 
quietly on a surface with a tilt that slowly oscillated 
by varying amounts, up to 8° in magnitude. For tilts 
of less than 2°, all subjects sway with the platform, 
suggesting that they use somatosensory information 
to orient their body to the support surface (Figure 
36–12B). At larger tilts, healthy subjects attenuate their 
sway and orient their posture more with respect to 
gravitational vertical than to the surface, as they rely 
more on vestibular information so they stop increasing 
body sway. Thus, relative sensory weighting changes 
in control subjects such that somatosensory weight is 
highest with a stable platform and vestibular weight 
is highest when standing on an unstable surface, such 
as with large surface tilts (Figure 36–12B2). In contrast, 
patients who have lost vestibular function persist in 
swaying along with the platform and subsequently fall 
during large surface tilts. This behavior is consistent 
with the patients’ inappropriate automatic postural 
response to platform tilts.
Studies such as these suggest that when people are 
standing on moving or unstable surfaces, the weight-
ing of vestibular and visual information increases, 
whereas that of somatosensory information decreases. 
Any sensory modality may dominate at a particular 
time, depending on the conditions of postural support 
and the specific motor behavior to be performed.
Control of Posture Is Distributed in the 
Nervous System
Postural orientation and balance are achieved through 
the dynamic and context-dependent interplay among 
all levels of the central nervous system, from the spinal 
cord to cerebral cortex. The major areas of the brain 
involved in postural control are shown in Figure 
36–13. Signals from specific areas in all lobes of the 
cerebral cortex converge and are integrated to deter-
mine appropriate outputs from motor cortical areas to 
subcortical structures. The basal ganglia, cerebellum, 
and pedunculopontine nucleus then send outputs to 
the brain stem. Ultimately, inputs from these varied 
sources result in activation of the reticulospinal and 
vestibulospinal pathways, which descend to the spinal 
cord where they contact interneurons and spinal motor 
neurons for postural control.
Afferent inputs from visual, vestibular, and soma-
tosensory sources are integrated along the neuraxis, 
including the vestibular nuclei and right parietal 
cortex, to inform the internal model of body orienta-
tion and balance. This internal model is continually 
updated by the cerebellum based on error signals 
between expected and actual sensory feedback follow-
ing motor commands.
Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining 
Antigravity Support but Not Balance
Adult cats with complete spinal transection at the tho-
racic level can, with experience, support the weight of 
their hindquarters with fairly normal hind limb and 
trunk postural orientation, but they have little control 
of balance. These animals do not exhibit normal pos-
tural responses in their hind limbs when the support 
surface moves. Their response to horizontal motion 
consists of small, random, and highly variable bursts 
of activity in extensor muscles, and postural activity 
in flexor muscles is completely absent. Active balance 
is absent despite the fact that extensors and flexors can 


