===== Page 1 =====
916    Part V / Movement
Leftward 
head rotation
Eye
position
Eye
position
Rightward 
head rotation
A
B
L
R
Dark
Light
(tracking 
object)
1 Normal VOR
 eye movement
 during both 
 rotations
2 Normal ﬁxation only 
 during rightward 
 rotation when leftward 
 VOR is suppressed 
Smooth
movement
Saccade
Target
Gaze
Position
Time
Figure 37–6  Lesions in the vestibulocerebellum have large 
effects on smooth-pursuit eye movements.
A. Sinusoidal target motion is tracked with smooth-pursuit eye 
movements as the target moves from left (L) to right (R). With a 
lesion of the left vestibulocerebellum, smooth pursuit is punctu-
ated by saccades when the target moves from right to left.
B. In the same patient, responses to vestibular stimulation are 
normal, whereas object fixation is disrupted during leftward 
rotation. The traces on the left and right show the eye move-
ments evoked by rightward and leftward head rotation experi-
enced in separate sessions. In each session the patient sat in a 
chair that rotated continuously in one direction, first in the dark 
then in the light while fixating on a target that moves along 
with him. (1) In the dark, the eyes show a normal vestibulo-
ocular reflex (VOR) during rotation in both directions: The eyes 
move smoothly in the direction opposite to the head’s rotation, 
then reset with saccades in the direction of head rotation. (2) In 
the light, the eye position during rightward head rotation is nor-
mal: Fixation on the target is excellent and the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex is suppressed. During leftward head rotation, however, 
the subject is unable to fixate on the object and the vestibulo-
ocular reflex cannot be suppressed.
vestibulocerebellum is compressed by an acoustic 
neuroma, a benign tumor that grows on the eighth 
cranial nerve as it courses directly beneath the lateral 
vestibulocerebellum.
The spinocerebellum is composed of the vermis and 
intermediate parts of the cerebellar hemispheres 
(Figure 37–4). It is so named because it receives exten-
sive input from the spinal cord via the dorsal and ven-
tral spinocerebellar tracts. These pathways convey 
information about touch, pressure, and limb position 
as well as the spiking activity of spinal interneurons. 
Thus, these inputs provide the cerebellum with varied 
information about the changing state of the organism 
and its environment.
The vermis receives visual, auditory, and vestib-
ular input as well as somatic sensory input from the 
head and proximal parts of the body. It projects by 
way of the fastigial nucleus to cortical and brain stem 
regions that give rise to the medial descending systems 
controlling proximal muscles of the body and limbs 
(Figure 37–5A). The vermis governs posture and loco-
motion as well as eye movements. For example, lesions 
of the oculomotor region of the vermis cause saccadic 
eye movements that overshoot their target, much as 
patients with cerebellar damage make arm movements 
that overshoot their target.
The adjacent intermediate parts of the hemispheres 
also receive somatosensory input from the limbs. Neu-
rons here project to the interposed nucleus, which 
provides inputs to lateral corticospinal and rubrospi-
nal systems on the contralateral side of the brain and 
controls the more distal muscles of the limbs and dig-
its (Figure 37–5B). Because corticospinal and rubrospi-
nal systems cross the midline as they descend to the 
spinal cord, cerebellar lesions disrupt ipsilateral limb 
movements.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    917
Figure 37–7  The interposed and dentate nuclei are involved 
in the precise timing of agonist and antagonist activa-
tion during rapid movements.  The interposed (medial) 
and dentate (lateral) nuclei are highlighted in the drawing of 
the cerebellum. The records of limb movement show how 
a monkey normally makes a rapid elbow flexion limb move-
ment and attempts to make the same movement when the 
interposed and dentate nuclei are inactivated by cooling. The 
electromyographic (EMG) traces show limb position and veloc-
ity and EMG responses of the biceps and triceps muscles. 
When the deep nuclei are inactivated, activation of the agonist 
(biceps) becomes slower and more prolonged. Activation of the 
antagonist (triceps), which is needed to stop the movement at 
the correct location, is likewise delayed and protracted so that 
the initial movement overshoots its appropriate extent. Delays 
in successive phases of the movement produce oscillations 
similar to the terminal tremor seen in patients with cerebellar 
damage.
Position
Deep nuclei inactive
Control
Velocity
Agonist 
(biceps) 
EMG
Limb
Antagonist
(triceps) 
EMG
0
700 ms
12°
300°/s
Interposed and 
dentate nuclei
The cerebrocerebellum comprises the lateral parts of 
the hemispheres (Figure 37–4). These areas are phylo-
genetically the most recent and are much larger rela-
tive to the rest of the cerebellum in humans and apes 
than in monkeys and cats. Almost all of the inputs to 
and outputs from this region involve connections with 
the cerebral cortex. The output is transmitted through 
the dentate nucleus, which projects via the thalamus to 
contralateral motor, premotor, parietal, and prefrontal 
cortices. The dentate nucleus also projects to the con-
tralateral red nucleus. The lateral hemispheres have 
many functions but seem to participate most exten-
sively in planning and executing movement. They also 
have a role in cognitive functions unconnected with 
motor planning, such as visuospatial and language 
processes. There is now some correlative evidence 
implicating the cerebellar hemispheres in aspects of 
schizophrenia (Chapter 60), dystonia (Chapter 38), and 
autism (Chapter 62).
Two important principles of cerebellar function 
have emerged from recordings of the action potentials 
of single neurons in the cerebellar cortex and deep 
cerebellar nuclei during arm movements, along with 
controlled, temporary inactivation of specific cerebel-
lar regions.
First, neurons in these areas discharge vigorously 
in relation to voluntary movements. Cerebellar out-
put is related to the direction and speed of movement. 
The deep nuclei are organized into somatotopic maps 
of different limbs and joints, as in the motor cortex, 
although the organization of the cerebellar cortex has 
been characterized as “fractured somatotopy” with 
multiple disconnected and partial maps. Moreover, 
the interval between the onset of modulation of the 
firing of cerebellar neurons and movement is remark-
ably similar to that for neurons in the motor cortex. 
This result emphasizes the cerebellum’s participation 
in recurrent circuits that operate synchronously with 
the cerebral cortex.
Second, the cerebellum provides feedforward con-
trol of muscle contractions to regulate the timing of 
movements. Rather than awaiting sensory feedback, 
cerebellar output anticipates the muscular contractions 
that will be needed to bring a movement smoothly, 
accurately, and quickly to its desired endpoint. Failure 
of these mechanisms causes the intention tremor of 
cerebellar disorders. For example, a rapid single-joint 
movement is initiated by the contraction of an ago-
nist muscle and terminated by an appropriately timed 
contraction of the antagonist. The contraction of the 
antagonist starts early in the movement, well before 
there has been time for sensory feedback to reach the 
brain, and therefore must be programmed as part of 
the movement. When the dentate and interposed 
nuclei are experimentally inactivated, however, con-
traction of the antagonist muscle is delayed until the 
limb has overshot its target. The programmed antici-
patory contraction of the antagonist in normal move-
ments is replaced by a correction driven by sensory 
feedback. This correction is itself dysmetric and results 
in another error, necessitating a new adjustment  
(Figure 37–7).


===== Page 3 =====
918    Part V / Movement
The Cerebellar Cortex Comprises Repeating 
Functional Units Having the Same  
Basic Microcircuit
The cellular organization of the microcircuit in the 
cerebellar cortex is striking, and one of the premises 
of cerebellar research has been that the details of the 
microcircuit are an important clue to how the cerebel-
lum works. In this section, we describe three major fea-
tures of the microcircuit.
The Cerebellar Cortex Is Organized Into Three 
Functionally Specialized Layers
The three layers of the cerebellar cortex contain distinct 
kinds of neurons and are functionally specialized 
(Figure 37–8).
The deepest, or granular layer, is the input layer. 
It contains a vast number of granule cells, estimated 
at 100 billion, which appear in histological sections 
as small, densely packed, darkly stained nuclei. The 
granular layer also contains a few larger Golgi cells 
and, in some cerebellar regions, a smattering of other 
neurons such as cells of Lugaro, unipolar brush cells, 
and chandelier cells. The mossy fibers, one of the two 
principal afferent inputs to the cerebellum, terminate 
in this layer. The bulbous terminals of the mossy fib-
ers excite granule cells and Golgi neurons in synaptic 
complexes called cerebellar glomeruli (Figure 37–8). As 
we will see later when discussing recurrent circuits in 
the cerebellum, Golgi cells inhibit granule cells.
The middle or Purkinje cell layer is the output layer 
of the cerebellar cortex. This layer consists of a sin-
gle sheet of Purkinje cell bodies, each 50 to 80 μm in 
diameter. The fan-like dendritic trees of Purkinje cells 
extend upward into the molecular layer where they 
receive inputs from the second major type of afferent 
to the cerebellum, the climbing fibers, as well as from 
granule cells and inhibitory interneurons. Purkinje 
cell axons conduct the entire output of the cerebellar 
cortex, projecting to the deep nuclei in the underlying 
white matter or to the vestibular nuclei in the brain 
stem, where they release the inhibitory transmitter 
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid).
The outermost or molecular layer contains the 
spatially polarized dendrites of Purkinje cells, which 
extend approximately 1 to 3 mm in the anterior-posterior 
direction but occupy only a very narrow territory in 
the medial-lateral direction. The molecular layer con-
tains the cell bodies and dendrites of two types of 
“molecular layer interneurons,” the stellate and basket 
cells, both of which inhibit Purkinje cells. It also con-
tains the axons of the granule cells, called the parallel 
fibers because they run parallel to the long axis of the 
folia (Figure 37–8). Parallel fibers run perpendicular to 
the dendritic trees of the Purkinje cells and thus have the 
potential to form a few synapses with each of a large 
number of Purkinje cells.
The Climbing-Fiber and Mossy-Fiber Afferent 
Systems Encode and Process Information Differently
The two main types of afferent fibers in the cerebellum, 
the mossy fibers and climbing fibers, probably medi-
ate different functions. Both form excitatory synapses 
with neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei and in the 
cerebellar cortex. However, they terminate in differ-
ent layers of the cerebellar cortex, affect Purkinje cells 
through very different patterns of synaptic conver-
gence and divergence, and produce different electrical 
events in the Purkinje cells.
Climbing fibers originate in the inferior olivary 
nucleus in the brain stem and convey sensory informa-
tion to the cerebellum from both the periphery and the 
cerebral cortex. The climbing fiber is so named because 
each one wraps around the proximal dendrites of a 
Purkinje neuron like a vine on a tree, making numer-
ous synaptic contacts (Figure 37–9). Each Purkinje neu-
ron receives synaptic input from only a single climbing 
fiber, but each climbing fiber contacts 1 to 10 Purkinje 
cells that are arranged topographically along a par-
asagittal strip in the cerebellar cortex. Indeed, the axons 
from clusters of related olivary neurons terminate in 
thin parasagittal strips that extend across several folia, 
and the Purkinje cells from one strip converge on a 
common group of neurons in the deep nuclei.
Climbing fibers have an unusually powerful influ-
ence on the electrical activity of Purkinje cells. Each 
action potential in a climbing fiber generates a pro-
tracted, voltage-gated Ca2+ conductance in the soma 
and dendrites of the postsynaptic Purkinje cell. This 
results in prolonged depolarization that produces an 
electrical event called a “complex spike”: an initial 
large-amplitude action potential followed by a high-
frequency burst of smaller-amplitude action potentials 
(Figure 37–9). Whether these smaller spikes are trans-
mitted down the Purkinje cell’s axon is not clear. In 
awake animals, complex spikes occur spontaneously at 
low rates, usually around one per second. Specific sen-
sory or motor events cause one or two complex spikes 
that occur at precise times in relation to those events.
Mossy fibers originate from cell bodies in the spinal 
cord and brain stem. They carry sensory information 
from the periphery as well as both sensory information 
and corollary discharges that report the current move-
ment command (Chapter 30) from the cerebral cortex 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    919
Figure 37–8  The cerebellar cortex contains five main 
types of neurons organized into three layers. A vertical 
section of a single cerebellar folium illustrates the general 
organization of the cerebellar cortex. The detail of a cer-
ebellar glomerulus in the granular layer is also shown. A 
glomerulus is the synaptic complex formed by the bulbous 
axon terminal of a mossy fiber and the dendrites of several 
Golgi and granule cells. Mitochondria are present in all of 
the structures in the glomerulus, consistent with their high 
metabolic activity.
Stellate cell
Purkinje 
cell axon
Mossy ﬁber
Granule cell
dendrite
Golgi
cell
axon
Glomerulus
Molecular 
layer
Purkinje cell 
layer
Granular 
layer
White 
matter
Basket cell
Climbing 
ﬁber
Mossy ﬁber
terminal
Golgi cell
Purkinje
cells
Purkinje
cell
Mossy 
ﬁber
Granule 
cell
Parallel ﬁbers


===== Page 5 =====
920    Part V / Movement
Granule 
cell
Mossy
ﬁber
Purkinje
cell
Parallel
ﬁbers
Climbing
ﬁber
50 ms
10 mV
1
2
Figure 37–9  Simple and complex spikes recorded intracel-
lularly from a cerebellar Purkinje cell. Simple spikes are 
produced by mossy-fiber input (1), whereas complex spikes are 
evoked by climbing-fiber synapses (2). (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Martinez, Crill, and Kennedy 1971.)
via the pontine nuclei. Mossy fibers affect Purkinje 
cells via multisynaptic pathways that have intriguing 
patterns of convergence and divergence. Individual 
mossy fibers, acting through granule cells and parallel 
fibers, have a tiny influence on Purkinje cell output, 
but collectively, the whole population of mossy fibers 
has massive effects on cerebellar output.
Mossy fibers form excitatory synapses on the den-
drites of granule cells in the granular layer (Figure 37–8). 
Each granule cell has three to five short dendrites, and 
each dendrite receives contacts from a single mossy 
fiber. Due to this paucity of inputs, the spatial inte-
gration by a granule cell of its different mossy fiber 
synapses is not extensive; however, the cell can be the 
site of convergence of mossy fibers from multiple sen-
sory modalities and motor corollary discharge. The 
next synaptic relay, between the granule cell axons 
and Purkinje cells, distributes information with very 
wide divergence and convergence. The parallel fibers 
allow each mossy fiber to influence a large number 
of Purkinje cells, and each Purkinje cell is contacted 
potentially by axons from somewhere between 200,000 
and 1 million granule cells. Importantly, in response 
to changing conditions there seems to be tremendous 
potential for adaptation of cerebellar output at the 
synapses between parallel fibers and Purkinje cells. It 
appears that only a small fraction of these synapses are 
active at any given time.
Parallel fibers produce brief, small excitatory 
potentials in Purkinje cells (Figure 37–9). These poten-
tials converge in the cell body and spread to the initial 
segment of the axon where they generate conventional 
action potentials called “simple spikes” that propagate 
down the axon. In awake animals, Purkinje cells emit 
a steady stream of simple spikes, with spontaneous fir-
ing rates as high as 100 per second even when an ani-
mal is sitting quietly. Purkinje cells fire at rates as high 
as several hundred spikes per second during active 
eye, arm, and face movements.
The climbing-fiber and mossy-fiber/parallel-fiber 
systems seem to be specialized for transmission of 
different kinds of information. Climbing fibers cause 
complex spikes that seem specialized for event detec-
tion. Although complex spikes occur only infrequently, 
synchronous firing in multiple climbing fibers enables 
them to signal important events. Synchrony seems to 
arise partly because signaling between many neurons 
in the inferior olivary nucleus occurs electrotonically 
(at gap-junction channels). In contrast, the high fir-
ing rates of the simple spikes in Purkinje cells can be 
modulated up or down in a graded way by mossy-
fiber inputs, and thereby encode the magnitude and 
duration of peripheral stimuli or centrally generated 
behaviors.
The Cerebellar Microcircuit Architecture  
Suggests a Canonical Computation
The cerebellar microcircuit is replicated many times 
across the surface of the cerebellar cortex. This repeat-
ing architecture and pattern of convergence and diver-
gence has led to the suggestion that since every such 
module has the same architecture and pattern of con-
vergence and divergence, the cerebellar cortex performs 
the same basic “canonical” computation on all of its 
inputs, and that it potentially transforms cerebellar 
inputs in a similar way for all cerebellar output systems. 
Inspection of a diagram of the cerebellar microcircuit 
(Figure 37–10) reveals a number of different computa-
tional components. One general feature is the existence 
of parallel excitatory and inhibitory pathways to the 
Purkinje cells or deep cerebellar nuclei. The other gen-
eral feature is the prevalence of recurrent loops.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    921
Figure 37–10  Synaptic organization of the cerebellar micro-
circuit. Excitation and inhibition converge both in the cerebellar 
cortex and in the deep nuclei. Recurrent loops involve Golgi 
cells within the cerebellar cortex and the inferior olive outside 
the cerebellum. (Adapted, with permission, from Raymond,  
Lisberger, and Mauk 1996. Copyright © 1996 AAAS.)
Purkinje
cell
Climbing
ﬁber
Inferior olivary
nucleus cell 
Deep
cerebellar
neurons 
Mossy
ﬁber 
Granule
cell 
Basket/
stellate 
cells
Parallel
ﬁber
Golgi
cell
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
Parallel Feedforward Excitatory and Inhibitory Pathways
The excitatory inputs relayed from mossy fibers to 
granule cells to Purkinje cells work in parallel with 
feedforward inhibitory inputs through the two molec-
ular layer interneurons, the stellate and basket cells. 
Both of these interneurons receive inputs from parallel 
fibers and inhibit Purkinje cells, but they have quite 
different architectures.
The short axons of stellate cells contact the nearby 
dendrites of Purkinje cells. Thus, a stellate cell acts 
locally in the sense that it and the Purkinje cell it inhib-
its are excited by the same parallel fibers. In contrast, 
a basket cell acts more widely. Its axon runs perpen-
dicular to the parallel fibers (Figure 37–8) and creates 
flanks of inhibition on Purkinje cells that receive input 
from parallel fibers other than those that excite the bas-
ket cell. Stellate cells affect Purkinje cells via synapses 
that are on distal dendrites, whereas basket cells make 
powerful synapses on the cell body of Purkinje cells 
and seem to be positioned for a powerful influence on 
Purkinje cell simple spiking. Remarkably, even 60 years 
after the architecture of the cerebellar microcircuit 
was described, the functional role of molecular layer 
interneurons remains a mystery.
Convergence of excitatory and inhibitory path-
ways is a predominant feature also in the deep cer-
ebellar nuclei. Here, inhibitory inputs from Purkinje 
cells converge with excitatory inputs from axon col-
laterals of mossy and climbing fibers (Figure 37–10). 
Thus, a mossy fiber affects target neurons in the deep 
nuclei in two ways: directly by excitatory synapses and 
indirectly by pathways through the cerebellar cortex 
and the inhibitory Purkinje cells. Neurons of the deep 
cerebellar nuclei are active spontaneously even in the 
absence of synaptic inputs, so the inhibitory output of 
the Purkinje cells both modulates this intrinsic activ-
ity and sculpts the excitatory signals transmitted from 
mossy fibers to the deep nuclei. In almost all parts of 
the cerebellum, collaterals from climbing fibers to the 
deep cerebellar nuclei create the opportunity for a sim-
ilar interaction of excitatory and inhibitory inputs.
Recurrent Loops
An important recurrent loop is contained entirely 
within the cerebellar cortex and employs Golgi cells to 
sculpt the activity of the granule cells, the input ele-
ments in the cerebellar cortex. Golgi cells receive a few 
large excitatory inputs from mossy fibers, many smaller 
excitatory inputs from parallel fibers, and inhibitory 
inputs from neighboring Golgi cells. The GABAergic 
terminals from Golgi cells inhibit granule cells (Figure 
37–10) and thereby regulate the activity of granule cells 
and the signals conveyed by the parallel fibers. This 
loop is evidence that important processing may occur 
within the granular layer. It may shorten the duration 
of bursts in granule cells, limiting the magnitude of the 
excitatory response of granule cells to their mossy fiber 
inputs, or could ensure that the granule cells respond 
only when a certain number of their mossy fiber inputs 
are active.
A second recurrent loop provides Purkinje cells 
with a way to regulate their own climbing fiber inputs 
(Figure 37–10). Purkinje cells inhibit GABAergic inhib-
itory neurons in the deep cerebellar nuclei that project 
to the inferior olive. When the simple-spike firing of a 
group of Purkinje cells decreases, the activity of these 
inhibitory interneurons increases, leading to decreases 
in the excitability of neurons in the inferior olive. The 
decreased excitability of the inferior olive reduces both 
the probability of action potentials in climbing fib-
ers that project to the original group of Purkinje cells 
and the duration of each burst of climbing fiber action 


===== Page 7 =====
922    Part V / Movement
potentials. In the section on cerebellar learning, we 
will see how this recurrent loop could allow the cer-
ebellar cortex to control the inputs that cause adaptive 
changes in the synapses on its Purkinje cells.
The Cerebellum Is Hypothesized to Perform 
Several General Computational Functions
We know that the cerebellum is important for motor 
control and some nonmotor functions. Even though we 
do not yet know how the cerebellar circuit controls these 
functions, we are able to identity aspects of the control 
that seem to be particularly “cerebellar.” These include 
reliable feedforward control, internal control of timing, 
integration of sensory inputs with corollary discharge, 
and state estimation through internal models.
The Cerebellum Contributes to Feedforward 
Sensorimotor Control
Sensory feedback is by its nature delayed. Therefore, 
when  a movement is initiated there is a period of time 
before any useful sensory feedback is received about 
the movement. We saw earlier that cerebellar damage 
causes movement disorders that appear to result from 
out-of-date sensory feedback. If so, it is reasonable 
to assume that the cerebellum regulates and coordi-
nates movement by preprogramming and coordinat-
ing commands for muscular contraction prior to the 
arrival of useful sensory feedback. The cerebellar 
output anticipates the muscular contractions that will 
be needed to bring a movement smoothly, accurately, 
and quickly to the desired endpoint, and uses sen-
sory feedback mainly to monitor and improve its own 
performance.
Like neurons in the motor cortex, cerebellar neu-
rons are activated before movement. Still, lesion stud-
ies and the symptoms in human motor disorders 
imply that the cerebellum and motor cortex play very 
different roles in movement. Lesions of the cerebellum 
disrupt the accuracy and coordination of voluntary 
movement, while lesions of the cerebral cortex largely 
prevent movement.
In addition, the pattern of cerebellar activity, not 
simply the rate of activity, conveys information for 
movement control. This is illustrated in mouse models 
of cerebellar disease. Deletion of certain ion channels 
produces excessive variability of Purkinje cell simple-
spike firing patterns, which seems to lead to ataxia. This 
suggests that the regularity of cerebellar activity must 
be closely regulated to achieve normal movement.
The Cerebellum Incorporates an Internal Model of  
the Motor Apparatus
To program the correct muscle contractions for a 
smooth, accurate arm movement, the cerebellum needs 
to have some information about the physical configu-
ration of the arm. Thus, it needs to create and maintain 
what are called “internal models” of the motor appara-
tus (Chapter 30). Internal models allow the cerebellum 
to perform a computation that helps the brain make 
good estimates of the exact muscle forces needed to 
move an arm in a desired manner.
An accurate inverse dynamic model of the arm, 
for example, can process sensory data about the cur-
rent posture of the arm and automatically generate a 
sequence of properly timed and scaled commands to 
move the hand to a new desired position. An accurate 
forward dynamic model does the opposite: It processes 
a copy of a motor command and makes a predic-
tion about the upcoming kinematics (ie, position and 
speed) of the arm movement. Recordings of the output 
of the cerebellum have provided evidence compatible 
with the idea that the cerebellum contains both types 
of models and that they are used to program both arm 
and eye movements.
One reason that the cerebellum may need these 
types of models for motor control is because of the com-
plexities associated with moving linked segments of the 
body. Consider the mechanics of making a simple arm 
movement. Because of the mechanics of the arm and the 
momentum it develops when moving, movement of 
the forearm alone causes inertial forces that passively 
move the upper arm. If a subject wants to flex or extend 
the elbow without simultaneously moving the shoul-
der, then muscles acting at the shoulder must contract 
to prevent its movement. These stabilizing contractions 
of the shoulder joint occur almost perfectly in healthy 
subjects but not in patients with cerebellar damage, who 
experience difficulty controlling the inertial interactions 
among multiple segments of a limb (Figure 37–1B). As a 
result, patients exhibit greater inaccuracy of multi-joint 
versus single-joint movements.
In conclusion, the cerebellum uses internal models 
to allow it to preprogram a sequence of muscle contrac-
tions that will generate smooth, accurate movement. It 
also anticipates the forces that result from the mechani-
cal properties of a moving limb. We do not yet know 
what these internal models look like in terms of the 
activity of cerebellar neurons, the circuits that oper-
ate as internal models, or how the cerebellar output is 
transformed into muscle forces. However, given that the 
properties of the limbs change throughout life, we can 
be confident that the cerebellum’s learning capabilities 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    923
are involved in adapting these internal models to help 
generate the most proficient movements.
The Cerebellum Integrates Sensory Inputs and 
Corollary Discharge
Sensory signals converge in the cerebellum with motor 
signals that are called a corollary discharge (or effer-
ence copy) because they report commands that are 
being sent to motor nerves at the same time. For exam-
ple, some neurons in the dorsal spinocerebellar tract 
relay inputs from sensory afferents in the spinal cord 
and transmit sensory signals to the cerebellum. In con-
trast, the neurons in the spinal cord that give rise to 
the axons in the ventral spinocerebellar tract receive 
the same afferent and descending inputs as do spi-
nal motor neurons, and they transmit the final motor 
command back to the cerebellum. The interaction of 
sensory signals and corollary discharge allows com-
parison of the plans for a movement with the sensory 
consequences. This comparison occurs to some degree 
at Purkinje cells, but we now know that at least some 
granule cells receive converging sensory and corollary 
discharge inputs and could perform the comparison.
Internal models and corollary discharge together 
provide one possible explanation of the role of the cer-
ebellum in movement. To be able to program accurate 
movements the cerebellum must be able to estimate 
the state of the motor system through sensory feed-
back and knowledge of prior motor activity. Next, it 
must combine information on the state of the motor 
system with the goals of the next movement and use 
internal models of the effector to help create com-
mands for muscle forces that will generate an accu-
rate and efficient movement. During the movement, 
the cerebellum must monitor movement performance 
through sensory feedback. Current thinking is that 
much of this is done by an internal model that con-
verts corollary discharge into predictions of the sen-
sory feedback. The cerebellum then compares real 
and predicted sensory feedback to determine a sen-
sory prediction error and uses the sensory prediction 
error to guide corrective movements and learning.
Using a paradigm that required monkeys to ignore 
the sensory signals caused by their own movement, 
Kathy Cullen and colleagues have identified a neural 
correlate of a sensory prediction error in the deep cer-
ebellar nuclei. Specifically, they studied the vestibular 
sensory signals that result from an animal’s active head 
movements. They showed that the brain attenuates or 
even eliminates the vestibular sensory signals caused 
by one’s own active head movement in order to bet-
ter detect unpredictable vestibular signals due to the 
environment. However, when the head is effectively 
made heavier by adding resistance via a mechanical 
device, the vestibular sensory signals no longer match 
the predicted sensory signals that normally would 
attenuate the vestibular input. They showed that the 
cerebellum adjusts its predictions of the vestibular 
input to account for the changes in head movement 
caused by resistance due to the mechanical device. 
After some practice, the predicted and actual self-gen-
erated sensory inputs again match, and neurons in the 
deep cerebellar nucleus return to being unresponsive 
to vestibular inputs. Cerebellum-dependent learning is 
described in detail later in this chapter.
The Cerebellum Contributes to Timing Control
The cerebellum seems to have a role in movement tim-
ing that goes well beyond its role in regulating the tim-
ing of contractions in different muscles (Figure 37–7). 
When patients with cerebellar lesions attempt to make 
regular tapping movements with their hands or fin-
gers, the rhythm is irregular and the motions vary in 
duration and force.
Based on a theoretical model of how tapping move-
ments are generated, Richard Ivry and Steven Keele 
inferred that medial cerebellar lesions interfere only 
with accurate execution of the response, whereas lat-
eral cerebellar lesions interfere with the timing of serial 
events. Such timing defects are not limited to motor 
events. They also affect the patient’s ability to judge 
elapsed time in purely mental or cognitive tasks, as in 
the ability to distinguish whether one tone is longer or 
shorter than another or whether the speed of one mov-
ing object is greater or less than that of another. We will 
see in our discussion of motor learning that the cer-
ebellum is critical for learning the timing of motor acts.
The Cerebellum Participates in Motor  
Skill Learning
In the early 1970s, on the basis of mathematical mod-
eling of cerebellar function and the cerebellar micro-
circuit, David Marr and James Albus independently 
suggested that the cerebellum might be involved 
in learning motor skills. Along with Masao Ito, they 
proposed that the climbing-fiber input to Purkinje 
cells causes changes at the synapses that relay mossy 
fiber input signals from parallel fibers to Purkinje 
cells. According to their theory, the synaptic plasticity 
would lead to changes in simple-spike firing, and these 
changes would cause behavioral learning. Subsequent 
experimental evidence has supported and extended 
this theory of cerebellar motor learning.


===== Page 9 =====
924    Part V / Movement
Figure 37–11  Long-term depression of the synaptic input 
from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells is one plausible mecha-
nism for cerebellar learning.
A. Two different groups of parallel fibers and the presynaptic 
climbing fibers are electrically stimulated in vitro. Repeated 
stimulation of one set of parallel fibers (PF1) at the same 
time as the climbing fibers produces a long-term reduction 
in the responses of those parallel fibers to later stimulation. 
The responses of a second set of parallel fibers (PF2) are not 
depressed because they are not stimulated simultaneously 
with the presynaptic climbing fibers. (Abbreviations: CF,  
climbing fiber; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential.) 
(Adapted from Ito et al. 1982.)
B. Top: An accurate wrist movement by a monkey is accom-
panied by a burst of simple spikes in a Purkinje cell, followed 
later by discharge of a single climbing fiber in one trial. Middle: 
When the monkey must make the same movement against 
a novel resistance (adaptation), climbing-fiber activity occurs 
during movement in every trial and the movement itself over-
shoots the target. Bottom: After adaptation, the frequency of 
simple spikes during movement is quite attenuated, and the 
climbing fiber is not active during movement or later. This is the 
sequence of events expected if long-term depression in the 
cerebellar cortex plays a role in learning. Climbing fiber activity 
is usually low (1/s) but increases during adaptation to a novel 
load. (Adapted, with permission, from Gilbert and Thach 1977.)
Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic 
Efficacy of Parallel Fibers
Climbing fibers can selectively induce long-term 
depression in the synapses between parallel fibers 
and Purkinje cells that are activated concurrently 
with the climbing fibers. Many studies in brain slices 
and cultured Purkinje cells have found that concur-
rent stimulation of climbing fibers and parallel fibers 
depresses the Purkinje cell responses to subsequent 
stimulation of the same parallel fibers. The depres-
sion is selective for the parallel fibers that were acti-
vated in conjunction with the climbing-fiber input 
A
B
Accurate movement prior to loading
Adaptation to novel load
After adaptation
Climbing
ﬁber ﬁres
PF1
PF2
PF2
PF2
PF1/CF
PF1
Test
Adapt
Test
Parallel ﬁber EPSPs recorded in Purkinje cell
Training
Paired (PF1)        
Unpaired (PF2)
Before 
training
After 
training
Purkinje
cell
Wrist
movement
Granule 
cell
Purkinje
cell
Mossy 
ﬁber
Climbing
ﬁber
PF1
PF2
Inferior Olive
and does not appear in synapses from parallel fibers 
that had not been stimulated along with climbing fib-
ers (Figure 37–11A). The resulting depression can last 
for minutes to hours.
Many studies in a variety of motor learning sys-
tems have recorded activity in Purkinje cells that is 
consistent with the predictions of the cerebellar learn-
ing theory. For example, if an unexpected resistance is 
applied to a well-practiced arm movement, extra mus-
cle tension will be required to move. Climbing fiber 
activity can signal error until the unexpected resist-
ance is learned. They presumably depress the synaptic 


