===== Page 1 =====
1068    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
by increases in dopaminergic synaptic transmission and 
weakened by decreases. These dopaminergic neurons 
are excited by glutamatergic cells in the prefrontal cor-
tex and amygdala as well as from cholinergic cells in the 
laterodorsal tegmental and pedunculopontine nuclei 
of the hindbrain, and are inhibited by local GABAergic 
cells within or just caudal to the ventral tegmental area. 
Brain stimulation is thought to activate dopaminergic 
neurons in the ventral tegmental area in part through 
the activation of these hindbrain cholinergic neurons. 
Blockade of this cholinergic input reduces the rewarding 
effects of the electrical stimulation. While most attention 
has focused on dopamine pathways in mediating brain 
stimulation reward, it is important to emphasize the 
involvement of non-dopaminergic pathways as well.
The strength of brain stimulation reward is indi-
cated by the finding that starving rats provided with 
brief daily access to food will forego eating to press 
a lever for brain stimulation. The heedless pursuit of 
an artificial goal to the detriment of a biological need 
is one of many parallels between self-stimulation 
and drug abuse. Indeed, drugs of abuse augment the 
rewarding effects of activation of dopaminergic path-
ways with brain stimulation (Figure 43–1C,D). Lower 
frequencies of stimulating currents accompanied by 
cocaine or nicotine administration—both of which 
enhance dopaminergic neurotransmission through 
different mechanisms—produce a rate of lever press-
ing equivalent to that obtained during self-stimulation 
at higher stimulating currents in the absence of these 
drugs. These results indicate that cocaine and nicotine 
amplify the effects of neuronal activation elicited by 
microstimulation.
Dopamine May Act as a Learning Signal
An earlier view of the function of dopamine was that 
it conveyed “hedonic signals” in the brain and that, in 
humans, it was directly responsible for subjective pleas-
ure. From this point of view, addiction would reflect 
the habitual choice of short-term pleasure despite a 
host of long-term life problems that emerge. In fact, 
however, new research indicates that the hedonic prin-
ciple cannot easily explain the persistence of drug use 
by addicted persons as negative consequences mount.
The effects of dopamine have proven to be far 
more complex than was first thought. Dopamine can 
be released by aversive as well as by rewarding stim-
uli, and the short latency component of a dopamine 
neuron’s response may not be related to the reward-
ing or aversive qualities of a stimulus at all. Moreover, 
rodents lacking dopamine—rats in which dopamine is 
depleted by 6-hydroxydopamine and mice genetically 
engineered so that they cannot produce dopamine—
continue to exhibit hedonic responses to sucrose. 
Dopamine delivery itself is not currently considered to 
produce hedonic qualities. Instead, the degree to which a 
particular sensory stimulus is rewarding is thought to be 
processed by a broad network of brain areas, spanning 
sensory cortices of different modalities, association cor-
tex, prefrontal cortex (in particular, orbitofrontal regions), 
and many subcortical areas such as the amygdala, hip-
pocampus, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum.
Many of the brain areas whose activity is modu-
lated by reward anticipation or receipt receive dopa-
minergic input. What information do dopaminergic 
neurons transmit to these brain areas? Wolfram Schultz 
and his colleagues discovered that dopaminergic neu-
rons often have a complex and changing pattern of 
responses to rewards during learning. In one experi-
ment, Schultz trained monkeys to expect juice at a 
fixed interval after a visual or auditory cue. Before the 
monkeys learned the predictive cues, the appearance 
of the juice was unexpected and produced a transient 
increase in firing above basal levels by ventral teg-
mental area dopaminergic neurons. As the monkeys 
learned that certain cues predict the juice, the timing 
of the firing changed. The neurons no longer fired in 
response to presentation of the juice—the reward—
but earlier, in response to a predictive visual or audi-
tory cue. If a cue was presented but the reward was 
withheld, firing paused at the time the reward would 
have been presented. In contrast, if a reward exceeded 
expectation or was unexpected, because it appeared 
without a prior cue, firing was enhanced (Figure 43–2).
These observations suggest that dopamine release 
in the forebrain serves not as a pleasure signal but as 
a prediction error signal. A burst of dopamine would 
signify a reward or reward-related stimulus that had 
not been predicted; pauses would signify that the 
predicted reward is less than expected or absent. If 
a reward is just as expected based on environmental 
cues, dopaminergic neurons would maintain their 
tonic (baseline) firing rates. Alterations in dopamine 
release are thus thought to modify future responses 
to stimuli to maximize the likelihood of obtaining 
rewards and to minimize fruitless pursuits. For natural 
rewards, like the sweet juice consumed by the mon-
keys in Schultz’s experiments, once the environmental 
cues for a reward are learned, dopaminergic neuron 
firing returns toward baseline levels. Schultz has inter-
preted this to mean that as long as nothing changes in 
the environment, there is nothing more to learn and 
therefore no need to alter behavioral responses.
Experiments using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging in humans have provided further evidence 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1069
Figure 43–2  Dopaminergic neurons report an error in reward 
prediction. Graphs show firing rates recorded from midbrain 
dopaminergic neurons in awake, active monkeys. Top: A drop 
of sweet liquid is delivered without warning to a monkey. The 
unexpected reward (R) elicits a response in the neurons. The 
reward can thus be construed as a positive error in reward pre-
diction. Middle: The monkey has been trained that a conditioned 
stimulus (CS) predicts a reward. In this record, the reward occurs 
according to the prediction and does not elicit a response in the 
neurons because there is no error in the prediction of reward. 
The neurons are activated by the first appearance of a predicting 
stimulus but not by the reward. Bottom: A conditioned stimulus 
predicts a reward that fails to occur. The dopaminergic neurons 
show a decrease in firing at the time the reward would have 
occurred. (Reproduced, with permission, from Schultz, Dayan, 
and Montague 1997. Copyright © 1997 AAAS.)
Dopaminergic 
neuron of 
the midbrain
Predicted reward
Unexpected reward
Reward predicted but does not occur
(no CS)
R
CS
R
CS
(no R)
0
1
2s
that dopaminergic agonists and antagonists modulate 
reward learning and the blood oxygen level–dependent 
(BOLD) signal in the nucleus accumbens. However, in 
some experiments, mice that lack a dopamine synthe-
sis gene can still learn where to find a sugar or cocaine 
reward, suggesting that dopamine is not required for 
all forms of reward learning. In addition, rodents who 
receive amphetamines to elevate presynaptic dopa-
mine levels over a more extended time interval exhibit 
enhanced “wanting” behavior (ie, increased respond-
ing in the presence of a Pavlovian cue predicting 
sucrose reward).
These considerations have led some investigators to 
suggest that dopamine has a broader role than simply 
driving reinforcement learning by providing prediction-
error signals. Indeed, several recent studies have demon-
strated considerable variation in the response properties 
of different subpopulations of midbrain dopaminergic 
neurons. Some neurons are activated by both rewarding 
and aversive stimuli, while others are activated prefer-
entially by one of the two types of stimuli, and still oth-
ers show opposite responses (activated by rewards and 
suppressed by aversive stimuli). There is some evidence 
that these neuronal differences are related to differences 
in afferent inputs and efferent projections between sub-
populations of dopaminergic neurons. Understanding 
the precise role of this complex mixture of dopamine 
signals—in learning, in driving goal-directed behav-
ior, and especially in more complex forms of learning 
that involve longer timescales of sequences of actions 
to acquire distant rewards—remains an active area of 
investigation.
Unlike natural rewards, addictive drugs cause 
dopamine release in the reward circuitry no matter 
how often they are consumed, and the magnitude of 
this release is often greater than that seen with natural 
rewards—dopamine is released even when the drug no 
longer produces subjective pleasure. To the brain, con-
sumption of addictive drugs might always signal “bet-
ter than expected” and in this way would continue to 
influence behavior to maximize drug seeking and drug 
taking. If this idea is correct, it might explain why drug 
seeking and consumption become compulsive and why 
the life of the addicted person becomes focused increas-
ingly on drug taking at the expense of all other pursuits.
Drug Addiction Is a Pathological Reward State
Drug addiction is a chronic and sometimes fatal syn-
drome characterized by compulsive drug seeking and 
consumption despite serious negative consequences 
such as medical illness and inability to function in the 


===== Page 3 =====
1070    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 43–3  Brain reward circuits. A schematic drawing of 
the major dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)-ergic connections to and from the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA) and nucleus accumbens (NAc) in the rodent brain. 
The primary reward circuit includes dopaminergic projections 
from the VTA to the NAc. The VTA projections release dopamine 
in response to reward-related stimuli (and in some cases aver-
sion-related stimuli). There are also GABAergic projections from 
the NAc to the VTA, with some in a direct pathway innervating 
the VTA and some in an indirect pathway innervating the VTA 
via intervening GABAergic neurons in the ventral pallidum (not 
shown). The NAc also contains numerous types of interneu-
rons. The NAc receives dense innervation from glutamatergic 
monosynaptic circuits from the medial prefrontal cortex, 
hippocampus, lateral habenula, and amygdala, among other 
regions. The VTA receives such inputs from the amygdala and 
prefrontal cortex and from several brain stem nuclei that use 
the transmitter acetylcholine (not shown). It also receives the 
peptidergic terminals of neurons in the lateral hypothalamus 
as well as other inputs. These various inputs control aspects of 
reward-related perception and memory. (Adapted from Russo 
and Nestler 2013.)
family, workplace, or society. Many drug addicts are 
aware of the destructive nature of their addiction but 
are unable to alter their addictive behavior despite 
numerous attempts at treatment.
An interesting feature of drug addiction is that 
only a minute fraction of all chemical substances can 
cause the syndrome. These so-called drugs of abuse do 
not share a common chemical structure, and they pro-
duce their effects by binding to different protein tar-
gets in the brain. Rather, these diverse substances can 
each cause a similar behavioral syndrome of addiction 
because their actions converge on the brain circuits 
that control reward and motivation (Figure 43–3).
Advances in understanding these actions have 
come about in large part based on studies of laboratory 
animals that self-administer the same drugs that cause 
addiction in humans. In fact, when animals are given 
free and unlimited access to these drugs, a subset will 
lose control over drug consumption—which becomes 
increasingly involuntary—at the expense of eating and 
sleeping, and some will even die by overdose. Drug 
self-administration and other animal models of addic-
tion (Box 43–1) have made it possible to study both the 
Hippocampus
Lateral
habenula
Lateral
hypothalamus
Amygdala
Nucleus
accumbens
VTA
Medial
prefrontal
cortex 
Dopamine
Glutamate
GABA
neural circuitry through which drugs of abuse act to 
produce their initial rewarding effects and the molecu-
lar and cellular adaptations that drugs induce in this 
circuitry after repeated exposures cause an addiction-
like syndrome. Over the past decade, these studies in 
animals, together with brain imaging studies in human 
addicts, have provided an increasingly complete view 
of the addiction process.
All Drugs of Abuse Target Neurotransmitter 
Receptors, Transporters, or Ion Channels
A great deal is known about the initial interactions of 
addictive drugs with the nervous system. Virtually all 
of the proteins with which such drugs interact have 
been cloned and characterized (Table 43–1).
Each class of drug of abuse produces a different 
range of acute behavioral effects, consistent with the 
fact that each class acts on different targets and that 
these targets have distinct patterns of expression 
throughout the nervous system and peripheral tissues. 
Cocaine and other psychostimulants are activating 
and can cause cardiac side effects because their targets 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1071
Several animal models have played an important role in 
understanding how addictive drugs produce reward acutely 
and an addiction-like syndrome after repeated exposures.
Drug Self-administration
The reinforcing effects of a drug can be demonstrated in 
experiments in which animals perform a task (eg, press a 
lever) to receive an intravenous drug injection. In addition 
to studying acquisition of this behavior, scientists assess 
how hard an animal will work to deliver the drug by use of 
progressive ratio procedures, where each successive drug 
dose requires an increasing number of lever presses.
Animals reach a so-called break point when they stop 
self-administering the drug. After weeks or months of 
withdrawal from or extinction of drug self-administration, 
animals display a relapse-like behavior: They will press 
the stimulation lever, which no longer delivers the drug, 
in response to a test dose of the drug, cues associated pre-
viously with the drug (a light or tone), or stress. These 
various self-administration behaviors are considered the 
best-validated models of human addiction.
Conditioned Place Preference
Animals learn to associate a particular environment 
with passive exposure to drugs. For example, a rodent 
will spend more time on the side of a box where it 
was given cocaine than on the side where it received 
saline. This paradigm offers an indirect measure of 
potency of a drug reward and demonstrates the strong 
cue-conditioned effects of addictive drugs.
Locomotor Sensitization
All drugs of abuse stimulate locomotion in rodents upon 
initial drug exposure, with increasing locomotor activa-
tion seen after repeated drug doses. Since the neural 
circuitry that mediates locomotor responses to drugs of 
abuse partly overlaps with the circuitry that mediates 
reward and addiction, locomotor sensitization provides 
a model with which to study plasticity in this circuitry 
during a course of chronic drug exposure.
Intracranial Self-Stimulation
Animals will work (eg, press a lever) to deliver elec-
trical current into parts of the brain’s reward circuitry 
(see Figure 43–1). Drugs of abuse reduce the stimula-
tion threshold for such self-stimulation, meaning that 
in the presence of drug animals will work for stimu-
lation frequencies that have no effect under control 
conditions.
Box 43–1  Animal Models of Drug Addiction
(monoamine transporters) are expressed in peripheral 
nerves that innervate the heart. In contrast, opiates 
are sedatives and potent analgesics because their tar-
gets (opioid receptors) are expressed in sleep and pain 
centers.
Nevertheless, all drugs of abuse acutely induce 
reward and reinforcement, and this shared action 
reflects the fact that the drugs, despite their very dif-
ferent initial targets, induce some common functional 
effects on the brain’s reward circuitry (Figure 43–4). 
The best established of these shared initial effects is 
increased dopaminergic neurotransmission in the 
nucleus accumbens, albeit via different mechanisms. 
For example, cocaine produces this effect by block-
ing dopamine reuptake transporters located on the 
terminals of the ventral tegmental neurons, whereas 
opiates activate ventral tegmental area dopamine 
neuron cell bodies by inhibiting nearby GABAergic 
interneurons.
Opiates also produce reward through dopa-
mine-independent actions (eg, by activating opioid 
receptors on nucleus accumbens neurons themselves). 
All other drugs of abuse act through a combination of 
dopamine-dependent and -independent mechanisms 
(eg, activation of endogenous opioid and cannabinoid 
signaling) to produce some of the same functional 
effects on nucleus accumbens neurons. Importantly, by 
increasing dopaminergic neurotransmission, all such 
drugs also produce some of the same functional effects 
mediated by activation of dopamine receptors on the 
many other projection targets of ventral tegmental 
dopamine neurons (Figure 43–3), actions that are also 
instrumental in reward and in initiating some of the 
deleterious actions of repeated drug exposure.
Repeated Exposure to a Drug of Abuse Induces 
Lasting Behavioral Adaptations
The acute rewarding actions of drugs of abuse do not 
account for addiction. Rather, addiction is mediated 
by the brain’s adaptations to the repeated exposure 
to such acute actions. Two main questions in the field 


===== Page 5 =====
1072    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Table 43–1  Major Classes of Addictive Drugs
Class
Source
Molecular target
Examples
Opiates
Opium poppy
μ opioid receptor (agonist)1
Morphine, methadone,  
oxycodone, heroin, many others
Psychomotor stimulants
Coca leaf
Synthetic2
Synthetic
Dopamine transporter (antagonist)3
Cocaine
Amphetamines
Methamphetamine
Cannabinoids
Cannabis
CB1 cannabinoid receptors (agonist)
Marijuana
Nicotine
Tobacco
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (agonist)
Tobacco
Ethyl alcohol
Fermentation
GABAA receptor (agonist), NMDA-type glu-
tamate receptor (antagonist), and  
multiple other targets
Various beverages
Phencyclidine-like drugs
Synthetic
NMDA-type glutamate receptor (antagonist)
Phencyclidine (PCP, angel dust)
Sedative/hypnotics
Synthetic
GABAA receptor (positive allosteric modulator) Barbiturates, benzodiazepines
Inhalants
Varied
Unknown
Glues, gasoline, nitrous oxide, 
others
1The signaling pathways induced by μ receptor activation differ between opiates, differences that might be related to different addiction liabilities. 
Additionally, most opiates activate the δ opioid receptor, although the action at μ receptors is most important for reward and addiction.
2The original synthesis of amphetamine was based on the natural plant product ephedrine.
3While cocaine is an antagonist of the transporter, amphetamine and methamphetamine act differently: They are substrates for the 
transporter and, once in the nerve terminal cytoplasm, act to stimulate dopamine release.
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate.
Note: Caffeine can produce mild physical dependence but does not result in compulsive use. Some illegal drugs that are abused can be 
harmful but do not generally produce addiction; these include the hallucinogens lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), mescaline, psilocybin, 
and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), popularly known as ecstasy.
remain: What specific adaptations mediate the behav-
ioral syndrome of addiction, and why are some indi-
viduals more likely to become addicted?
We know—in both animals and humans—that 
roughly 50% of the risk for addiction across all drugs of 
abuse is genetic, but the specific genes that confer risk 
remain largely unknown. As for most other common 
chronic conditions, the genetic risk for addiction is highly 
complex, reflecting the combined actions of hundreds of 
genetic variations, each of which has a very small effect. 
The other 50% of the risk, while incompletely under-
stood, involves a host of environmental factors including 
early life stress, stress throughout life, and peer pressure.
Historically, the adaptations induced by repeated 
drug exposure have been described by a series of 
pharmacological terms. Tolerance refers to the dimin-
ishing effect of a drug after repeated administration at 
the same dose or to the need for an increase in dose 
to produce the same effect. Sensitization, also known 
as reverse tolerance, occurs when repeated adminis-
tration of the same drug dose elicits escalating effects. 
Dependence is defined as an adaptive state that develops 
in response to repeated drug administration and is 
unmasked during withdrawal, which occurs when drug 
taking stops. The symptoms of withdrawal vary from 
drug to drug and include effects opposite to a drug’s 
acute actions. Tolerance, sensitization, and depend-
ence/withdrawal are seen with many drugs that are 
not addicting. For instance, two drugs used to treat 
hypertension, the β-adrenergic antagonist proprano-
lol and the α2-adrenergic agonist clonidine, produce 
strong dependence as evidenced by severe hyperten-
sion upon their sudden withdrawal.
Drugs of abuse are unique in causing tolerance, 
sensitization, and dependence/withdrawal in reward- 
and motivation-related behaviors, and these behaviors 
contribute to the syndrome of addiction. Reward tol-
erance, which can be viewed as homeostatic suppres-
sion of endogenous reward mechanisms in response 
to repeated drug exposure, is one factor leading to 
escalating patterns of drug use. Motivational depend-
ence, which is manifested as negative emotional 
(eg, depression- and anxiety-like) symptoms seen 
during early drug withdrawal and also mediated by 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1073
Figure 43–4  Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging 
reveals neural correlates of cue-induced cocaine craving. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Grant et al. 1996.)
A. Subjects were shown neutral or cocaine-related cues and 
asked, “How do you rate your craving or urge for cocaine on a 
scale of 1–10?” The mean craving score (horizontal bar) is sig-
nificantly higher for exposure to cocaine-related cues than for 
exposure to neutral stimuli, even though the magnitude of the 
response across individuals varies considerably. Two subjects, 
identified by red and blue dots, represent high-level and low-
level craving, respectively.
B. Changes in self-reported craving are correlated with changes 
in metabolic rate in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and 
medial temporal lobe during exposure to cocaine-related cues. 
The abscissa plots the difference in metabolic rate between 
the two sessions (activity with cocaine cues minus activity 
with neutral cues). Metabolic rate is measured as the regional 
cerebral metabolic rate for glucose (rCMRglc). The ordinate 
plots the difference between the average of the responses to 
the question, “Do you have a craving or urge for cocaine?” in 
separate sessions with neutral and cocaine-related cues. (Each 
session lasted 30 minutes, and in each session, the question 
was asked three times.)
C. When subjects report a craving for cocaine, metabolic activ-
ity increases in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and 
in two medial temporal lobe structures, the amygdala (Am) 
and parahippocampal gyrus (Ph). Pseudocolored PET images 
of metabolic activity are spatially aligned with high-resolution 
structural magnetic resonance images. Metabolic rate markedly 
increased in the amygdala and parahippocampal gyrus in one 
subject who reported a large increase in craving during presen-
tation of cocaine-related cues (red dots in parts A and B). This 
effect is not evident in a subject who reported no increase in 
craving while exposed to the cocaine-related cues (blue dots in 
parts A and B). Metabolic activity outside the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex and medial temporal lobe is not shown.
1  Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
B  Change in metabolic rate
6
∆ rCMRglc
∆ Craving
2
1.5
r = 0.66
p < 0.02
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
5
4
3
2
1
0
A  Self-reported craving
C
10
Craving score
8
6
Neutral
cues
High craver
Low craver
Cocaine
cues
4
2
0
2  Medial temporal lobe
6
∆ rCMRglc
∆ Craving
2
1.5
r = 0.66
p < 0.02
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
5
4
3
2
1
0
DLPFC
Neutral cues
Cocaine cues
Am
Ph


===== Page 7 =====
1074    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
suppressed endogenous reward mechanisms, is a lead-
ing factor in driving the return to drug use, or relapse. 
Reward sensitization, which typically occurs after longer 
withdrawal periods, can trigger relapse in response to 
exposure to the drug itself or to drug-associated cues 
(eg, being with people or in a place where drug was 
previously used).
Interestingly, a given drug can produce all of these 
adaptations—tolerance, sensitization, and dependence—
simultaneously, due to different acute effects of the 
drug; this phenomenon emphasizes the involvement 
of multiple cell types and circuits in mediating a 
drug’s global actions. The key challenge for neuro-
scientists is to identify the changes in specific types 
of neurons and glia—and in their consequent con-
tributions to circuit function—that are induced by 
repeated drug exposure and that mediate the behav-
ioral features that define a state of addiction.
Lasting Molecular Adaptations Are Induced in 
Brain Reward Regions by Repeated Drug Exposure
An extensive literature shows that repeated exposure 
to a drug of abuse in animal models alters the levels 
of many neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors, 
their receptors and intracellular signaling pathways, 
and transcriptional regulatory proteins throughout the 
brain’s reward circuitry. Most of these changes can-
not be studied in living patients—only a small num-
ber of neurotransmitters and receptors can be assessed 
in patients with brain imaging—although studies 
of postmortem human brain tissue are being used 
increasingly to validate findings from animal models. 
Most of the reported research has focused on the ven-
tral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens, although 
an increasing number of studies are examining other 
parts of the reward circuitry.
The most robust experimental findings are available 
for psychostimulants and opiates, probably because the 
changes induced by these drugs are larger in magnitude 
than those of other drugs of abuse. This likely reflects 
the greater inherent addictiveness of psychostimulants 
and opiates: With equivalent exposures, a larger fraction 
of people will become addicted to these drugs as com-
pared with other classes of abused substances. Never-
theless, given the dominant public health consequences 
of alcohol, nicotine, and marijuana addictions, more 
attention should be given to these drugs.
Below, we summarize this large literature by 
focusing on a small number of drug-induced adapta-
tions that have been linked causally to specific behav-
ioral features of addiction in animal models. As will be 
clear in the next section, the present research focus is 
on relating these and many other molecular changes 
to synaptic and circuit adaptations also implicated in 
addiction.
Upregulation of the cAMP-CREB Pathway
Several drugs of abuse activate Gi protein–linked 
receptors, such as the D2 dopamine receptor; the μ, 
δ, and κ opioid receptors; and the CB1 cannabinoid 
receptor. This means that, to a certain extent, many 
drugs of abuse will activate Gi protein–linked signal-
ing pathways, with effects such as inhibition of adeny-
lyl cyclase (Chapter 14), in the nucleus accumbens and 
other target neurons.
Work over the past two decades has established 
that, after repeated exposure, the affected neurons 
adapt to this sustained suppression of the cyclic aden-
osine monophosphate (cAMP) pathway by upregu-
lating it, including induction of certain isoforms of 
adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A. Repeated drug 
exposure likewise induces upregulation of the tran-
scription factor CREB, which is normally activated by 
the cAMP pathway. Such upregulation of the cAMP-
CREB pathway can be seen as a molecular mechanism 
of tolerance and dependence: It restores normal activ-
ity of these pathways despite the presence of a drug 
(tolerance and dependence), and when the drug is 
removed, the upregulated pathway is unopposed, 
causing abnormally high activity of the pathway 
(withdrawal) (Figure 43–5). Indeed, upregulation of 
the cAMP-CREB pathway in nucleus accumbens neu-
rons has been shown to mediate both reward tolerance 
and motivational dependence and withdrawal in ani-
mal models.
Induction of ∆FosB
∆FosB is a member of the Fos family of transcription 
factors. It is a truncated product of the FosB gene gen-
erated through alternative splicing. In contrast to all 
other members of the Fos family, which are induced 
rapidly and transiently in response to many pertur-
bations in neural activity or cell signaling, ∆FosB is 
induced only slightly by initial presentation of stimuli. 
However, with repeated drug exposure, ∆FosB accu-
mulates in neurons because of its unusual stability, 
unique among all Fos family proteins.
This phenomenon occurs within neurons of the 
nucleus accumbens and several other brain reward 
areas after repeated exposure to virtually any drug of 
abuse, including cocaine and other psychomotor stim-
ulants, opiates, nicotine, ethanol, cannabinoids, and 
phencyclidine. Recent studies involving the selective 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1075
Figure 43–5  Upregulation of the cAMP-CREB pathway is 
a molecular mechanism underlying drug tolerance and 
dependence. Morphine or other μ opioid receptor agonists 
acutely inhibit the functional activity of the cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) pathway in brain reward neurons, as 
indicated, for example, by cellular levels of cAMP or protein 
kinase A (PKA)–dependent phosphorylation of substrates such 
as CREB. With continued drug exposure (shading), functional 
activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway is gradually upregulated 
and increases far above control levels upon removal of the drug 
(eg, by administration of the μ opioid receptor antagonist nalox-
one). These changes in the functional state of the cAMP-CREB 
pathway are mediated via the induction of adenylyl cyclase 
and PKA and activation of PKA substrates such as CREB in 
response to repeated drug administration. Induction of these 
proteins accounts for the gradual recovery in the functional 
activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway seen during chronic drug 
exposure (tolerance and dependence) and for the elevated 
activity of the cAMP-CREB pathway seen upon removal of the 
drug (withdrawal). First demonstrated for opiate drugs, similar 
regulation is seen in response to several other types of drugs 
of abuse. (Reproduced, with permission, from Nestler et al. 
2020.)
Adenylyl cyclase,
protein kinase A
induction
cAMP levels,
cAMP-dependent
protein
phosphorylation
Tolerance and 
dependence
Morphine
Withdrawal
Naloxone
expression or knockdown of ∆FosB in the nucleus 
accumbens of adult mice have provided direct evi-
dence that induction of ∆FosB mediates reward sensi-
tization, including increased drug self-administration 
and relapse. This is yet another example of a common 
adaptation to drugs of abuse that contributes to aspects 
of addiction shared across numerous drugs of abuse.
CREB and ∆FosB are two of many transcription 
factors implicated in drug addiction. Ongoing research 
is focused on characterizing the chromatin regulatory 
mechanisms through which these factors cooperate to 
regulate the expression of specific genes in the affected 
neurons and glia. Work is also underway to understand 
how these target genes drive their associated behavioral 
abnormalities via altered expression of proteins involved 
in synaptic, cell, and circuit function (Figure 43–6).
Lasting Cellular and Circuit Adaptations Mediate 
Aspects of the Drug-Addicted State
Repeated exposure to a drug of abuse can alter a neural 
circuit in two major ways. One mechanism, referred to 
as whole-cell or homeostatic plasticity, involves alter-
ing the intrinsic excitability of a nerve cell that will ulti-
mately alter functioning of the larger circuit of which it 
is a part. It is easy to imagine how whole-cell plasticity 
in neurons within the brain’s reward circuitry might 
mediate aspects of reward tolerance, sensitization, and 
dependence and withdrawal.
The other mechanism is synaptic plasticity, where 
connections between particular neurons are either 
strengthened or weakened. These synapse-specific 
adaptations could mediate the features of addiction 
that involve maladaptive memories, such as memories 
of the association of drug exposure with a host of envi-
ronmental cues. This pathological learning and mem-
ory can increasingly focus an individual on the drug at 
the expense of natural rewards. Most attention in the 
field to date has concentrated on synaptic plasticity.
Synaptic Plasticity
As discussed elsewhere in this book, two major forms 
of synaptic plasticity have been described at gluta-
matergic synapses: long-term depression (LTD) and 
long-term potentiation (LTP). Over the past two dec-
ades, the molecular basis of both adaptations has been 
established, with distinct mechanisms underlying each 
of several distinct subtypes of LTD and LTP that occur 
throughout the nervous system. We now know that 
several types of drugs of abuse, in particular psycho-
motor stimulants and opiates, cause LTD- and LTP-like 
changes at particular classes of glutamatergic synapses 
in the brain’s reward circuitry, with most work to date 
focused on the ventral tegmental area and nucleus 
accumbens.
Changes in the nucleus accumbens show inter-
esting time-dependent adaptations as a function of 
drug withdrawal. At early withdrawal points (hours 
to days), glutamatergic synapses on neurons of the 
nucleus accumbens display LTD-like changes, which 
evolve into LTP-like changes after longer periods of 
withdrawal (weeks to months). Drug-induced LTD- 
and LTP-like adaptations in the nucleus accumbens 
involve morphological changes similar to those in 
other brain regions (mostly the hippocampus and cer-
ebral cortex) where LTD and LTP occur in association 
with morphological changes in individual dendritic 
spines. During early withdrawal, LTD-like responses 
occur coincidently with increased numbers of 


===== Page 9 =====
1076    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 43–6  Dopamine- and glutamate-activated intracel-
lular signaling pathways implicated in drug addiction.  
NMDA-type glutamate receptors permit Ca2+ entry, which 
binds calmodulin. The Ca2+/calmodulin complex activates two 
types of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases, CaMKII 
in the cytoplasm and CaMKIV in the cell nucleus. Certain 
dopamine receptors activate a stimulatory G protein that in 
turn activates adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP). The cAMP-dependent protein kinase 
A (PKA) catalytic subunit can enter the nucleus. Once acti-
vated in the nucleus, both PKA and CaMKIV phosphorylate 
and thus activate cAMP response element binding protein 
(CREB). CREB recruits CREB-binding protein (CBP) and many 
other chromatin regulatory proteins and thereby activates the 
RNA polymerase II–dependent transcription of many genes, 
giving rise to proteins that can alter cellular function. Arc and 
Homer are localized in synaptic regions; mitogen-activated 
protein (MAP) kinases are protein kinases that control numer-
ous cellular processes; Fos and ∆FosB are transcription fac-
tors; and dynorphin is a type of endogenous opioid peptide. 
These proteins are thought to contribute both to homeostatic 
responses to excessive dopamine stimulation and to the mor-
phological and functional changes in synapses associated with 
memory formation. (Abbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphos-
phate; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; POL 2, RNA polymerase 
2; TBP, TATA binding protein.)
P
P
POL2
TBP
CBP
cAMP
ATP
CREB-1
CRE
Ca2+
Ca2+/
calmodulin
Enhancement
of active synaptic
connections 
Multiple
substrates
Homeostatic
adaptations
Adenylyl
cyclase 
TATA
G
PKA
CaMKIV
D1 dopamine
receptor
Nucleus
Glutamate
Dopamine
Dynorphin, Arc, Homer,
MAP kinases, c-Fos,
∆FosB, + many others
CaMKII
NMDA-glutamate
receptor
CaMKIV


