===== Page 1 =====
724    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–6  Anticipatory control of self-generated 
actions.  (Adapted, with permission, from Blakemore,  
Goodbody, and Wolpert 1998. Copyright © 1998 Society for 
Neuroscience.
A. When a subject is instructed to hold an object to which a 
sinusoidal load force is mechanically applied, the grip force 
of the fingers is high to prevent slippage, and the grip force 
modulation lags behind the changes in load force. This is high-
lighted for a portion of the load force modulation (dark red 
solid line) that  leads to a corresponding grip force (dark red 
dashed line), which is delayed. (Trial duration 4 s).
B. When a subject generates a similar load profile by pulling down 
on the fixed object, the load force can be anticipated, and thus, 
the grip force is lower and also tracks the load force without delay.
Force (N)
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Force (N)
0
5
10
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Grip
force 
Load
force 
Hand
moves
A  Robot controls movement
B  Hand controls movement
Load 
force
Grip force
lags
Grip and load
forces aligned
Grip force
Load 
force
Robot
arm moves
Grip force
signals by motor actions is a fundamental property of 
many sensory systems.
Sensory Processing Can Differ for Action  
and Perception
A growing body of research supports the idea that the 
sensory information used to control actions is pro-
cessed in neural pathways that are distinct from the 
afferent pathways that contribute to perception. It has 
been proposed that visual information flows in two 
streams in the brain (Chapter 25). A dorsal stream that 
projects to the posterior parietal cortex is particularly 
involved in the use of vision for action (Chapter 34), 
while a ventral stream that projects to the inferotem-
poral cortex is involved in conscious visual perception.
This distinction between the uses of vision for action 
and perception is based on a double dissociation seen in 
patient studies. For example, the patient D.F. developed 
visual agnosia after damage to her ventral stream. She 
is unable, for example, to indicate the orientation of a 
slot either verbally or with her hand. However, when 
asked to perform a simple action, such as putting a card 
through the slot, she has no difficulty orienting her 
hand appropriately to put the card through the slot 
(Chapter 59). Conversely, patients with damage to the 
dorsal stream can develop optic ataxia in which percep-
tion is intact but control is affected.
Although the distinction between perception and 
action arose from clinical observations, it can also be 
seen in normal people, as in the size–weight illusion. 
When lifting two objects of different size but equal 
weight, people report that the smaller object feels 
heavier. This illusion, first documented more than  
100 years ago, is both powerful and robust. It does not 
lessen when a person is informed that the objects are of 
equal weight and does not weaken with repeated lifting.
When subjects begin to lift large and small objects 
that weigh the same, they generate larger grip and load 
forces for the larger object because they assume that 
larger objects are heavier. After alternating between 
the two objects, they rapidly learn to scale their finger-
tip forces precisely for the true object weight (Figure 
30–7). This shows that the sensorimotor system recog-
nizes that the two weights are equal. Nevertheless, the 
size–weight illusion persists, suggesting not only that 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    725
A  Experimental setup
B
Grip
force
(N)
Large 
object 
lift off
Small object  lift off
Lift off for both objects
Load
force
(N)
Trial 1
Trial 8
Grip 
sensors
5
3
500 ms
Figure 30–7  The size–weight illusion.
A. In each trial, subjects alternately lifted a large 
object and a small object that weighed the same. 
Subjects thought the smaller object felt heavier 
than it actually was.
B. In the first trial, subjects generated greater 
grip and load forces for the bigger object (orange 
traces) as it was expected to be heavier than the 
small object. In the eighth trial, the grip and load 
forces are the same for the two objects, showing 
that the sensorimotor system for this action gener-
ates grip and load forces appropriate to the weights 
of the two objects despite the persistent conscious 
perception of a difference in weight. (Adapted with 
permission, from Flanagan and Beltzner 2000. 
Copyright © 2000 Springer Nature.)
the illusion is a result of high-level cognitive centers 
in the brain but also that the sensorimotor system can 
operate independently of these centers.
Motor Plans Translate Tasks Into  
Purposeful Movement
Real-world tasks are expressed as goals: I want to 
pick up a glass, dance, or have lunch. However, 
action requires a detailed specification of the temporal 
sequence of movements powered by the 600 or so mus-
cles in the human body. There is clearly a gap between 
the statement of a goal and a motor plan that recruits 
specific muscles in pursuit of that goal.
Stereotypical Patterns Are Employed in  
Many Movements
The ability of the motor systems to achieve the same 
task in many different ways is called redundancy. If 
one way of achieving a task is not practical, there is 
usually an alternative. For example, the simplest of all 
tasks, reaching for an object, can be achieved in infi-
nitely many ways.
The duration of the movement can be freely 
selected from a wide range and, given a particular 
choice of duration, the path and speed profile of the 
hand along the path (ie, trajectory) can take on many 
different patterns. Even selecting one trajectory still 
allows for infinitely many joint configurations to hold 
the hand on any given point of the path. Finally, hold-
ing the arm in a fixed posture can be achieved with a 
wide range of muscular co-contraction levels. There-
fore, for any movement, a choice must be made from a 
large number of alternatives.
Do we all choose to move in our own way? The 
answer is clearly no. Repetitions of the same behav-
ior by one individual as well as comparisons between 
individuals have shown that the patterns of movement 
are very stereotypical.
Invariance in stereotypical patterns of move-
ment tells us something about the principles the brain 
uses when planning and controlling our actions. For 
example, when reaching, our hand tends to follow 
roughly a straight path and the hand speed over time 
is typically smooth, unimodal, and roughly symmet-
ric (bell-shaped, Figure 30–8). The tendency to make 
straight-line movements characterizes a large class of 
movements and is surprising given that the muscles 
act to rotate joints.
To achieve such a straight-line movement of the 
hand requires complex joint rotations. The motions of 
the joints in series (the shoulder, elbow, and wrist) are 
complicated and vary greatly with different initial and 
final positions. Because rotation at a single joint would 


===== Page 3 =====
726    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–8  Hand path and velocity 
have stereotypical features. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Morasso 1981. 
Copyright © 1981 Springer Nature.)
A. The subject sits in front of a semicir-
cular plate and grasps the handle of a 
two-jointed apparatus that moves in the 
horizontal plane and records hand posi-
tion. The subject is instructed to move the 
hand between various targets (T1–T6).
B. The paths traced by one subject while 
moving his hand between targets.
C. Kinematic data for three hand paths  
(c, d, and e) shown in panel B. All paths 
are roughly straight, and all hand speed 
profiles have the same shape and scale 
in proportion to the distance covered. 
In contrast, the profiles for the angular 
velocity of the elbow and shoulder for the 
three hand paths differ. The straight hand 
paths and common profiles for speed 
suggest that planning is done with refer-
ence to the hand because these param-
eters can be linearly scaled. Planning  
with reference to joints would require 
computing nonlinear combinations of  
joint angles.
A
B
T3
T2
T4
T5
T1
C
T3
T2
T1
T6
T5
T4
e
d
c
100
Elbow (θ)
Elbow
Shoulder (α)
Shoulder
50
0
50
–50
–100
800
400
0
0.5 s
Joint angle (°)
Joint angular velocity (°/s)
Hand speed (mm/s)
0
T1      T4
T1      T5
T2      T5
θ
α
produce an arc at the hand, both elbow and shoulder 
joints must be rotated concurrently to produce a straight 
path. In some directions, the elbow moves more than the 
shoulder; in others, the reverse occurs. When the hand 
is moved from one side of the body to the other (Figure 
30–8, movement from T2 to T5), one or both joints may 
have to reverse direction in midcourse. The fact that 
hand trajectories are more invariant than joint trajecto-
ries suggests that the motor system is more concerned 
with controlling the hand, even at the cost of generating 
complex patterns of joint rotations.
Such task-centered motor plans can account for 
our ability to perform a specific action, such as writ-
ing, in different ways with more or less the same result. 
Handwriting is structurally similar regardless of the size 
of the letters or the limb or body segment used to pro-
duce it (Figure 30–9). This phenomenon, termed motor 
equivalence, suggests that purposeful movements are 
represented in the brain abstractly rather than as sets 
of specific joint motions or muscle contractions. Such 
abstract representations of movement, which are able to 
drive different effectors, provide a degree of flexibility 
of action not practical with preset motor programs.
Motor Planning Can Be Optimal at Reducing Costs
Why do humans choose one particular manner of per-
forming a task out of the infinite number of possibilities? 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    727
A  Right hand
C  Left hand
D  Teeth
E  Foot
B  Right hand 
 
(wrist ﬁxed)
Figure 30–9  Motor equivalence.   
The ability of different motor systems 
to achieve the same behavior is called 
motor equivalence. For example, writ-
ing can be performed using different 
parts of the body. The examples here 
were written by the same person 
using the right (dominant) hand (A), the 
right hand with the wrist immobilized 
(B), the left hand (C), the pen gripped 
between the teeth (D), and the pen 
attached to the foot (E). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Raibert 1977.)
Extensive research has attempted to answer this ques-
tion, and the fundamental idea that has emerged is that 
planning can be equated with choosing the best way to 
achieve a task. Mathematically, this is equivalent to the 
process of optimizing (ie, minimizing) a cost associ-
ated with the movement. The cost is a way of quantify-
ing what is good or bad about a movement (eg, energy, 
accuracy, stability) with a single number.
Different ways of achieving a task will lead to dif-
ferent costs. This allows all possible solutions to be 
ranked, thus identifying the one with the lowest cost. 
Invariances in our movements will reflect the particu-
lar cost we care about for that type of movement. Many 
costs have been proposed, but currently, most success-
ful theories propose that there are two main compo-
nents to movement cost: task success and effort. The 
effort component means that we want to achieve suc-
cess but with minimal energetic cost.
To understand how task success is a component 
of the cost, it is useful to understand what leads to 
lack of success. Having inaccurate internal models or 
processing clearly limits our ability to complete tasks, 
and motor learning is designed to keep these processes 
accurate. However, low-level components in the motor 
system, such as motor noise, limit success. Move-
ments tend to be variable, and the variability tends 
to increase with the speed or force of the movement. 
Part of this increase is caused by random variation in 
both the excitability of motor neurons and the recruit-
ment of additional motor units needed to increase 
force. Incremental increases in force are produced by 
progressively smaller sets of motor neurons, each of 
which produces disproportionately greater increments 
of force (Chapter 31). Therefore, as force increases, 
fluctuations in the number of motor neurons lead to 
greater fluctuations in force.
The consequences of this can be observed experi-
mentally by asking subjects to generate a constant 
force. The variability of such force production increases 
with the level of the force. Over a large range, this 
increase in variability is captured by a constant coef-
ficient of variation (the standard deviation divided 
by the mean force). This dependence of variability on 
force also increases the variability of pointing move-
ments as the speed of movement increases (as greater 
speed requires greater muscle force). The decrease in 
movement accuracy with increasing speed is known as 
the speed–accuracy trade-off (Figure 30–10). This rela-
tionship is not fixed, and part of skill learning, such 
as learning to play the piano, involves being able to 
increase speed without sacrificing accuracy.
In general, effort and accuracy are in conflict. 
Accuracy requires energy because corrections 
require muscular activity and thus comes at some 
cost. The trade-off between accuracy and energy 
varies for different movements. When walking, we 
could choose to step gingerly to ensure we never 
trip, but this would require substantial energy use. 
Therefore, we are willing to save energy by allowing 
ourselves the risk of occasionally tripping. In con-
trast, while eating with a knife and fork, we prior-
itize accuracy over energy to ensure the fork does 
not end up in our cheek.
The optimal movement is thus the one that mini-
mizes the bad consequences of noise while saving 
energy. One way to do this is to specify a desired 


===== Page 5 =====
728    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–10  Accuracy of movement varies in direct pro-
portion to its speed. Subjects held a stylus and had to hit a 
straight line lying perpendicular to the direction in which they 
moved the stylus. Subjects started from one of three different 
initial positions and were required to complete the movement 
within three different times (140, 170, or 200 ms). A trial was 
successful if the subject completed the movement within 
10% of the required time. Only successful trials were used 
for analysis. Subjects were informed when a trial was not 
successful. The variability in the motion of the subjects’ arm 
movements is shown in the plot as the standard deviation of 
the movement endpoint plotted against average speed (for 
each of three movement starting points and three movement 
times, giving nine data points). The variability in movement 
increases in proportion to the speed and therefore to the 
force producing the movement. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Schmidt et al. 1979.)
10
Average speed (cm/s)
Standard deviation of
movement endpoint (mm)
200
150
200
170
140
Movement time (ms)
100
50
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Target line
Possible 
starting points
movement trajectory or sequence of states that can be 
considered optimal. Although noise and environmen-
tal disturbances can cause the motor system to devi-
ate from the desired behavior, the role of feedback is 
simply to return the movement back to the desired 
trajectory. However, this approach is not necessarily 
computationally efficient. Rather than specifying the 
desired state of the body, we can specify an optimal 
feedback controller to generate the movement.
Optimal Feedback Control Corrects for Errors in a 
Task-Dependent Manner
Optimal feedback control aims to minimize a cost 
such as a combination of energy and task inaccuracy 
(Chapter 34). This type of feedback control is based on 
the idea that people do not plan a trajectory given a par-
ticular cost. Instead, the cost is used to create a feedback 
controller that specifies, for example, how the feedback 
gain for positional errors (and other errors such as veloc-
ity and force) changes over time. Therefore, given the 
goal of the task, the controller specifies the motor com-
mand suitable for different possible states of the body. 
The trajectory is then simply a consequence of applying 
the feedback control law to the current estimate of the 
state of the body (Figure 30–11). The feedback controller 
is optimal in that it can minimize the cost even in the 
presence of potential disturbances.
Optimal feedback control, therefore, does not make 
a hard distinction between feedforward and feedback 
control. Rather, during a task, the balance between 
feedforward and feedback control varies along a con-
tinuum that depends on the extent to which the esti-
mate of current body state is influenced by predictions 
(feedforward) or by sensory input (feedback).
An important feature of optimal feedback control 
is that it will correct only for deviations that are task 
relevant and allow variation in task-irrelevant devia-
tions. For example, when reaching to open an exit door 
that has a long horizontal handle, it is of little impor-
tance where along the handle one makes contact, so 
deviations in the horizontal direction can be ignored. 
Such considerations lead naturally to the minimal 
intervention principle that one should only intervene 
in an ongoing task if deviations will affect task success.
Intervening will generally add noise into the 
system (and require an increased effort), so interven-
ing unnecessarily will lead to a decrement in perfor-
mance. The aim of optimal feedback control is not to 
eliminate all variability, but to allow it to accumulate 
in dimensions that do not interfere with the task while 
minimizing it in the dimensions relevant for the task 
completion. The minimal intervention principle is 
supported by studies that show that feedback does not 
always return the system to the unperturbed trajectory 
but often acts in a manner to reduce the effect of the 
disturbance on the achievement of the task goal and to 
ensure that corrections are task-dependent.
Optimal feedback control emphasizes the setting 
of feedback gains, which can be partially instanti-
ated by reflexes that generate rapid motor responses. 
Optimal feedback control proposes that these rapid 
responses should be highly tuned to the task at hand. 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    729
Cost =
inaccuracy
+ effort
Motor command
Noise
Sensory feedback
Efference copy
Task-relevant
variability
Task-irrelevant
variability
Noise
Position
Velocity
Task
State estimator
Position
Velocity
Time
Low
High
Feedback gain
Optimal feedback control law
Figure 30–11  Optimal feedback control. In order to generate 
a movement for a given task, such as touching a horizontal bar, 
the sensorimotor system specifies a cost that is a combination 
of accuracy (eg, distance of the finger to the bar) and effort. To 
generate a movement that minimizes this cost, the sensorimo-
tor system sets up an optimal feedback control rule that speci-
fies the time-varying gains. These gains specify how the motor 
command should depend on states such as positional error and 
hand velocity. The form of this feedback control law assures 
that the movement is the best it can be in the presence of 
internal noise and external perturbations. The optimal behavior 
tends to let variability (blue ellipsoid, showing the possible 
final locations of the hand) accumulate in dimensions that do 
not affect task success (task-irrelevant variability), such as along 
the axis of the bar, while controlling variability that would lead 
to the hand missing the bar (task-relevant variability). Three 
paths for reaching from the same starting point are shown; cor-
rections are made only in the task-relevant dimension.
Although the short-latency (monosynaptic) stretch 
reflex responds only to muscle stretch, the long-
latency response has long been known to respond to 
task-dependent factors (Chapter 32). Optimal feedback 
control is important because it combines trajectory 
generation, noise, and motor cost and provides a clear 
comparison for the results of experimental work.
Multiple Processes Contribute to  
Motor Learning
Animals have a remarkable capacity for learning new 
motor skills simply through everyday interaction with 
their environment. Although evolution can hard wire 
some innate behaviors, such as the ability of a foal 
to stand or a spider to spin a web, motor learning is 
required to adapt to new and varying environments.
New motor skills cannot be acquired by fixed neural 
systems. Sensorimotor systems must constantly adapt 
over a lifetime as body size and proportions change, 
thereby maintaining an appropriate relationship between 
motor commands and body mechanics. In addition, 
learning is the only way to acquire motor skills that are 
defined by social convention, such as writing or dancing.
Most forms of motor learning involve procedural 
or implicit learning, so-called because subjects are gen-
erally unable to express what it is they have learned. 
Implicit learning often takes place without consciously 
thinking about it and can be retained for extended 
periods of time without practice (Chapter 52). Typical 
examples of procedural learning are learning to ride a 


===== Page 7 =====
730    Part V / Movement
bicycle or play the piano. In contrast, declarative or explicit 
learning refers to knowledge that can be expressed in 
statements about the world and is available to intro-
spection (Chapter 52). Memorizing the names of the 
cranial nerves or the directions to the local hospital 
are examples of explicit learning. Declarative memory 
tends to be easily forgotten, although repeated expo-
sure can lead to long-lasting retention. We use explicit 
learning strategies when initially learning some motor 
tasks, such as driving a car, but the skill becomes auto-
matic with time and practice.
Motor learning can occur more or less immediately 
or over time. We learn to pick up an object of unknown 
weight almost immediately, and we learn to ride a bicy-
cle after a few weeks of practice, but mastering the piano 
requires years. These different timescales may reflect the 
intrinsic difficulty of the task as well as evolutionary con-
straints that have to be unlearned to perform the task. 
For example, piano playing requires learning precise 
control of individual fingers, whereas in normal move-
ments, such as reaching and grasping, individuated fin-
ger movements are rare. Sensorimotor learning can be 
divided into two broad, but overlapping, classes: adapta-
tions to alterations in the properties of sensorimotor sys-
tems and learning new skills. We focus on each in turn.
Error-Based Learning Involves Adapting Internal 
Sensorimotor Models
Error-based learning is the driving force behind many 
well-studied sensorimotor adaptation paradigms. For 
example, the relation between the visual and proprio-
ceptive location of a limb can be altered by wearing pris-
matic glasses (or even spectacles). This shifts the visual 
input so that a person’s reach for an object is misdi-
rected. Over repeated attempts, the reach trajectories are 
adjusted to account for the discrepancy between vision 
and proprioception, a process termed visuomotor learn-
ing. Similarly, to control a computer mouse, we must 
learn the kinematic relation between the movement of 
the mouse and the cursor on the screen. In addition, the 
properties of the limbs change with both growth and 
tool use. The brain must adapt to such changes by reor-
ganizing or adjusting motor commands.
In error-based learning, the sensorimotor system 
senses the outcome of each movement and compares 
this to both the desired outcome and the predicted 
outcome. For example, when shooting a basketball the 
desired outcome is for the ball to go through the hoop. 
However,  once you let go of the ball you may predict 
that the ball will miss to the right of the hoop.  The 
difference between the prediction and actual outcome, 
termed the sensory prediction error,  can be used to 
update the internal model of how the ball responds to 
your actions. The  difference between the actual and 
desired outcome, termed the target error, can be used 
to adjust your plan (i.e. aim direction) to reduce the 
error. Both sensory prediction errors and target errors 
are important for driving learning.
Additional transformations may have to be 
applied to the error signal before it can be used to 
train an internal model. For example, when we throw 
a dart, errors are received in visual coordinates. This 
sensory error must be converted into motor command 
errors suitable for updating a control process such as 
an inverse model. Error-based learning tends to lead 
to trial-by-trial reduction in error as the motor system 
learns the novel sensorimotor properties.
An example of such error-based learning in reach-
ing occurs when the dynamics of the arm are unex-
pectedly changed. As we saw earlier, we normally 
move the hand with a straight-line path to reach an 
object. Unexpected dynamic interactions can produce 
curved paths, but subjects learn to anticipate and com-
pensate for these effects. This learning is conveniently 
studied by having subjects make reaching movements 
while holding the end of a robotic apparatus that can 
introduce novel forces on the arm (Figure 30–12A–C). 
Applying a force that is proportional to the speed of 
the hand but that acts at right angles to the direction 
of movement will produce a curved movement before 
finally reaching the target. Over time, the subject 
adapts to this perturbation and is able to maintain a 
straight-line movement (Figure 30–12D).
Subjects might adapt to such a situation in either 
of two ways. Subjects could co-contract the muscles 
in their arm, thereby stiffening the arm and reducing 
the impact of the perturbation, or they could learn an 
internal model that compensates for the anticipated 
force. By examining the aftereffects (movements after 
the robot is turned off), we can distinguish between 
these two forms of learning. If the arm simply stiff-
ens, it should continue to move in a straight path. If a 
new internal model is learned, the new model should 
compensate for a force that no longer exists, thereby 
producing a path in the direction opposite from the 
earlier perturbation. Early in learning, co-contraction 
is used to reduce the errors before an internal model 
can be learned, but the co-contraction then decreases 
as the internal model is able to compensate for the per-
turbation. Therefore, when the force is turned off after 
learning, subjects normally show a large aftereffect in 
the opposite direction, demonstrating that they have 
compensated for the perturbation (Figure 30–12D).
Such error-based processes appear to underlie 
adaptation across a number of different movement 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 30 / Principles of Sensorimotor Control    731
C  Perturbing force
1  Initial exposure
2  Adaptation
3  Aftereffects
B  Null ﬁeld
A  Experimental setup
D
Y
X
Hand velocity (x)
Hand velocity (y)
–1
–1
0
0
1
1
15 N
Figure 30–12  Learning improves the accuracy of reaching 
in a novel dynamic environment. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Brashers-Krug, Shadmehr, and Bizzi 1996. Copyright © 
1996 Springer Nature.)
A. A subject holds a robotic apparatus that measures the position 
and velocity of the hand and applies forces to the hand.
B. When the motors are off (null field), the subject makes 
approximately straight movements from the center of the 
workspace to targets arrayed in a circle.
C. A clockwise force is then applied to the hand, shown as a 
function of hand velocity. This field produces a force propor-
tional to the speed of the hand that always acts at right angles 
to the current direction of motion.
D. Initially, the hand paths are severely perturbed in response to 
the perturbing force (1). After some time, the subject adapts and 
can again follow a straight path during the entire movement (2). 
When the motors are then turned off, movement is again per-
turbed, but in a direction opposite to the earlier perturbation (3).
types and effectors, from the eye to whole-body move-
ments. For example, our normal symmetric pattern of 
gait seems to rely on error-based learning. When the gait 
pattern of subjects is perturbed by walking on a split-belt 
treadmill in which one belt moves faster than the other, 
they initially limp. However, step by step the gait pat-
tern naturally regains its symmetry (Figure 30–13), thus 
showing that error-based learning can drive complex 
whole-body coordinated movements. There is extensive 
evidence that fast trial-by-trial error-based learning relies 
on the cerebellum (Chapter 37).
Motor adaptation may not be a single unitary 
process. Recent evidence suggests that adaptation 
is driven by interacting processes whose outputs are 
combined. These interacting processes could have dif-
ferent temporal properties: one process quickly adapt-
ing to perturbations but also rapidly forgetting what 
was learned and the other learning more slowly but 
retaining learning for a longer period (Figure 30–13B). 
The advantage of such a mechanism is that the learning 
processes can be matched to the temporal properties 
of the perturbations, which can range from short-lived 
(fatigue) to long-lasting (growth).
Although motor learning often takes much prac-
tice, once a task is no longer performed, deadapta-
tion is typically faster. However, the sensory inputs 
associated with the particular action can be enough to 
switch behavior. When subjects wear prismatic glasses 


===== Page 9 =====
732    Part V / Movement
Figure 30–13  Learning new coordination patterns in 
walking.
A. A subject walks on a split-belt treadmill. When the two belts 
move at the same speed, subjects have a symmetric gait pat-
tern with equal step lengths.
B. In an adaptation study, the speeds of the belts are initially 
the same, then become split so that the right belt moves faster 
than the left, and then finally return to the same speed (top). 
Step length symmetry is initially lost when the belts move at 
different speeds, causing the subject to limp. Over time, the 
symmetry is restored and the limping is abolished. When the 
belts are once again moving at the same speed, an aftereffect 
is seen (middle).
  Maurice Smith and colleagues have shown that this type 
of adaptation is composed of multiple underlying processes 
that adapt on different timescales (bottom). The change in the 
step length symmetry is composed of two processes: a fast 
process (light green line) that adapts quickly but also rapidly 
forgets what has been learned, and a slow process (dark green 
line) that learns more slowly but has better retention. These 
processes both adapt to learn from the error, and the sum of 
these processes is the final adaptation (blue line). This dual-
rate learning system gives rise to the typical double exponential 
learning curves seen in many forms of adaptation in which 
adaptation is initially fast but tends to slow down as learning 
proceeds. (Adapted, with permission, from Roemmich, Long, 
and Bastian 2016.)
0
0
A
B
Step length
asymmetry
Symmetry
change
Baseline
Adaptation
Deadaptation
Belt speed
Fast belt
Fast belt
Step length
Slow belt
Slow belt
200 steps
that shift visual space, for example, they initially miss 
when reaching to targets but soon learn to reach cor-
rectly. After repeated trials, the mere feel of the glasses, 
without the prisms in place, is sufficient to evoke the 
adaptive behavior appropriate for the prisms.
In general, we can quantify performance with 
two measurements, accuracy and precision. Accuracy 
is a measure of systematic errors or biases, for exam-
ple, on average how far a series of thrown darts are 
away from the target. In contrast, precision is a meas-
ure of random errors, or statistical variability, in our 
actions. Both accuracy and precision contribute to 
performance. In general, accuracy can be improved 
by adapting or calibrating motor commands so as to 
reduce systematic errors. Although there is always 
some variability in movement arising from irreducible 
sensory and motor noise, the variability, as we have 
seen, can be reduced through planning so as to have 
minimal impact on task success. Most motor learning 
tends to become automatic (ie, implicit) with time, but 
early learning of some tasks can be aided by explicit 
learning (ie, strategy), such as a verbal instruction on 
how best to approach the task.
Not all sensory modalities are equally important 
in learning all motor tasks. In learning dynamic tasks, 
proprioception and tactile input are more important 
than vision. We normally learn dynamic tasks equally 
well with or without vision. However, individuals 
who have lost proprioception and tactile input have 
particular difficulty controlling the dynamic proper-
ties of their limbs or learning new dynamic tasks with-
out vision (Box 30–3).
Skill Learning Relies on Multiple Processes  
for Success
In contrast to error-based learning in which the sensori-
motor system adapts to a perturbation to return to pre-
perturbation performance, learning skills such as tying 
one’s shoelaces, juggling, typing, or playing the piano 
instead involves improving performance in the absence 
of a perturbation. Such learning tends to improve the 
speed–accuracy trade-off. Initially, we may be able to hit 
the correct keys on a keyboard when paced 1 second apart, 
but with practice, the same accuracy can be achieved at 
an increasingly quickening pace.


