===== Page 1 =====
50
Repairing the Damaged Brain
have been renowned for their ability to localize lesions 
with great precision but until recently have had little 
to offer in terms of treatment. This situation is now 
changing.
Advances in our understanding of the structure, 
function, and chemistry of the brain’s neurons, glial 
cells, and synapses have led to new ideas for treat-
ment. Many of these are now in clinical trials, and 
some are already available to patients. Developmental 
neuroscience is emerging as a major contributor to this 
sea change for three main reasons. First, efforts to pre-
serve or replace neurons lost to damage or disease rely 
on recent advances in our understanding of the mecha-
nisms that control the generation and death of nerve 
cells in embryos (Chapters 45 and 46). Second, efforts 
to improve the regeneration of neural pathways fol-
lowing injury draw heavily on what we have learned 
about the growth of axons and the formation of syn-
apses (Chapters 47 and 48). Third, there is increasing 
evidence that some devastating brain disorders, such 
as autism and schizophrenia, are the result of distur-
bances in the formation of neural circuits in embryonic 
or early postnatal life. Accordingly, studies of normal 
development provide an essential foundation for dis-
covering precisely what has gone wrong in disease.
In this chapter, we focus on the first two of these 
issues: how neuroscientists hope to augment the lim-
ited ability of neurons to recover normal function. We 
shall begin by describing how axons degenerate fol-
lowing the separation of the axon and its terminals 
from the cell body. The regeneration of severed axons 
is robust in the peripheral nervous system of mam-
mals and in the central nervous system of lower verte-
brates, but very poor in the central nervous system of 
Damage to the Axon Affects Both the Neuron and 
Neighboring Cells
Axon Degeneration Is an Active Process
Axotomy Leads to Reactive Responses in Nearby Cells
Central Axons Regenerate Poorly After Injury
Therapeutic Interventions May Promote Regeneration of 
Injured Central Neurons
Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration of 
Injured Axons
Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth
Injury-Induced Scarring Hinders Axonal Regeneration
An Intrinsic Growth Program Promotes Regeneration
Formation of New Connections by Intact Axons Can 
Lead to Recovery of Function Following Injury
Neurons in the Injured Brain Die but New Ones Can Be Born
Therapeutic Interventions May Retain or Replace Injured 
Central Neurons
Transplantation of Neurons or Their Progenitors Can 
Replace Lost Neurons
Stimulation of Neurogenesis in Regions of Injury May 
Contribute to Restoring Function
Transplantation of Nonneuronal Cells or Their 
Progenitors Can Improve Neuronal Function
Restoration of Function Is the Aim of  
Regenerative Therapies
Highlights
F
or much of its history, neurology has been a 
discipline of outstanding diagnostic rigor but lit-
tle therapeutic efficacy. Simply put, neurologists 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1237
Figure 50–1  Axotomy affects the injured neuron and its 
synaptic partners.
A. A normal neuron with an intact functional axon wrapped by 
myelinating cells contacts a postsynaptic neuron. The neuron’s 
cell body is itself a postsynaptic target.
B. After axotomy, the nerve terminals of the injured neuron 
begin to degenerate (1). The distal axonal stump separates 
from the parental cell body, becomes irregular, and undergoes 
Wallerian degeneration (2). Myelin begins to fragment (3) and 
the lesion site is invaded by phagocytic cells (4). The cell body 
of the damaged neuron undergoes chromatolysis: The cell 
body swells and the nucleus moves to an eccentric position 
(5). Synaptic terminals that contact the damaged neuron with-
draw and the synaptic site is invaded by glial cell processes (6). 
The injured neuron’s inputs (7) and targets (8) can atrophy and 
degenerate.
mammals. Many investigators have sought the reasons 
for these differences in the hope that understanding 
them will lead to methods for augmenting recovery 
of the human brain and spinal cord following injury. 
Indeed, we shall see that several differences in regen-
erative capacity of mammalian neurons have been 
discovered, each of which has opened promising new 
approaches to therapy.
We shall then consider an even more dire conse-
quence of neural injury: the death of neurons. The ina-
bility of the adult brain to form new neurons has been 
a central dogma of neuroscience since the pioneering 
neuroanatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal asserted that 
in the injured central nervous system, “Everything 
may die, nothing may be regenerated.” This pessi-
mistic view dominated neurology for most of the last 
century despite the fact that Ramón y Cajal added, “It 
is for the science of the future to change, if possible, 
this harsh decree.” Remarkably, in the past few dec-
ades, evidence has accumulated that neurogenesis 
does occur in certain regions of the adult mammalian 
brain. This discovery has helped accelerate the pace 
of research on ways to stimulate neurogenesis and to 
replace neurons following injury. More than a century 
later, neuroscientists are finally beginning to reverse 
Cajal’s “harsh decree.”
Damage to the Axon Affects Both the  
Neuron and Neighboring Cells
Because many neurons have very long axons and 
cell bodies of modest size, most injuries to the cen-
tral or peripheral nervous system involve damage to 
axons. Transection of the axon, either by cutting or by 
crushing, is called axotomy, and its consequences are 
numerous.
Axon Degeneration Is an Active Process
Axotomy divides the axon in two: a proximal segment 
that remains attached to the cell body and a distal seg-
ment that has lost this crucial attachment. Axotomy 
dooms the distal segment of the axon because energy 
supplies dwindle during a short-lived latent period. 
Soon the alterations become irreversible. Synaptic 
transmission fails at severed nerve terminals, and 
calcium levels increase within the axon. The calcium 
activates proteases, initiating a program of cytoskeletal 
disassembly and degradation, and physical degenera-
tion of the axon ensues. Once the denervation begins, 
its progression is relatively rapid and inexorably pro-
ceeds to completion (Figure 50–1). This degenerative 
response is the first step in an elaborate constellation 
Nissl substance
A
B
Myelin
Transneuronal
degeneration
(retrograde)
Transneuronal
degeneration
(anterograde)
Retraction of
synaptic terminals
and glial cell
invasion
Chromatolysis
Microglia
macrophage
inﬁltration
Myelin
debris
Wallerian
degeneration
Terminal
degeneration
Oligodendrocyte
or Schwann cell
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
8
Glial 
cell


===== Page 3 =====
1238    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–2  Axonal degeneration is delayed in Wlds 
mutant mice. In wild type animals, axons in the distal 
stump degenerate rapidly after sectioning of a peripheral 
nerve, as shown by disrupted axonal fragments (yel-
low) and the lack of myelinated axonal profiles at the 
electron micrographic level. In Wlds mutant mice the 
distal portion of severed axons persists for a long time. 
(Confocal micrographs reproduced, with permission, from 
Beirowski et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 Elsevier B.V.; 
electron micrographs reproduced, with permission, from 
Mack TGA, Reiner M, Beirowski B, et al. 2001. Copyright 
© 2001 Springer Nature.)
of changes, called Wallerian degeneration, that were ini-
tially described in 1850 by Augustus Waller.
The degeneration of transected axons was long 
thought to be a passive process, the consequence of 
separation from the cell body, where most of the cell’s 
proteins are synthesized. Lacking a source of new pro-
tein, the distal stump was thought to simply wither 
away. But the discovery and analysis in mice of a spon-
taneously occurring mutation called Wlds (Wallerian 
degeneration slow) challenged this view (Figure 50–2). 
In Wlds mutant mice, the distal stumps of peripheral 
nerves persist for several weeks after transection, 
about 10-fold longer than in normal mice. This remark-
able finding suggested that degeneration is not a pas-
sive consequence of separation from the cell body, but 
is rather an actively regulated response.
Analysis of the Wlds mutant mice led to insights 
into the nature of this regulation. The mutation led to 
formation of a mutant form of nicotinamide mononu-
cleotide adenyltransferase 1 (NMNAT1), an enzyme 
involved in biosynthesis of a metabolic cofactor, nicoti-
namide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). A related enzyme, 
NMNAT2, which is normally present in the axon, 
becomes quite unstable and breaks down rapidly fol-
lowing axotomy, leading to loss of NAD, which is criti-
cal for maintenance of energy homeostasis in the axon. 
Although normal NMNAT1 is confined to the nucleus, 
the mutant Wlds form mislocalizes to the axon, where 
it substitutes for NMNAT2 to prolong axonal survival. 
Surprisingly, a main way that both the wild type and 
Wlds forms of NMNAT maintain NAD levels is not 
by synthesizing it but by inhibiting another protein, 
SARM1, that breaks down NAD. Thus, loss of SARM 
protects damaged axons, whereas activation of SARM1 
leads to degeneration (Figure 50–3A). Several other pro-
teins modulate this core pathway (Figure 50–3B).
10–12 
days later
Wild type
Wlds mutant


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 50–3  A core pathway regulates axon degeneration 
following axotomy in mice.
A. Damage to neurites in vitro leads to degeneration of the por-
tions separated from the cell body. Likewise, axotomy in vivo 
leads to Wallerian degeneration, as shown by loss of myelin 
profiles in the cross section. Both in vitro and in vivo axons are 
spared if the SARM1 gene is deleted. (From Gerdts et al. 2013.)
B. NMNAT2, closely related to the mutant Wlds protein, is  
normally present in axons. It can generate nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and inhibit SARM1, which 
degrades NAD. High NAD levels are required for  
energy metabolism, keeping adenosine triphosphate (ATP)  
levels high and calcium levels low in the axon. Following  
axotomy, NMNAT2 levels decrease rapidly, disinhibiting 
SARM1. NAD levels fall, ATP is depleted, calcium levels rise, 
calcium-dependent proteases are activated, and the axon is 
degraded. Kinases (MAPK) and a ubiquitin ligase (Phr1) regulate 
the pathway.
A
Uninjured
Injured
B
Uninjured
Injured
Wild type
In vitro
In vivo
Wild type
SARM1 KO
Axonal
integrity
Axonal
transport
?
?
Ca2+ LOW
ATP HIGH
NAD
NMNAT2
NAM
SARM1OFF
PHR1
MAPK2
NMN
Axonal
degeneration
Axonal
damage
Ca2+ HIGH
ATP LOW
NAD
NMNAT2
NAM
SARM1ON
PHR1
MAPK2
NMN


===== Page 5 =====
1240    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Together, these exciting new discoveries provide 
an answer to the question of why, following axotomy, 
the distal stump degenerates while the proximal 
stump is preserved. The conventional explanation 
that the distal stump is deprived of nutrients normally 
delivered from the cell body is incomplete. Instead, 
a signaling pathway in the axon senses damage and 
rapidly triggers degeneration. In this scenario, the 
key element supplied by the axon is NMNAT2. Its 
breakdown following axotomy disinhibits SARM1 
and, perhaps in parallel with activation of factors that 
stimulate SARM1, triggers the loss of NAD, lead-
ing to the energy crisis that results in Wallerian 
degeneration.
These recent discoveries may be useful in devising 
treatments for neurological disorders in which axonal 
degeneration is prominent and generally precedes 
neuronal death. A fatal disease of motor neurons, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, falls into this category. 
Other possibilities include some forms of spinal mus-
cular atrophy, Parkinson disease, and even Alzhei-
mer disease. Axon degeneration that occurs in these 
diseases, as well as after metabolic, toxic, or inflam-
matory insults, resembles the degeneration that 
follows acute trauma and may be regulated in similar 
ways. Thus, while methods for saving transected distal 
axons are unlikely to be useful clinically for treating 
patients who have suffered traumatic injury, the same 
techniques could be useful in treating neurodegenera-
tive diseases.
Even though the proximal portion of the axon 
remains attached to the cell body, it too suffers. And in 
some cases, the neuron itself dies by apoptosis, prob-
ably because axotomy isolates the cell body from its 
supply of target-derived trophic factors. Even when 
this does not occur, the cell body often undergoes a 
series of cellular and biochemical changes called the 
chromatolytic reaction: The cell body swells, the nucleus 
moves to an eccentric position, and the rough endo-
plasmic reticulum becomes fragmented (Figure 50–1B). 
Chromatolysis is accompanied by other metabolic 
changes, including an increase in protein and RNA 
synthesis as well as a change in the pattern of genes 
that the neuron expresses. These changes are reversed 
if regeneration is successful.
Axotomy Leads to Reactive Responses  
in Nearby Cells
Axotomy sets in motion a cascade of responses in 
numerous types of neighboring cells. Among the most 
important responses are those of the glial cells that 
ensheath the distal nerve segment. One is fragmentation 
of the myelin sheath, which is then removed by phago-
cytes. This process is rapid in the peripheral nervous 
system, where the myelin-producing Schwann cells 
break the myelin into small fragments and engulf it. 
Schwann cells, which then divide, secrete factors that 
recruit macrophages from the blood stream. The mac-
rophages in turn assist the Schwann cells in disposing 
of debris. Schwann cells also produce growth factors 
that promote axon regeneration, a point to which we 
will return later.
In contrast, in the central nervous system, the 
myelin-forming oligodendrocytes have little or no 
ability to dispose of myelin, and removal of debris 
depends on resident phagocytic cells called microglia. 
This difference in cellular properties may help explain 
the observation that Wallerian degeneration proceeds 
to completion much more slowly in the central nerv-
ous system.
Axotomy also affects both the synaptic inputs to 
and the synaptic targets of the injured neuron. When 
axotomy disrupts the major inputs to a cell—as hap-
pens in denervated muscle, or to neurons in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus when the optic nerve is cut—the 
consequences are severe. Usually the target atrophies 
and sometimes dies. When targets are only partially 
denervated, their responses are more limited. In addi-
tion, axotomy affects presynaptic neurons. In many 
instances, synaptic terminals withdraw from the cell 
body or dendrites of chromatolytic neurons and are 
replaced by the processes of glial cells—Schwann cells 
in the periphery and microglia or astrocytes in the 
central nervous system. This process, called synaptic 
stripping, depresses synaptic activity and can impair 
functional recovery.
Although the mechanism of synaptic stripping 
remains unclear, two possibilities have been sug-
gested. One is that postsynaptic injury causes axon 
terminals to lose their adhesiveness to synaptic sites so 
that they are subsequently wrapped by glia. The other 
is that glia initiate the process of synaptic stripping in 
response to factors released from the injured neuron 
or to changes in its cell surface. Whatever the trigger, 
the activation of microglia and astrocytes by axotomy 
clearly contributes to the stripping process. In addi-
tion, biochemically altered astrocytes, called reactive 
astrocytes, contribute to formation of a glial scar near 
sites of injury.
As a result of these transsynaptic effects, neu-
ronal degeneration can propagate through a circuit 
in both anterograde and retrograde directions. For 
example, a denervated neuron that becomes severely 
atrophic can fail to activate its target, which in turn 
becomes atrophic. Likewise, when synaptic stripping 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1241
Figure 50–4  Axons in the periphery regenerate better than 
those in the central nervous system. After sectioning of a 
peripheral nerve, the perineural sheath reforms rapidly and 
Schwann cells in the distal stump promote axonal growth by 
producing trophic and attractant factors and expressing high 
levels of adhesive proteins. After sectioning of an axona in the 
central nervous system, the distal segment disintegrates and 
myelin fragments. In addition, reactive astrocytes and mac-
rophages are attracted to the lesion site. This complex cellular 
milieu, termed a glial scar, inhibits axonal regeneration.
prevents an afferent neuron from obtaining sufficient 
sustenance from its target cell, the afferent neuron’s 
inputs are placed at risk. Such chain reactions help to 
explain how injury in one area in the central nervous 
system eventually affects regions far from the site of 
the injury.
Central Axons Regenerate Poorly After Injury
Central and peripheral nerves differ substantially in 
their ability to regenerate after injury. Peripheral nerves 
can often be repaired following injury. Although the 
distal segments of peripheral axons degenerate, con-
nective tissue elements surrounding the distal stump 
generally survive.
Axonal sprouts grow from the proximal stump, 
enter the distal stump, and grow along the nerve toward 
its targets (Figure 50–4). The mechanisms that drive 
this process are related to those that guide embryonic 
axons. Chemotropic factors secreted by Schwann cells 
attract axons to the distal stump, adhesive molecules 
within the distal stump promote axon growth along 
cell membranes and extracellular matrices, and inhibi-
tory molecules in the perineural sheath prevent regen-
erating axons from going astray.
Once regenerated peripheral axons reach their tar-
gets, they are able to form new functional nerve end-
ings. Motor axons form new neuromuscular junctions; 
autonomic axons successfully reinnervate glands, 
blood vessels, and viscera; and sensory axons reinner-
vate muscle spindles. Finally, those axons that lost their 
myelin sheaths are remyelinated, and chromatolytic 
cell bodies regain their original appearance. Thus, in 
all three divisions of the peripheral nervous system—
motor, sensory, and autonomic—the effects of axotomy 
are reversible. Peripheral regeneration is not perfect, 
however. In the motor system, recovery of strength 
may be substantial, but recovery of fine movements is 
usually impaired. Some motor axons never find their 
targets, some form synapses on inappropriate muscles, 
and some motor neurons die. Nevertheless, the regen-
erative capacities in the peripheral nervous system are 
impressive.
Myelin
Schwann cell
Peripheral nervous system
Myelin
Oligodendrocyte
Central nervous system
Reactive 
astrocyte
invasion
Glial
scar
Macrophage
inﬁltration
Sheath 
reforms
Schwann cells 
promote growth
Perineural 
sheath


===== Page 7 =====
1242    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–5  A transplanted peripheral nerve provides 
a favorable environment for the regeneration of central 
axons. Left: After sectioning of the spinal cord, ascending and 
descending axons fail to cross the lesion site. Right: Insertion 
of a peripheral nerve graft that bypasses the lesion site pro-
motes regeneration of both ascending and descending axons. 
(Adapted from David and Aguayo 1981.)
In contrast, regeneration after injury is poor in 
the central nervous system (Figure 50–4). The proxi-
mal stumps of damaged axons can form short sprouts, 
but these soon stall and form swollen endings called 
“retraction bulbs”, which fail to progress. Long-distance 
regeneration is rare. The failure of central regenera-
tion is what led to the long-standing belief that inju-
ries to the brain and spinal cord are largely irreversible 
and that therapy must be restricted to rehabilitative 
measures.
For some time, neurobiologists have been seeking 
the reasons why regenerative capacity in the central 
and peripheral nervous systems differs so dramati-
cally. The goal of this work has been to identify the 
crucial barriers to regeneration so that they can be 
overcome. These studies have begun to bear fruit, and 
there is now cautious optimism that the injured human 
brain and spinal cord have a regenerative capacity that 
can eventually be exploited.
Before discussing these new developments, it is 
helpful to consider the problem of neural regenera-
tion in a broader biological context. Is it the ability of 
peripheral axons to regenerate that is unusual, or the 
inability of central axons to do so? It is in fact the latter. 
Obviously, central axons grow well during develop-
ment. More surprisingly, axons in immature mammals 
can also regenerate following transection in the brain 
or spinal cord. Moreover, regeneration is robust in the 
adult central nervous systems of lower vertebrates 
such as fish and frogs, as exemplified by the studies of 
Roger Sperry on restoration of vision following dam-
age to the optic nerve (Chapter 47).
So why have mature mammals lost this seemingly 
important capacity for repair? The answer may lie in 
what the mammalian brain can do peerlessly, which 
is to remodel its basic wiring diagram in accordance 
with experience during critical periods in early post-
natal life, so that each individual’s brain is optimized 
to deal with the changes and challenges of internal 
and external worlds (Chapter 49). Once remodeling 
has occurred, it must be stabilized. Although it is 
obviously useful to reassign cortical space to one eye 
if the other is blinded in childhood, we would not 
want our cortical connections similarly rearranged in 
response to a brief period of unusual illumination or 
darkness. Maintaining constancy in the face of small 
perturbations in connectivity may therefore have the 
unavoidable consequence of limiting the ability of cen-
tral connections to regenerate in response to injury. In 
this view, our limited regenerative capacity is a Faus-
tian bargain in which we have sacrificed recuperative 
power to ensure the maintenance of precisely wired 
circuits that underlie our superior intellectual capacity.
Therapeutic Interventions May Promote 
Regeneration of Injured Central Neurons
In seeking reasons for the poor regeneration of central 
axons, one critical question is whether it reflects an ina-
bility of neurons themselves to grow or an inability of 
the environment to support axonal growth. This issue 
was addressed by Albert Aguayo and his colleagues 
in the early 1980s. They inserted segments of a central 
nerve trunk into a peripheral nerve, and segments of a 
peripheral nerve into the brain or spinal cord, to find 
out how axons would respond when confronted with 
a novel environment.
As expected, axons in the grafts, which were sep-
arated from their somata, promptly degenerated, leav-
ing “distal stumps” containing glia, support cells, and 
extracellular matrix. What was striking was the behavior 
of axons near the translocated segments. Spinal axons 
that regenerated poorly following spinal cord injury 
grew several centimeters into the peripheral graft 
(Figure 50–5). Similarly, retinal axons, which regener-
ated poorly following damage to the optic nerve, grew 
long distances into a peripheral graft placed in their path.  
Peripheral
nerve graft
Central
nervous
system


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1243
Figure 50–6  Peripheral and central nerves differ in their 
ability to support axonal regeneration.
A. In the peripheral nervous system, severed axons regrow 
past the site of injury. Insertion of a segment of optic nerve 
into a peripheral nerve suppresses the ability of the peripheral 
nerve to regenerate.
B. In the central nervous system, severed axons typically  
fail to regrow past the site of injury. Insertion of a sec-
tion of peripheral nerve into a central nerve tract promotes 
regeneration.
Conversely, peripheral axons regenerated well through 
their own distal nerve trunk, but fared poorly when 
paired with a severed optic nerve (Figure 50–6).
Aguayo extended these studies to show that axons 
from multiple regions, including the olfactory bulb, 
brain stem, and mesencephalon, could all regenerate 
long distances if provided with a suitable environment. 
Even an optimal environment cannot fully restore the 
growth potential of central axons for reasons we will 
discuss in a later section. Nevertheless, these pioneer-
ing experiments focused attention on components of the 
central environment that inhibit regenerative ability and 
motivated an intensive search for the molecular culprits.
Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration  
of Injured Axons
In probing the differences between peripheral and 
central growth environments, initial searches were 
influenced by the results of experiments performed 
by Ramón y Cajal’s student Francisco Tello nearly a 
century before Aguayo’s studies. Tello transplanted 
segments of peripheral nerves into the brains of exper-
imental animals and found that injured central axons 
grew toward the implants, whereas they barely grew 
when implants were not available.
This result implied that peripheral cells provide 
growth-promoting factors to the injured areas, factors 
normally absent from the brain. Ramón y Cajal rea-
soned that central nerve pathways lacked “substances 
able to sustain and invigorate the indolent and scanty 
growth” similar to those provided by peripheral path-
ways. Numerous studies over the succeeding century 
identified constituents of peripheral nerves that are 
potent promoters of neurite outgrowth. These include 
components of Schwann cell basal laminae, such as 
laminin, and cell adhesion molecules of the immuno-
globulin superfamily. In addition, cells in denervated 
Cut peripheral nerve
Cut optic nerve
Regeneration
Poor regeneration
Cut and transplant  
peripheral nerve
Cut and transplant  
optic nerve
Regeneration
No regeneration
Spinal cord
Muscle
Retina
Tectum
A  Peripheral nervous system 
 
(motor and sensory nerve)
B  Central nervous system
 
(optic nerve) 


===== Page 9 =====
1244    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–7  Myelin inhibits regeneration of central 
axons. (Adapted, with permission, from Schwegler, Schwab, 
and Kapfhammer 1995.)
A. Sensory fibers normally extend rostrally in a myelin-rich  
spinal cord.
B. Right dorsal root fibers were sectioned in 2-week-old normal 
rats. Regeneration of the fibers was assessed histochemically 
20 days later. The central branches of the sectioned axons 
degenerated, leaving a portion of the spinal cord denervated. 
Little regeneration occurred in the myelin-rich cord.
C. Some littermates received local x-irradiation to block myeli-
nation. In these animals, sensory fibers that entered the cord 
through neighboring uninjured roots sprouted new collaterals 
following denervation.
distal nerve stumps begin to produce neurotrophins 
and other trophic molecules of the sort described in 
Chapter 46. Together, these molecules nourish neurons 
and guide growing axons in the embryonic nervous 
system, so it makes sense that they also promote the 
regrowth of axons. By contrast, central neuronal tis-
sue is a poor source of these molecules, containing lit-
tle laminin and low levels of trophic molecules. Thus, 
in the embryo, both central and peripheral nervous 
systems provide environments that promote axon out-
growth. But only the peripheral environment retains 
this capacity in adulthood or is able to regain it effec-
tively following injury.
The practical implications of this view are that 
supplementing the central environment with growth-
promoting molecules might improve regeneration. To 
this end, investigators have infused neurotrophins 
into areas of injury or inserted fibers rich in extracel-
lular matrix molecules such as laminin to serve as scaf-
fold for axonal growth. In some attempts, Schwann 
cells themselves, or cells engineered to secrete trophic 
factors, have been grafted into sites of injury. In many 
of these cases, injured axons grow more extensively 
than they do under control conditions. Yet regenera-
tion remains limited, with axons generally failing to 
extend long distances. More important, functional 
recovery is minimal.
Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth
What accounts for such disappointingly limited regen-
eration? One part of the explanation is that the envi-
ronment encountered by severed central axons is not 
only poor in growth-promoting factors but also rich in 
growth-inhibiting factors, some of which are derived 
from myelin. In culture, fragments of central but not 
peripheral myelin potently inhibit neurite outgrowth 
from co-cultured central or peripheral neurons. Con-
versely, sprouting of spinal axon collaterals following 
injury is enhanced in rats treated to prevent myelin 
formation in the spinal cord (Figure 50–7).
These findings implied that although both central 
and peripheral environments might contain a supply 
of growth-promoting elements, central nerves also 
contain inhibitory components. The fact that myelin 
inhibits neurite growth may seem peculiar, but not if 
we consider that myelination normally occurs postna-
tally, after axon extension is largely complete.
Searches for the inhibitory components of central 
myelin turned up an embarrassment of riches. Several 
classes of molecules that occur at higher levels in cen-
tral myelin compared to peripheral myelin are able to 
inhibit neurite outgrowth when presented to cultured 
neurons. The first to be discovered was identified when 
an antibody generated against myelin proteins proved 
A  Normal
B  Limited regeneration 
 
in myelin-rich cord
C  Regeneration in 
 
myelin-free cord
Myelin
Myelin free
Sensory 
ﬁbers


