===== Page 1 =====
868    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–7  Oculomotor neurons signal eye position and 
velocity.
A. The record is from an abducens neuron of a monkey. When the 
eye is positioned in the medial side of the orbit, the cell is silent 
(position θ0). As the monkey makes a lateral saccade, there is a 
burst of firing (D1), but in the new position (θ1), the eye is still too 
far medial for the cell to discharge continually. During the next 
saccade, there is a burst (D2), and at the new position (θ2), there 
is a tonic position-related discharge. Before and during the next 
saccade (D3), there is again a pulse of activity and a higher tonic 
discharge when the eye is at the new position (θ3). When the eye 
makes a medial movement, there is a period of silence during the 
saccade (D4) even though the eye ends up at a position (θ4) asso-
ciated with a tonic discharge. (Adapted from Fuchs and Luschei 
1970.)
B. Saccades are associated with a step of activity, which signals 
the change in eye position, and a pulse of activity, which signals 
eye velocity. The neural activity corresponding to eye position and 
velocity is illustrated both as a train of individual spikes and as an 
estimate of the instantaneous firing rate (spikes per second).
Medial
Lateral
Horizontal 
eye position 
(degrees)
Abducens 
motor 
neuron
Spikes /s
Spikes
Pulse
Step
Eye position
5 ms
Lateral
Eye velocity
D1
D2
D3
D4
Lateral 
rectus
Abducens
motor neuron
(N. VI)
Recording
A
B
Time
Medial
θ
θ1
θ0
θ2
θ4
θ3
the pulse, then the eye drifts away from the target after 
the saccade. As described later, the pulse and step are 
generated by different brain stem structures.
The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in  
the Brain Stem
Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the  
Pontine Reticular Formation
The neuronal signal for horizontal saccades origi-
nates in the paramedian pontine reticular formation, 
adjacent to the abducens nucleus to which it projects 
(Figure 35–8A). The paramedian pontine reticular for-
mation contains a family of burst neurons that gives 
rise to the saccadic pulse. These cells fire at a high 
frequency just before and during ipsiversive saccades 
(toward the same side as the discharging neurons), and 
their activity resembles the pulse component of oculo-
motor neuron discharge (Figure 35–7B).
There are several types of burst neurons (Figure 
35–8B). Medium-lead excitatory burst neurons make 
direct excitatory connections to motor neurons and 
interneurons in the ipsilateral abducens nucleus. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    869
Figure 35–8  The brain stem motor circuit for horizon-
tal saccades.
A. Eye velocity component. Long-lead burst neurons relay 
signals from higher centers to the excitatory burst neu-
rons. The eye velocity component arises from excitatory 
burst neurons in the paramedian pontine reticular forma-
tion that synapse on motor neurons and interneurons 
in the abducens nucleus. The abducens motor neurons 
project to the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscles, while 
the interneurons project to the contralateral medial rec-
tus motor neurons by axons that cross the midline and 
ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Excitatory 
burst neurons also drive ipsilateral inhibitory burst neu-
rons that inhibit contralateral abducens motor neurons 
and excitatory burst neurons.
   Eye position component. This component arises from a 
neural integrator comprising neurons distributed through-
out the medial vestibular nuclei and nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi on both sides of the brain stem. These neurons 
receive velocity signals from excitatory burst neurons and 
integrate this velocity signal to a position signal. The posi-
tion signal excites the ipsilateral abducens neurons and 
inhibits the contralateral abducens neurons. (Gray neurons 
are inhibitory; all other neurons are excitatory. The vertical 
dashed line indicates the midline of the brain stem.)
B. Different neurons provide different information for a hori-
zontal saccade. The motor neuron provides both position 
and velocity signals. The tonic neuron (nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi) signals only eye position. The excitatory burst 
neuron (paramedian pontine reticular formation) signals only 
eye velocity. The omnipause neuron discharges at a high 
rate except immediately before, during, and just after the 
saccade.
Lateral
rectus
Medial
rectus
Abducens
nerve
Oculomotor
nerve
Oculomotor
nucleus
Medial rectus
motor neuron
Excitatory
burst
neuron
A
Long-lead
burst neuron
Omnipause
neuron
Nucleus of the dorsal raphe
Paramedian pontine
reticular formation
Inhibitory
burst neuron
Medial
vestibular
nucleus
Nucleus
prepositus
hypoglossi
Interneuron
Motor
neuron
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
10°
50 ms
Motor
neuron
Eye
position
B
Tonic
neuron
Burst
neuron
Omnipause
neuron
Eye 
position
signal
Eye 
velocity
signal
Tonic 
neuron
Abducens
nucleus
Long-lead burst neurons drive the medium-lead burst 
cells and receive excitatory input from higher cent-
ers. Inhibitory burst neurons suppress the activity 
of contralateral abducens neurons and contralateral 
excitatory burst neurons and are themselves excited by 
medium-lead burst neurons.
A second class of pontine cells, omnipause neurons, 
fires continuously except around the time of a saccade; 
firing ceases shortly before and during all saccades 
(Figure 35–8B). Omnipause neurons are located in 
the nucleus of the dorsal raphe in the midline (Figure 
35–8A). They are GABAergic (γ-aminobutyric acid) 
inhibitory neurons that project to contralateral pontine 
and mesencephalic burst neurons. Electrical stimula-
tion of omnipause neurons arrests a saccade, which 
resumes when the stimulation stops. Making a saccade 
requires simultaneous excitation of burst neurons and 
inhibition of omnipause cells; this provides the system 


===== Page 3 =====
870    Part V / Movement
with additional stability, such that unwanted saccades 
are infrequent.
If the motor neurons received signals from only 
the burst cells, the eyes would drift back to the start-
ing position after a saccade, because there would be 
no new position signal to hold the eyes against elastic 
restorative forces. The appropriate tonic innervation is 
required to keep the eye at the new orbital position. 
This tonic position signal, the saccadic step, can be 
generated from the velocity burst signal by the neural 
equivalent of the mathematical process of integration. 
Velocity can be computed by differentiating position 
with respect to time; conversely, position can be com-
puted by integrating velocity with respect to time.
For horizontal eye movements, neural integra-
tion of the velocity signal is performed by the medial 
vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi 
(Figure 35–8A) in conjunction with the flocculus of 
the cerebellum. As expected, animals with lesions of 
these areas make normal horizontal saccades, but the 
eyes drift back to a middle position after a saccade. 
Moreover, integration of the horizontal saccadic burst 
requires coordination of the bilateral nuclei prepositi 
hypoglossi and medial vestibular nuclei through com-
missural connections. Thus, a midline lesion of these 
connections also causes failure of the neural integrator.
Medium-lead burst neurons in the paramedian 
pontine reticular formation and neurons of the medial 
vestibular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypo-
glossi project to the ipsilateral abducens nucleus and 
deliver respectively the pulse and step components of 
the motor signal. Two populations of neurons in the 
abducens nucleus receive this signal. One is a group 
of motor neurons that innervate the ipsilateral lateral 
rectus muscle. The second group consists of interneu-
rons whose axons cross the midline and ascend in the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus to the motor neurons 
for the contralateral medial rectus, which lie in the ocu-
lomotor nucleus (Figure 35–8A).
Thus, medial rectus motor neurons do not receive 
the pulse and step signals directly. This arrangement 
allows for precise coordination of corresponding 
movements of both eyes during horizontal saccades 
and other conjugate eye movements. The susceptibil-
ity of the medial longitudinal fasciculus to strokes and 
multiple sclerosis make it clinically important.
Several cerebellar structures play an important 
role in the calibration of the saccade motor signal. 
First, the oculomotor portion of the dorsal vermis, act-
ing through the caudal fastigial nucleus, controls the dura-
tion of the pulse and thus the accuracy of the saccade. 
The fastigial nucleus increases saccade velocity at the 
beginning of contraversive saccades and contributes to 
braking ipsiversive saccades to end the saccade. Sec-
ond, the flocculus and paraflocculus of the vestibu-
locerebellum calibrate the neural integrator to ensure 
that the step is properly matched to the pulse, in order 
to hold the eyes at the new position after each saccade.
Vertical Saccades Are Generated in the 
Mesencephalic Reticular Formation
The burst neurons responsible for vertical saccades are 
found in the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus in the mesencephalic reticular 
formation (Figure 35–3). Vertical and torsional neural 
integration are performed in the nearby interstitial 
nucleus of Cajal. The pontine and mesencephalic sys-
tems participate together in the generation of oblique 
saccades, which have both horizontal and vertical 
components.
Purely vertical saccades require activity on both 
sides of the mesencephalic reticular formation, and 
communication between the two sides occurs via the 
posterior commissure. There are not separate omni-
pause neurons for horizontal and vertical saccades; 
pontine omnipause cells inhibit both pontine and mes-
encephalic burst neurons.
Brain Stem Lesions Result in Characteristic Deficits 
in Eye Movements
We can now understand how different brain stem 
lesions cause characteristic syndromes. Lesions that 
include the paramedian pontine reticular formation 
result in paralysis of ipsiversive horizontal gaze of both 
eyes but spare contraversive and vertical saccades. A 
lesion of the abducens nucleus has a similar effect, as 
both abducens motor neurons and interneurons are 
affected. Lesions that include the midbrain gaze cent-
ers cause paralysis of vertical gaze. Certain neurologi-
cal disorders cause degeneration of burst neurons and 
impair their function, leading to a progressive slowing 
of saccades.
Lesions of the medial longitudinal fasciculus dis-
connect the medial rectus motor neurons from the 
abducens interneurons (Figure 35–8A). Thus, dur-
ing conjugate horizontal eye movements, such as sac-
cades and pursuit, the abducting eye moves normally 
but adduction of the other eye is impeded. Despite this 
paralysis in version movements, the medial rectus typi-
cally acts normally in vergence movements because the 
motor neurons for vergence lie in the midbrain, as will 
be discussed later. This syndrome, called an internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia, is a consequence of a brain stem stroke 
or demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    871
Figure 35–9  Cortical pathways for 
saccades.
A. In the monkey, the saccade generator in 
the brain stem receives a command from the 
superior colliculus. That command is relayed 
through the pontine and mesencephalic burst 
circuits, providing the motor signals that drive 
the extraocular muscles for saccades. The col-
liculus receives direct excitatory projections 
from the frontal eye fields and the lateral intra-
parietal area (LIP) and an inhibitory projection 
from the substantia nigra. The substantia nigra 
is suppressed by the caudate nucleus, which 
in turn is excited by the frontal eye fields. 
Thus, the frontal eye fields directly excite the 
colliculus and indirectly release it from sup-
pression by the substantia nigra by exciting 
the caudate nucleus, which inhibits the sub-
stantia nigra. The oculomotor vermis (OMV) 
of the cerebellum, acting through the fastigial 
nucleus (FN), calibrates the burst to keep  
saccades accurate.
B. This lateral scan of a human brain shows 
areas of cortex activated during saccades. 
(Adapted from Curtis and Connolly 2008.)
A lesion of the cerebellar fastigial nucleus 
causes ipsiversive saccades to overshoot their targets 
(hypermetric saccades), due to failure of normal termi-
nation of the saccadic burst. Contraversive saccades 
undershoot their targets (hypometric saccades). Cor-
respondingly, damage to the oculomotor vermis dis-
inhibits the fastigial nucleus and causes hypometric 
ipsiversive saccades. This may be due to an additional 
failure to compensate for the position-dependent pas-
sive forces of the orbital tissues.
Saccades Are Controlled by the Cerebral Cortex 
Through the Superior Colliculus
The pontine and mesencephalic burst circuits provide 
the motor signals necessary to drive the extraocu-
lar muscles for saccades. However, among higher 
Frontal
eye ﬁeld
Supplementary
eye ﬁeld
Posterior 
parietal 
cortex (LIP) 
Caudate
nucleus
Substantia nigra
pars reticulata
Selects 
target
Relays cortical 
decision to 
motor centers
Transforms 
cortical target 
choice into 
muscle signals
Superior
colliculus
B  Human
A  Monkey
Frontal 
eye ﬁeld
Supplementary
eye ﬁeld
Intraparietal
sulcus
Calibrates 
innervation for 
saccade 
accuracy
Mesencephalic
and pontine reticular
formations
Nucleus reticularis 
tegmenti pontis
FN
OMV
mammals, eye movements are ultimately driven by 
cognitive behavior. The decision of when and where to 
make a saccade that is behaviorally important is usu-
ally made in the cerebral cortex. A network of corti-
cal and subcortical areas controls the saccadic system 
through the superior colliculus (Figure 35–9).
The Superior Colliculus Integrates Visual and 
Motor Information into Oculomotor Signals  
for the Brain Stem
The superior colliculus in the midbrain is a major visu-
omotor integration region, the mammalian homolog of 
the optic tectum in nonmammalian vertebrates. It can 
be divided into two functional regions: the superficial 
layers and the intermediate and deep layers.
The three superficial layers receive both direct 
input from the retina and a projection from the striate 


===== Page 5 =====
872    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–10  Neurons in the superior colliculus are organ-
ized in a retinotopic map.
A. Map of the left visual field in polar coordinates. Dashed 
lines represent the angle and solid lines the eccentricity.
B. Spatial map of neurons in the superior colliculus represented 
in polar coordinates of the visual field. In the nucleus, more 
neurons represent the part of the visual field close to the fovea 
and fewer neurons represent the periphery. For example, a 
stimulus appearing at 20° eccentricity and 30° elevation in the 
visual field (red dot) will excite neurons at the location of the 
red dot on the collicular map. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Quaia et al. 1998.)
cortex representing the entire contralateral visual hemi-
field. Neurons in the superficial layers respond to vis-
ual stimuli. In monkeys, the responses of half of these 
vision-related neurons are quantitatively enhanced 
when an animal prepares to make a saccade to a stim-
ulus in the cell’s receptive field. This enhancement 
is specific for saccades. If the monkey attends to the 
stimulus without making a saccade to it—for example, 
by making a hand movement in response to a bright-
ness change—the neuron’s response is not augmented. 
Neurons in the superficial layers of the superior col-
liculus are functionally arranged in a retinotopic map 
of the visual field in which representation of the visual 
field closest to the fovea occupies the largest area 
(Figure 35–10).
Neuronal activity in the two intermediate and 
deep layers is primarily related to oculomotor actions. 
The movement-related neurons in these layers receive 
visual information from the prestriate, middle tempo-
ral, and parietal cortices and motor information from 
the frontal eye field. The intermediate and deep lay-
ers also contain somatotopic, tonotopic, and retino-
topic maps of sensory inputs, all in register with one 
another. For example, the image of a bird will excite 
a vision-related neuron, whereas the bird’s chirp will 
excite an adjacent audition-related neuron, and both 
A  Left visual ﬁeld
B  Right superior colliculus map
–60
–90
60
90
90
–90
60
–60
30
–30
0
50
50
40
20
10
5
2.5
40
20
10
5
2.5
–30
30
0
0
will excite a bimodal neuron. Polymodal spatial maps 
enable us to shift our eyes toward auditory or soma-
tosensory stimuli as well as visual ones.
Much of the early research describing the sensory 
responsiveness of neurons in the intermediate layer 
was done in anesthetized animals. To understand how 
the brain generates movement, however, the activity 
of neurons needs to be studied in alert, active animals. 
Edward Evarts pioneered this approach in studies of 
the skeletomotor system, after which it was extended 
to the oculomotor system.
One of the earliest cellular studies in active ani-
mals revealed that individual movement-related neu-
rons in the superior colliculus selectively discharge 
before saccades of specific amplitudes and directions, 
just as individual vision-related neurons in the supe-
rior colliculus respond to stimuli at specific distances 
and directions from the fovea (Figure 35–11A). The 
movement-related neurons form a map of potential 
eye movements that is in register with the visuotopic 
and tonotopic arrays of sensory inputs, so that the neu-
rons that control eye movements to a particular target 
are found in the same region as the cells excited by 
the sounds and image of that target. Each movement-
related neuron in the superior colliculus has a move-
ment field, a region of the visual field that is the target 
for saccades controlled by that neuron. There is a map 
of movement fields in the intermediate layers that is in 
register with the map of visual receptive fields in the 
overlying superficial layers. Each movement neuron 
discharges before a saccade to the center of the overly-
ing visual receptive field. A map of saccades evoked by 
electrical stimulation of the intermediate layers resem-
bles the visual map.
Movement fields are large, so each superior col-
liculus cell fires before a wide range of saccades, 
although each cell fires most intensely before saccades 
of a specific direction and amplitude. A large popula-
tion of cells is thus active before each saccade, and eye 
movement is encoded by the entire ensemble of these 
broadly tuned cells. Because each cell makes only a 
small contribution to the direction and amplitude of 
the movement, any variability or noise in the discharge 
of a given cell is minimized. Similar population coding 
is found in many sensory systems (Chapter 17) and the 
skeletal motor system (Chapter 34).
Activity in the superficial and intermediate layers 
of the superior colliculus can occur independently: 
Sensory activity in the superficial layers does not 
always lead to motor output, and motor output can 
occur without sensory activity in the superficial lay-
ers. In fact, the neurons in the superficial layers do not 
provide a large projection directly to the intermediate 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    873
Figure 35–11  Neurons in the superior colliculus and sub-
stantia nigra are active around the time of a saccade.   
(Reproduced, with permission, from Hikosaka and Wurtz 1989.)
A. A neuron recorded from the region in the superior colliculus 
from which the neuron in B could be excited antidromically 
fires in a burst immediately before the saccade. Raster plots 
of activity in successive trials of the same task are summed to 
form the histogram below. The small vertical lines in the raster 
indicate target appearance. The trials are aligned at the begin-
ning of the saccade (blue line).
B. A neuron in the substantia nigra pars reticulata is tonically 
active, becomes quiet just before the saccade, and resumes 
activity after the saccade. This type of neuron inhibits neurons 
in the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus.
Inhibitory
projection
A  Superior colliculus neuron 
B  Substantia nigra neuron
200 ms
Superior
colliculus
Substantia 
nigra
Saccade
100 
spikes/s
100 
spikes/s
layers. Instead, their axons terminate on neurons in the 
pulvinar and lateral posterior nuclei of the thalamus, 
which relay the signals from the superficial layers of 
the superior colliculus to cortical regions that project 
back to the intermediate layers.
Lesions of a small part of the colliculus affect the 
latency, accuracy, and velocity of saccades. Destruction 
of the entire colliculus renders a monkey unable to 
make any contraversive saccades, although with time, 
this ability is recovered.
The Rostral Superior Colliculus Facilitates  
Visual Fixation
The most rostral portion of the superior colliculus 
receives inputs from the fovea and the foveal repre-
sentation in primary visual cortex (V1). Neurons in the 
intermediate layers in this region discharge strongly 
during active visual fixation and before small saccades 
to the contralateral visual field. Because the neurons 
are active during visual fixation, this area of the supe-
rior colliculus is often called the fixation zone.
Neurons here inhibit the movement-related neu-
rons in the more caudal parts of the colliculus and 
also project directly to the nucleus of the dorsal raphe, 
where they inhibit saccade generation by exciting the 
omnipause neurons. With lesions in the fixation zone, 
an animal is more likely to make saccades to distract-
ing stimuli.
The Basal Ganglia and Two Regions of Cerebral 
Cortex Control the Superior Colliculus
The superior colliculus receives a powerful GABAergic 
inhibitory projection from neurons in the substantia 
nigra, which fire spontaneously with high frequency. 
This discharge is suppressed at the time of voluntary 
eye movements to the contralateral visual field 
(Figure 35–11B) by inhibitory input from neurons in 
the caudate nucleus, which fire before saccades to the 
contralateral visual field.
The superior colliculus is controlled by two regions 
of the cerebral cortex that have overlapping but dis-
tinct functions: the lateral intraparietal area of the pos-
terior parietal cortex (part of Brodmann’s area 7) and 
the frontal eye field (part of Brodmann’s area 8). Each 
of these areas contributes to the generation of saccades 
and the control of visual attention.
Perception of attended objects in the visual field is 
better than perception of unattended objects, as meas-
ured either by a subject’s reaction time to an object 
suddenly appearing in the visual field or by the sub-
ject’s ability to perceive a stimulus that is just barely 


===== Page 7 =====
874    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–12  A parietal neuron is active before memory-
guided saccades. Traces are aligned at events indicated by 
vertical lines. (Adapted, with permission, from Powell and  
Goldberg 2000.)
A. The monkey plans a saccade from a fixation point to a target 
in the receptive field of a neuron in the lateral intraparietal cor-
tex. The neuron responds to the appearance of the target (1).  
It continues to fire after the target has disappeared but before 
the signal to make the saccade and stops firing after the onset 
of the saccade (2).
B. The monkey plans a saccade to a target outside the  
receptive field. The neuron responds initially to a distractor 
in the receptive field as strongly as it did to the target of a 
saccade.
noticeable. Saccadic eye movements and visual atten-
tion are closely intertwined (Figure 35–5).
The lateral intraparietal area in the monkey is 
important in the generation of both visual attention 
and saccades. The role of this area in the processing of 
eye movements is best illustrated by a memory-guided 
saccade. To demonstrate this saccade, a monkey first 
fixates a spot of light. An object (the stimulus) appears 
in the receptive field of a neuron and then disappears; 
then the spot of light is extinguished. After a delay, the 
monkey must make a saccade to the former location of 
the vanished object. Neurons in the lateral intrapari-
etal area respond from the moment the object appears 
and continue firing after the object has vanished and 
throughout the delay until the saccade begins (Figure 
35–12A), but their activity can be also dissociated from 
saccade planning. If the monkey is planning a saccade 
Target
Distractor
Target
1
2
Recording from
lateral intraparietal 
neuron
A  Neuron ﬁres from appearance of target until saccade
B  Neuron responds as powerfully to distractor 
 
in receptive ﬁeld
100
spikes/s
100
spikes/s
100 ms
100 ms
Distractor
Target
Target
Fixation
point
Saccade
Saccade
Receptive 
ﬁeld
to a target outside the receptive field of a neuron and a 
distractor appears in the field during the delay period, 
the neuron responds as vigorously to the distractor as 
it does to the target of a saccade (Figure 35–12B).
Lesioning of a monkey’s posterior parietal cortex, 
which includes the lateral intraparietal area, increases 
the latency of saccades and reduces their accuracy. 
Such a lesion also produces selective neglect: A mon-
key with a unilateral parietal lesion preferentially 
attends to stimuli in the ipsilateral visual hemifield. 
In humans as well, parietal lesions—especially right 
parietal lesions—initially cause dramatic attentional 
deficits. Patients act as if the objects in the neglected 
field do not exist, and they have difficulty making eye 
movements into that field (Chapter 59).
Patients with Balint syndrome, which is usually 
the result of bilateral lesions of the posterior parietal 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    875
and prestriate cortex, tend to see and describe only 
one object at a time in their visual environment. These 
patients make few saccades, as if they are unable to 
shift the focus of their attention from the fovea, and 
can therefore describe only a foveal target. Even after 
these patients have recovered from most of their defi-
cits, their saccades are delayed and inaccurate.
Compared to the neurons in the parietal cortex, 
neurons in the frontal eye field are more closely associ-
ated with saccades. Three different types of neurons in 
the frontal eye field discharge before saccades.
Visual neurons respond to visual stimuli, and half of 
these neurons respond more vigorously to stimuli that 
are the targets of saccades (Figure 35–13A). Activity in 
these cells is not enhanced when an animal responds to 
the stimulus without making a saccade to it. Likewise, 
these cells are not activated before saccades that are 
made without visual targets; monkeys can be trained 
to make saccades of a specific direction and amplitude 
in total darkness.
Movement-related neurons fire before and during 
saccades to their movement fields. Unlike the movement-
related cells in the superior colliculus, which fire before 
all saccades, movement-related neurons of the frontal 
eye field fire only before saccades that are relevant to 
the monkey’s behavior (Figure 35–13B). These neu-
rons, especially those whose receptive fields lie in the 
visual periphery, project more strongly to the superior 
colliculus than do the visual neurons.
Visuomovement neurons have both visual and 
movement-related activity and discharge most strongly 
before visually guided saccades. Electrical stimulation 
of the frontal eye field evokes saccades to the move-
ment fields of the stimulated cells. Bilateral stimula-
tion of the frontal eye field evokes vertical saccades.
Movement-related neurons in frontal eye field 
control the superior colliculus through two pathways. 
They excite the superior colliculus directly and they 
release it from the inhibitory influence of the substan-
tia nigra by exciting the caudate nucleus, which in turn 
inhibits the nigra (Figure 35–9A). The frontal eye field 
also projects to the pontine and mesencephalic reticu-
lar formations, although not directly to the burst cells.
Two other cortical regions besides LIP that have 
inputs to the frontal eye field are thought to be impor-
tant in the cognitive aspects of saccades. The sup-
plementary eye field at the most rostral part of the 
supplementary motor area contains neurons that 
encode spatial information other than the direction of 
the desired eye movement. For example, a neuron in 
the left supplementary eye field that ordinarily fires 
before rightward eye movements will fire before a left-
ward saccade if that saccade is to the right side of the 
target. The dorsolateral prefrontal cortex has neurons 
that discharge when a monkey makes a saccade to a 
remembered target. The activity commences with the 
appearance of the stimulus and continues throughout 
the interval during which the monkey must remember 
the location of the target.
We can now understand the effects of lesions of 
these regions on the generation of saccades. Lesions of 
the superior colliculus in monkeys produce only tran-
sient damage to the saccade system because the projec-
tion from the frontal eye field to the brain stem remains 
intact. Animals can likewise recover from cortical 
lesions if the superior colliculus is intact. However, 
when both the frontal eye field and the colliculus are 
damaged, the ability to make saccades is permanently 
compromised. The predominant effect of a parietal 
lesion is an attentional deficit. After recovery, however, 
the system can function normally because the frontal 
eye field signals are sufficient to suppress the substan-
tia nigra and stimulate the colliculus.
Damage to the frontal eye field alone causes more 
subtle deficits. Lesions of the frontal eye field in mon-
keys cause transient contralateral neglect and paresis 
of contraversive gaze, which recover rapidly. The latter 
deficit may reflect the loss of frontal eye field control of 
the substantia nigra; this loss of control means that the 
constant inhibitory input from the substantia nigra to the 
colliculus does not get suppressed, and the colliculus is 
unable to generate any saccades. Eventually the system 
adapts, and the colliculus responds to the remaining pari-
etal signal. After recovery, the animals have no trouble 
producing saccades to targets in the visual field but have 
great difficulty with memory-guided saccades. Bilateral 
lesions of both the frontal eye fields and the superior col-
liculus render monkeys unable to make saccades at all.
Humans with lesions of the frontal cortex have diffi-
culty suppressing unwanted saccades to attended stim-
uli. This is easily shown by asking subjects to make an 
eye movement away from a stimulus, the “anti-saccades 
task.” For example, if a stimulus appears on the left, the 
subject should make a saccade of the same size to the 
right. To do this, the subject must attend to the stimulus, 
without turning the eyes toward it, and use its location 
to calculate the desired saccade to the opposite direc-
tion. Patients with frontal lesions have great difficulty 
suppressing the unwanted saccade to the stimulus.
As we have seen, neurons in the lateral intrapari-
etal area of monkeys are active when the animal attends 
to a visual stimulus whether or not the animal makes 
a saccade to the stimulus. In the absence of frontal eye 
field signals, this undifferentiated signal is the only one 
to reach the superior colliculus. In humans, the fail-
ure to suppress a saccade is therefore to be expected 


===== Page 9 =====
876    Part V / Movement
B  Movement-related neuron responds before movement but not to stimulus
200 ms
200 ms
Appearance of target
Start of saccade
Appearance of target
Start of saccade
A  Visual neuron responds to the stimulus and not to movement
Target
Target
Frontal
eye ﬁeld
100 spikes/s
Figure 35–13  Visual and movement-related neurons in the 
frontal eye field. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bruce 
and Goldberg 1985.)
A. Activity of a visual neuron in the frontal eye field as a mon-
key makes a saccade to a target in its visual field. Raster plots 
of activity in successive trials of the same task are summed to 
form the histogram below. In the record on the left, the individ-
ual trials are aligned at the appearance of the stimulus. A burst 
of firing is closely time-locked to the stimulus. In the record on 
the right, the trials are aligned at the beginning of the saccade. 
Activity is not well aligned with the beginning of the saccade 
and stops before the saccade itself commences.
B. Activity of a movement-related neuron in the frontal eye 
field. The records of each trial are aligned as in part A. The cell 
does not respond to appearance of the saccade target (left) but 
is active at the time of the saccade (right).


