===== Page 1 =====
1292    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Contrary to the prevalent view that cognitive func-
tions are localized in the brain, many students of learn-
ing doubted that memory is localized. In fact, until 
the middle of the 20th century, many psychologists 
doubted that memory is a discrete function, independ-
ent of perception, language, or movement. One reason 
for the persistent doubt is that memory storage involves 
many different parts of the brain. We now appreciate, 
however, that these regions are not all equally impor-
tant. There are several fundamentally different types 
of memory, and certain regions of the brain are much 
more important for encoding some types of memory 
than for others.
During the past several decades, researchers have 
made significant progress in the analysis and under-
standing of learning and memory. In this chapter, we 
focus on studies of normal human memory behavior, 
its perturbations following brain lesions due to injury 
or surgery, and measurements of brain activity during 
learning and memory recall using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) and extracellular electro-
physiological recordings. These studies have yielded 
three major insights.
First, there are several forms of learning and mem-
ory. Each form of learning and memory has distinctive 
cognitive and computational properties and is sup-
ported by different brain systems. Second, memory 
involves encoding, storage, retrieval, and consolida-
tion. Finally, imperfections and errors in remember-
ing can provide clues about the nature and function of 
learning and memory and the fundamental role that 
memory plays in guiding behavior and planning for 
the future.
Memory can be classified along two dimensions: 
(1) the time course of storage and (2) the nature of the 
information stored. In this chapter, we consider the time 
course of storage. In the next two chapters, we focus on 
the cellular, molecular, and circuit-based mechanisms 
of different forms of learning and memory, based 
largely on studies of animal models.
Short-Term and Long-Term Memory Involve 
Different Neural Systems
Short-Term Memory Maintains Transient 
Representations of Information Relevant to 
Immediate Goals
When we reflect on the nature of memory, we usually 
think of the long-term memory that William James 
referred to as “memory proper” or “secondary memory.” 
That is, we think of memory as “the knowledge of a 
former state of mind after it has already once dropped 
from consciousness.” This knowledge depends on the 
formation of a memory trace that is durable, in which 
the representation persists even when its content has 
been out of conscious awareness for a long period.
Not all forms of memory, however, constitute “for-
mer states of mind.” In fact, the ability to store informa-
tion depends on a form of short-term memory, called 
working memory, which maintains current, albeit 
transient, representations of goal-relevant knowledge. 
In humans, working memory consists of at least two 
subsystems––one for verbal information and another 
for visuospatial information. The functioning of these 
two subsystems is coordinated by a third system called 
the executive control processes. Executive control pro-
cesses are thought to allocate attentional resources to 
the verbal and visuospatial subsystems and to moni-
tor, manipulate, and update stored representations.
We use the verbal subsystem when we attempt 
to keep speech-based (phonological) information in 
conscious awareness, as when we mentally rehearse 
a password before entering it. The verbal subsystem 
consists of two interactive components: a store that 
represents phonological knowledge and a rehearsal 
mechanism that keeps these representations active 
while we need them. Phonological storage depends 
on posterior parietal cortices, and rehearsal partially 
depends on articulatory processes in Broca’s area.
The visuospatial subsystem of working memory 
retains mental images of visual objects and of the loca-
tion of objects in space. The rehearsal of spatial and 
object information is thought to involve modulation of 
this information in the parietal, inferior temporal, and 
occipital cortices by the frontal and premotor cortices.
Single-cell recordings in nonhuman primates 
indicate that, over a period of seconds, some prefron-
tal neurons maintain spatial representations, others 
maintain object representations, and still others repre-
sent the integration of spatial and object knowledge. 
Although neurons concerned with working memory 
of objects tend to lie in the ventrolateral prefrontal cor-
tex and those concerned with spatial knowledge tend 
to lie in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, all three 
classes of neurons are found in both prefrontal subre-
gions (Figure 52–1).
Thus, working memory involves activation of 
representations of information stored in specialized 
cortical regions that vary based on the content of the 
information, as well as activation of general control 
mechanisms in prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal control 
signals in working memory are further dependent on 
interaction with the striatum and ascending dopamin-
ergic inputs from the midbrain.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1293
Figure 52–1  The prefrontal cortex maintains a working 
memory. (Adapted, with permission, from Rainer, Asaad, and 
Miller 1998.)
A. The role of prefrontal cortex in maintaining information in 
working memory is often assessed in monkeys using electro-
physiological methods in conjunction with a delayed-match-to-
sample (DMS) task. In this type of task, each trial begins when 
the monkey grabs a response lever and visually fixates a small 
target at the center of a computer screen. An initial visual stimu-
lus (the sample) is briefly presented and must be held in working 
memory until the next stimulus (the match) appears. In the task 
illustrated here, the monkey was required to remember the sam-
ple (“what”) and its location (“where”) and release the lever only 
in response to stimuli that matched on both dimensions.
B. Neural firing rates in the lateral prefrontal cortex of a monkey 
during the delay period are often maintained above baseline 
and represent responses to the type of stimulus (what), the 
location (where), and the integration of the two (what and 
where). As shown, at left is the activity of a prefrontal neuron in 
response to a preferred object (to which the neuron responds 
robustly) and to a nonpreferred object (to which the neuron 
responds minimally). Activity is robust both when the monkey 
looks at the preferred object (sample) and during the delay. 
In the sketch at right, the symbols represent recording sites 
where neurons maintained each type of information (what, 
where, and what and where). Typically, several types of neu-
rons were found at one site; hence, many symbols overlap and 
some symbols indicate more than one neuron.
Preferred 
object 
Nonpreferred 
object 
Match
Sample
Delay
Sample
Delay
Match
Location
nonmatch
Object
nonmatch
Object
Location
Object and 
location
Arcuate 
sulcus 
A
B
Time (ms)
0
1,000
2,000
Spikes/s
Principal 
sulcus
Information Stored in Short-Term Memory Is 
Selectively Transferred to Long-Term Memory
In the mid-1950s, startling new evidence about the neu-
ral basis of long-term memory emerged from the study 
of patients who had undergone bilateral removal of the 
hippocampus and neighboring regions in the medial 
temporal lobe as treatment for epilepsy. The first and 
best-studied case was a patient called H.M. studied by 
the psychologist Brenda Milner and the surgeon William 
Scoville. (After H.M. died on December 2, 2008, his full 
name, Henry Molaison, was revealed to the world.)
H.M. had suffered for a number of years from 
untreatable temporal lobe epilepsy caused by brain 


===== Page 3 =====
1294    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
damage sustained at age 7 years in a bicycle accident. 
As an adult, his seizures rendered him unable to work 
or lead a normal life, and at the age of 27, he under-
went surgery. Scoville removed the brain regions 
thought to be responsible for the seizures, including 
the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, and parts 
of the multimodal association area of the temporal cor-
tex bilaterally (Figure 52–2). After the surgery, H.M.’s 
seizures were better controlled, but he was left with a 
devastating memory deficit (or amnesia). What was so 
remarkable about H.M.’s deficit was its specificity.
He still had normal working memory, for seconds 
or minutes, indicating that the medial temporal lobe is 
not necessary for transient memory. He also had long-
term memory for events that had occurred before the 
operation. For example, he remembered his name, the 
job he had held, and childhood events. In addition, 
he retained a command of language, including his 
vocabulary, indicating that semantic memory––factual 
knowledge about people, places, and things––was pre-
served. His IQ remained unchanged, in the range of 
bright-normal.
What H.M. now lacked, and lacked dramatically, 
was the ability to transfer new information into long-
term memory, a deficit termed anterograde amnesia. 
He was unable to retain for lengthy periods informa-
tion about people, places, or objects that he had just 
encountered. Asked to remember a new telephone 
number, H.M. could repeat it immediately for seconds 
to minutes because of his intact working memory. But 
when distracted, even briefly, he forgot the number. 
H.M. could not recognize people he met after surgery, 
even when he met them again and again. For several 
years, he saw Milner every month, yet each time she 
entered the room, he reacted as though he had never 
seen her before. H.M. is not unique. All patients with 
extensive bilateral lesions of the limbic association 
areas of the medial temporal lobe show similar long-
term memory deficits.
H.M. is a historic case because his deficit provided 
the first clear link between memory and the medial 
temporal lobe, including the hippocampus. Subse-
quent studies by Larry Squire and others of patients 
with brain damage more limited to the hippocam-
pus confirmed its central role in memory. The obser-
vation that H.M. and others with medial temporal 
lobe damage had a profound deficit in the formation 
of new memories while the retrieval of old memo-
ries remained largely intact suggested that memories 
must be transferred over time from the hippocampus 
and medial temporal lobe to other brain structures. 
These studies gave rise to four central questions that 
continue to drive memory research to this day: First, 
what is the functional role of the medial temporal lobe 
memory system? Second, what are the roles of differ-
ent subregions within this system? Third, how do these 
subregions work together with other brain circuits to 
support different forms of memory? Fourth, where are 
hippocampal-dependent memories ultimately stored?
The Medial Temporal Lobe Is Critical for 
Episodic Long-Term Memory
A crucial finding about H.M. was that formation of 
long-term memory was impaired only for certain types 
of information. H.M. and other patients with damage 
to the medial temporal lobe were able to form and 
retain certain types of durable memories just as well as 
healthy subjects.
For example, H.M. learned to draw the outlines 
of a star while looking at the star and his hand in a 
mirror (Figure 52–3). Like healthy subjects learning 
to remap hand–eye coordination, H.M. initially made 
many mistakes, but after several days of training, his 
performance was error-free and comparable to that of 
healthy subjects. Nevertheless, he did not consciously 
remember having performed the task.
Long-term memory formation in amnesic patients 
is not limited to motor skills. These patients retain sim-
ple reflexive learning, including habituation, sensitiza-
tion, and some forms of conditioning (to be discussed 
later in this chapter). Furthermore, they are able to 
improve their performance on certain perceptual and 
conceptual tasks. For example, they do well with a 
form of memory called priming, in which perception 
of a word or object or access to the meaning of a word 
or object is improved by prior exposure. Thus, when 
shown only the first few letters of previously studied 
words, a subject with amnesia is able to generate the 
same number of studied words as normal subjects, 
even though the amnesic patient has no conscious 
memory of having recently encountered the words 
(Figure 52–4).
This pattern of selectively impaired performance 
in patients with amnesia raised questions about how to 
classify these different forms of memory: What are the 
key features that distinguish between memories that 
survive medial temporal lobe damage and those that do 
not? Early theories by Squire and colleagues suggested 
that a critical factor may be conscious awareness—
damage to the medial temporal lobe appears to impair 
forms of memory that can be accessed consciously 
and can be reported on or expressed in words, while 
leaving intact forms of memory that cannot. For this 
reason, memories that depend on the medial temporal 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1295
Figure 52–2  The medial temporal lobe and memory 
storage.
A. The key components of the medial temporal lobe important 
for memory storage.
B. The areas of temporal lobe resected (gray shading) in the 
patient known as H.M., viewed from the ventral surface of 
the brain (left hemisphere is on the right side of the image). 
Surgery was a bilateral, single-stage procedure, but to illustrate 
the structures that were removed from the left hemisphere 
(right side of the image), the left hemisphere is shown here 
intact. The longitudinal extent of the lesion is shown in a ven-
tral view of the brain (top). Cross sections 1 through 3 show 
the estimated extent of areas of the brain removed from H.M. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Corkin et al. 1997.)
C. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan of a parasagittal 
section from the left side of H.M.’s brain. The calibration bar 
at the right of the panel has 1-cm increments. The asterisk 
in the central area of the scan indicates the resected portion 
of the anterior temporal lobes. The nearby arrowhead points 
to the remaining portion of the intraventricular portion of the 
hippocampal formation. Approximately 2 cm of preserved 
hippocampal formation is visible bilaterally. Note also the sub-
stantial degeneration in the enlarged folial spaces of the cer-
ebellum. (Adapted, with permission, from Corkin et al. 1997.)
Entorhinal cortex
Lesion
Entorhinal cortex
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Lesion
Lesion
Hippocampus
5 cm
A
C
B
1
2
3
Entorhinal 
cortex
Perirhinal
cortex
Parahippocampal
cortex
CA1
Subiculum
Hippocampus
Dentate
gyrus
CA3
1
2
3


===== Page 5 =====
1296    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Figure 52–4  Amnesic subjects differ in their ability to recall 
words under two conditions. Subjects were presented with 
common words and then asked to recall the words. Amnesic 
patients did not do well on this test during free recall. However, 
when subjects were given the first three letters of a word  
that had been presented and instructed to form the first word 
that came to mind (word completion), the amnesic subjects 
performed as well as normal subjects. The baseline guessing 
rate in the word completion condition for words not previously 
presented was 9%. (Adapted from Squire 1987.)
Number of errors in each attempt
10
20
30
1
10
10
1
Attempts each day
10
1
0
1st day
2nd day
3rd day
ABSENT
INCOME
FILLY
DISCUSS
CHEESE
ELEMENT
ABS
INC
FIL
DIS
CHE
ELE
Free recall
0
20
40
60
80
Mean correct  (percent)
Control
Amnesic
After priming
Figure 52–3  The amnesic patient H.M. could learn skilled 
movements. He was taught to trace between two outlines of 
a star while viewing his hand in a mirror. The graph plots the 
number of times, during each attempt, that he strayed outside 
the outlines as he drew the star. As with healthy subjects, H.M. 
improved considerably with repeated attempts despite the fact 
that he had no recollection of performing the task.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Blakemore 1977.)
lobe are often referred to as explicit (or declarative) 
memory. Explicit memory can be further classified 
into episodic memory (the memory of personal expe-
riences or autobiographical memory) and semantic 
memory (memory for facts). Episodic memory refers 
to our ability to remember rich details of moments in 
time, including information about what happened, 
when, and where. For example, episodic memory is 
used to recall that we saw the first flowers of spring 
yesterday or that we heard Beethoven’s “Moonlight 
Sonata” several months ago. Semantic memory is used 
to recall the meanings of words or concepts, among 
other facts.
Cognitive psychologists found a similar distinc-
tion between different forms of memory in healthy 
subjects by using tasks that differ in how memories are 
expressed. One type is a nonconscious form of mem-
ory that is evident in the performance of a task. This 
form of memory is often referred to as implicit mem-
ory (also referred to as nondeclarative or procedural 
memory). Implicit memory is typically manifested in 
an automatic manner, with little conscious processing 
on the part of the subject. Different forms give rise to 
priming, skill learning, habit memory, and condition-
ing (Figure 52–5). Explicit memory is considered to 
be highly flexible; multiple pieces of information can 
be associated under different circumstances. Implicit 
memory, however, is tightly connected to the original 
conditions under which the learning occurred.
The terms “explicit memory” and “implicit mem-
ory” are used to describe two broad forms of memory 
that differ in their hallmark behavioral characteris-
tics and in their neural underpinnings. These forms 
of memory can be acquired in parallel. For example, 
one might form an explicit memory of how good a 
bakery smelled upon entering it yesterday, while at 
the same time, one might develop an automatic con-
ditioned response of increased salivation upon view-
ing a picture of the bakery. Moreover, we now believe 
that these forms of memory, while distinct, normally 
interact to support behavior, although the precise 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1297
Figure 52–5  Long-term memory 
is commonly classified as either 
explicit (the memory is reported 
verbally) or implicit (the memory is 
expressed through behavior without 
conscious awareness).
Facts
(semantic)
Events
(episodic)
Priming
Procedural
(skills and
habits)
Associative learning:
classical and
operant conditioning
Nonassociative learning:
habituation and
sensitization
Two forms of
long-term memory
Implicit
(nondeclarative)
Explicit
(declarative)
nature and extent of their interactions are a topic of 
ongoing investigation.
There are also ongoing debates about the role of 
conscious awareness in memory and about whether it 
is indeed a necessary feature of memories supported 
by the medial temporal lobe. These debates are driven 
by a growing body of work showing that the same 
medial temporal circuits necessary for explicit memory 
are also necessary for some forms of implicit memory 
(as described below). Indeed, although episodic mem-
ory is typically assessed by asking subjects to report 
the content of their memory, it remains unknown 
whether conscious accessibility is an integral feature 
of the memories themselves. Nonetheless, the distinc-
tion between implicit and explicit memory played an 
important historical role in differentiating forms of 
memory and still offers a productive framework for 
considering the neural bases of memory. Thus, we use 
the terms “explicit memory” and “implicit memory” 
here to distinguish these two forms of memory and 
the classes of subjective experience and behaviors that 
they are based on. In the following sections, we focus 
on episodic memory, which has been the target of a 
great deal of cognitive neuroscience research in both 
amnesic patients and healthy individuals.
Episodic Memory Processing Involves Encoding, 
Storage, Retrieval, and Consolidation
Episodic memory has been studied extensively and 
offers a window into understanding how the brain 
builds, stores, and retrieves details about episodes in 
our lives. We now know that the brain does not have 
a single long-term store of episodic memories. Instead, 
the storage of any item of knowledge is widely dis-
tributed among many brain regions that process dif-
ferent aspects of the content of the memory and can 
be accessed independently (by visual, verbal, or other 
sensory clues). Second, episodic memory is mediated 
by at least four related but distinct types of processing: 
encoding, storage, consolidation, and retrieval.
Encoding is the process by which new information 
is initially acquired and processed during the formation 
of a new memory. The extent of this processing is criti-
cally important for determining how well the learned 
material will be remembered. For a memory to persist 
and be well remembered, the incoming information 
must undergo what the psychologists Fergus Craik and 
Robert Lockhart called “deep” encoding. This is accom-
plished by attending to the information and associating 
it with memories that were already established. Mem-
ory encoding is also stronger when one is motivated to 
remember, whether because the information has par-
ticular emotional or behavioral relevance (eg, a memory 
for a particularly delicious meal on an enjoyable first 
date) or whether the information itself is neutral but is 
associated with something meaningful (eg, remember-
ing the location of that restaurant).
Storage refers to the neural mechanisms and sites 
by which the newly acquired information is retained 
as a lasting memory over time. One of the remarkable 
features about long-term storage is that it seems to 
have an almost unlimited capacity. In contrast, work-
ing memory storage is very limited; psychologists 
believe that human working memory can hold only a 
few pieces of information at any one time.
Consolidation is the process that transforms tem-
porarily stored and still labile information into a more 
stable form. As we shall learn in the next two chapters, 
consolidation involves expression of genes and protein 
synthesis that give rise to structural changes at synapses.
Finally, retrieval is the process by which stored 
information is recalled. It involves bringing back to 
mind different kinds of information that are stored 
in different sites. Retrieval of memory is much like 
perception; it is a constructive process and therefore 
subject to distortion much as perception is subject to 
illusions (Box 52–1). When a memory is retrieved, it 
becomes active again, providing an opportunity for 
an old memory to be encoded again. Because retrieval 
is constructive, re-encoding of a retrieved memory 
can differ from the original memory. For example, 


===== Page 7 =====
1298    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
How accurate is episodic memory? This question was 
explored by the psychologist Frederic Bartlett in a series 
of studies in the 1930s in which subjects were asked to 
read stories and then retell them. The recalled stories 
were shorter and more coherent than the original stories, 
reflecting reconstruction and condensation of the original.
The subjects were unaware that they were editing 
the original stories and often felt more certain about the 
edited parts than about the unedited parts of the retold 
stories. They were not confabulating; they were merely 
interpreting the original material so that it made sense 
on recall.
Observations such as these demonstrate that epi-
sodic memory is malleable. Moreover, the fact that peo-
ple incorporate later edits into their original memories 
leads us to believe that episodic memory is a constructive 
process in the sense that individuals perceive the envi-
ronment from the standpoint of a specific point in 
space as well as a specific point in their own history. 
Much like sensory perception, episodic memory is not 
a passive recording of the external world but an active 
process in which incoming bottom-up sensory informa-
tion is shaped by top-down signals, representing prior 
experience, along the afferent pathways. Likewise, once 
information is stored, recall is not an exact copy of the 
information stored. Past experiences are used in the pre-
sent as cues that help the brain reconstruct a past event. 
During recall, we use a variety of cognitive strategies, 
including comparison, inference, shrewd guessing, and 
supposition, to generate a memory that seems coherent 
to us, that is consistent with other memories, and that is 
consistent with our “memory of the memory.”
Box 52–1  Episodic Memories Are Subject to Change During Recall
re-encoding can include information from the old 
memory together with the new context in which it was 
retrieved. This re-encoding allows memories of sepa-
rate moments in time to be connected in memory, but 
it also opens the door to errors in memory, as discussed 
later in the chapter.
Retrieval of information is most efficient when a 
retrieval cue reminds individuals of the episodic nature 
of the events linking the elements of the encoded expe-
rience. For example, in a classic behavioral experiment, 
Craig Barclay and colleagues asked some subjects to 
encode sentences such as “The man lifted the piano.” 
On a later retrieval test, “something heavy” was a 
more effective cue for recalling piano than “something 
with a nice sound.” Other subjects, however, encoded 
the sentence “The man tuned the piano.” For them, 
“something with a nice sound” was a more effective 
retrieval cue for piano than “something heavy” as it 
reflected better the initial experience. Retrieval, partic-
ularly of explicit memories, also is partially dependent 
on working memory.
Episodic Memory Involves Interactions Between the 
Medial Temporal Lobe and Association Cortices
Although studies of amnesic patients during the past 
few decades have refined our understanding of vari-
ous types of memory, medial temporal lobe damage 
affects all four operations of memory—encoding, 
storage, consolidation, and retrieval––and thus it is 
often difficult to discern how the medial temporal 
lobe contributes to each. fMRI allows us to scan brain 
activity in the process of building new memories or 
retrieving existing memories, and thus to identify spe-
cific regions that are active during different processes 
(Chapter 6).
A common method for studying encoding with 
fMRI is the subsequent memory paradigm. In a typical 
subsequent memory task, a human subject views a 
series of stimuli (eg, words or pictures) one at a time 
while being scanned with fMRI, often while engaged 
in a cover task (eg, determining whether the pictures 
are in color or black and white). A subject’s memory 
for the stimuli is then tested outside of the scanner, 
allowing the researchers to sort all the encoding events 
into those that were later remembered compared to 
those that were later forgotten. fMRI scans show that 
remembered items, compared with forgotten items, 
are associated with greater activity in the hippocam-
pus during encoding. This difference is also evident 
in simultaneous activity in other parts of the brain, 
including prefrontal, retrosplenial, and parietal corti-
ces. Often, the activity of these regions covaries on a 
moment-to-moment basis with the activity in the hip-
pocampus during memory encoding, suggesting that 
these regions are functionally connected (Figure 52–6).
These fMRI findings, together with findings from 
patients with amnesia, provide strong support for an 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1299
Figure 52–6  In the study illustrated here, 
neural activity during encoding of visual 
events (presentation of words) was 
measured using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). Subsequently, 
recall of the studied words was tested, 
and each word was classified as either 
remembered or forgotten. The scans taken 
during encoding were then sorted into 
two groups: those made during encoding 
of words that were later remembered and 
those made during encoding of words that 
were later forgotten. The activity in regions 
of the left prefrontal cortex and medial 
temporal lobe was greater during the 
encoding of words later remembered than 
those later forgotten (locations denoted by 
white arrows). At right are the observed 
fMRI responses in these regions for words 
later remembered and those later  
forgotten. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Wagner et al. 1998.)
Left inferior prefrontal cortex 
Left medial temporal lobe
4
3
2
1
0
–1
4
8
12
0
Time (s)
fMRI signal intensity
4
3
2
1
0
–1
4
8
12
0
Time (s)
fMRI signal intensity
Words remembered
Words forgotten 
important role of the hippocampus in encoding epi-
sodic memories. The fMRI findings also extend the 
findings from amnesic patients, showing that success-
ful formation of episodic memories depends on inter-
action between frontoparietal networks and the medial 
temporal lobe. However, as the medial temporal lobe 
is a large structure, a key goal is to understand the role 
of its different subregions. Such information is being 
provided by higher-resolution fMRI studies that use 
more powerful brain scanning technologies. These 
studies reveal that distinct subregions within and out-
side the hippocampus contribute to different aspects 
of memory encoding. Thus, whereas some cortical 
areas surrounding the hippocampus are particularly 
important for object recognition (perirhinal cortex), 
others are important for encoding spatial context 
(parahippocampal cortex). These cortical regions pro-
vide strong (but indirect) inputs to the hippocampus 
proper, which is thought to bind together spatial and 
object information, forming a unified memory.
Interaction between the medial temporal lobe and 
widely separated cortical regions is also central in 
memory consolidation and retrieval. It was initially 
thought that the hippocampus was not important for 
retrieval, since patient H.M., whose medial temporal 
lobe was surgically removed, could still recall child-
hood memories. In fact, early observations suggested 
that H.M. could recall many of the experiences of his 
life up until several years before his operation. These 
observations of H.M. and other amnesic patients with 
damage to the medial temporal lobe suggested that old 
memories must be ultimately stored in various other 
cortical regions through interaction with the medial 
temporal lobe. However, even though patients with 
hippocampal damage like H.M. have some ability to 
recall older memories, there is evidence that the extent 
of memory recall may be impaired in these patients. 
Current thinking suggests that there is a distributed 
circuit for consolidation and retrieval involving sev-
eral brain regions, with the hippocampus playing 
an essential role in the binding of associations dur-
ing both encoding and retrieval. The cortical regions 
serve as the long-term repository of the separate ele-
ments of information that constitute a memory and in 
the controlled retrieval and reactivation of the content 
of the memory itself.
As with studies of encoding, studies of retrieval of 
episodic knowledge have implicated specific regions 
of association cortex, frontoparietal networks, and 
the medial temporal lobe. The retrieval of contextual 
or event details associated with an episodic memory 
also involves activity in the hippocampus, with medial 
temporal lobe retrieval processes facilitating the acti-
vation of neocortical representations that were present 
during encoding.
fMRI scans have a fairly limited time resolution 
due to the relatively slow time course of changes in 
blood flow associated with brain activity. To achieve 
higher temporal resolution of brain activity, research-
ers can record electrical activity from the human brain 
using extracellular electrodes. Such recordings are rare 
and possible only in human patients who are already 


===== Page 9 =====
1300    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
undergoing brain surgery for medical reasons, such as 
severe epilepsy, when electrode implantation is used 
to localize the site of seizure generation. In one study, 
intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG) signals 
were measured using subdural electrodes placed in 
the medial temporal lobe and other areas of cortex. 
A subject first learned associations between pairs of 
words and then had to retrieve memories of those 
associations. The retrieval of memories was associated 
with neural activity in the hippocampus, coupled with 
neural activity in temporal association cortex, a region 
involved in language and multisensory integration. 
This coupled neural activity was associated with a reac-
tivation of cortical patterns that were initially observed 
when participants first memorized word pairs. This 
finding provides a link between the neural activity 
observed in the hippocampus during initial encod-
ing of a memory and the later coupled activity in the 
temporal association cortex during retrieval. Related 
observations of reactivation of encoding patterns dur-
ing retrieval have been reported in numerous human 
functional imaging studies, documenting the ubiquity 
of such effects. As with encoding of episodic memory, 
retrieval involves a complex interaction between the 
medial temporal lobe and distributed cortical regions, 
including frontoparietal networks and other high-level 
association areas.
Episodic Memory Contributes to Imagination and 
Goal-Directed Behavior
Memory enables us to use our past experience to pre-
dict future events, thus promoting adaptive behav-
ior. Like retrieval of memories, imagination of future 
events involves construction of details from memory. 
The first report of a possible connection between 
memory and imagination came from the case study 
of patient K.C., as reported by Endel Tulving in 1985. 
Patient K.C. displayed typical and devastating amne-
sia as a result of damage to his hippocampus and 
medial temporal lobe. Similar to patient H.M., he had 
a complete lack of episodic memory while language 
and nonepisodic functions were unimpaired. Tulving’s 
studies revealed further that such brain damage was 
associated with the loss of the ability to imagine events 
in the future. When asked what he would be doing the 
next day, K.C. was unable to provide details.
The importance of the hippocampus in imagin-
ing future events is also seen with fMRI studies. Such 
studies examined brain activity of healthy individu-
als, comparing activity when subjects were asked to 
remember an event from the past (eg, think of your 
birthday last year) with activity when they imagined 
events in the future (eg, imagine a beach vacation next 
summer). The subjects were asked to report any vivid 
details of the event that came to mind. The MRI scans 
showed a striking overlap in the network of brain 
regions that were active during memory retrieval and 
imagination of future events. This network included 
the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, posterior cingu-
late cortex, retrosplenial cortex, and lateral parietal and 
temporal areas (Figure 52–7).
Further evidence supporting the view that episodic 
memory and hippocampal function are necessary for 
planning future behavior comes from a study on human 
performance of a spatial navigation task using virtual 
reality simulations. High-resolution fMRI and multivoxel 
pattern analysis (Chapter 6) showed that activity in the 
hippocampus was related to simulation of navigation 
goals. Moreover, hippocampal activity during planning 
covaried with goal-related activity in prefrontal, medial 
temporal, and medial parietal cortex (Figure 52–8).
Episodic memory encoding and storage are also 
influenced by the adaptive value of events. Alison 
Adcock and colleagues showed that the anticipation 
of a potential reward can enhance memory by elicit-
ing coordinated activity between the medial temporal 
lobe and midbrain regions that are rich in dopamine 
neurons. Reward can also retroactively enhance mem-
ories. When human participants navigate a maze for 
a reward, they have better memory for neutral events 
that happened right before the reward. The ability to 
retroactively shape episodic memory based on out-
comes is important because the relevance of a spe-
cific episode may only become known after the fact. 
Together with the role of episodic memory in con-
structing the retrieval of past events and in imagining 
and simulating future events, the findings on reward 
support the view that a major function of episodic 
memory is to guide adaptive behaviors.
The Hippocampus Supports Episodic Memory by 
Building Relational Associations
In addition to the broad role of the hippocampus in 
episodic memory, future thinking, and goal-directed 
behavior, studies of rodents first pointed to a role for the 
hippocampus in spatial navigation (Chapter 54), find-
ings that were later supported by studies of nonhuman 
primates and humans. In rodents, single neurons in the 
hippocampus encode specific spatial information, and 
lesions of the hippocampus interfere with the animal’s 
memory for spatial location. Functional imaging of the 
brain in healthy humans shows that activity increases 
in the right hippocampus when spatial information 
is recalled and in the left hippocampus when words, 


