===== Page 1 =====
876    Part V / Movement
B  Movement-related neuron responds before movement but not to stimulus
200 ms
200 ms
Appearance of target
Start of saccade
Appearance of target
Start of saccade
A  Visual neuron responds to the stimulus and not to movement
Target
Target
Frontal
eye ﬁeld
100 spikes/s
Figure 35–13  Visual and movement-related neurons in the 
frontal eye field. (Reproduced, with permission, from Bruce 
and Goldberg 1985.)
A. Activity of a visual neuron in the frontal eye field as a mon-
key makes a saccade to a target in its visual field. Raster plots 
of activity in successive trials of the same task are summed to 
form the histogram below. In the record on the left, the individ-
ual trials are aligned at the appearance of the stimulus. A burst 
of firing is closely time-locked to the stimulus. In the record on 
the right, the trials are aligned at the beginning of the saccade. 
Activity is not well aligned with the beginning of the saccade 
and stops before the saccade itself commences.
B. Activity of a movement-related neuron in the frontal eye 
field. The records of each trial are aligned as in part A. The cell 
does not respond to appearance of the saccade target (left) but 
is active at the time of the saccade (right).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    877
Figure 35–14  Directing the fovea to an object when 
the head is moving requires coordinated head and eye 
movements.
A. For a small gaze shift, the eye and head move in sequence. 
The eye begins to move 300 ms after the target appears. Near 
the end of the eye movement, the head begins to move as 
well. The eye then rotates back to the center of the orbit to 
compensate for the head movement. The gaze record is the 
sum of eye and head movements. (Abbreviations: L, left;  
R, right.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Zee 1977.)
B. For a large gaze shift, the eye and head move in the same 
direction simultaneously. Near the end of the gaze shift, the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex returns, the eye begins to compensate 
for head movement as in part A, and gaze becomes still. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Laurutis and Robinson 
1986.)
if the superior colliculus responds to a parietal signal 
that generates attention to the stimulus without the 
frontal-nigral control that normally prevents saccades 
in response to parietal signals.
The Control of Saccades Can Be Modified  
by Experience
Quantitative study of the neural control of movement is 
possible because the discharge rate of a motor neuron has 
a predictable effect on a movement. For example, a cer-
tain frequency of firing in the abducens motor neuron has 
a predictable effect on eye position and velocity.
This relationship can change if disease dam-
ages an oculomotor nerve or causes an eye muscle to 
become weak, although the brain can compensate to 
some degree for such changes. Guntram Kommerell 
described a case that dramatically illustrates this point. 
A diabetic patient had an acute partial abducens nerve 
lesion affecting one eye and a retinal hemorrhage in the 
other. Because of the poor vision in the eye with a nor-
mal abducens nerve, he ordinarily used the eye with 
the newly weakened lateral rectus muscle. After a few 
days, the eye recovered the ability to make fairly accu-
rate eye movements. When the weak eye was patched 
and the subject attempted to make a saccade with the 
visually poor eye, the saccade overshot the target. This 
implies that in order to compensate for the weakness 
of the visually normal eye the brain increased the neu-
ral signal to both eyes, resulting in too large a signal to 
the eye with normal motor input. This change in the 
motor response depends on the fastigial nucleus and 
vermis of the cerebellum (Figure 35–9A) and results 
from the visual system signaling that the preceding 
eye movement was inaccurate.
Some Rapid Gaze Shifts Require Coordinated  
Head and Eye Movements
So far, we have described how the eyes are moved 
when the head is still. When we look around, however, 
our head is moving as well. Head and eye movements 
must be coordinated to direct the fovea to a target.
Because the head has a much greater inertia than 
the eyes, a small shift in gaze drives the fovea to its 
target before the head begins to move. A small gaze 
shift usually consists of a saccade followed by a small 
head movement during which the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex moves the eyes back to the center of the orbit in 
the new head position (Figure 35–14). For larger gaze 
shifts, the eyes and the head move simultaneously in 
the same direction. Because the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
ordinarily moves the eyes in the direction opposite that 
of the head, the reflex must be temporarily suppressed.
20°
20°
L
A  Small gaze shift
B  Large gaze shift
R
L
R
Eye
0°
20°
20°
Head
0°
20°
20°
Gaze
Target
0°
–40°
40°
0
0.5
Time (s)
0°
205°
Eye
Head
Gaze
163°
420°/s


===== Page 3 =====
878    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–15  Cortical pathways for 
smooth-pursuit eye movements in 
the monkey.  The cerebral cortex pro-
cesses information about motion in the 
visual field and sends it to the oculomo-
tor neurons via the dorsolateral pontine 
nuclei, the vermis and flocculus of the 
cerebellum, and the vestibular nuclei. 
The initiation signal for smooth pursuit 
may originate in part from the frontal 
eye field.
The Smooth-Pursuit System Keeps Moving 
Targets on the Fovea
The smooth-pursuit system holds the image of a mov-
ing target on the fovea by calculating how fast the tar-
get is moving and moving the eyes at the same speed. 
Smooth-pursuit movements have a maximum angu-
lar velocity of approximately 100° per second, much 
slower than saccades. Drugs, fatigue, alcohol, and even 
distraction degrade the quality of these movements.
Smooth pursuit and saccades have very different 
central control systems. This is best seen when a target 
jumps away from the center of gaze and then slowly 
moves back toward it. A smooth-pursuit movement is 
initiated first because the smooth-pursuit system has 
a shorter latency and responds to target motion on the 
peripheral retina as well as on the fovea. The task of  
the smooth-pursuit system differs from that of the saccade 
system. Instead of driving the eyes as rapidly as possible 
to a point in space, it must match the velocity of the eyes 
to that of a target in space. Therefore, as the target moves 
back toward the center of gaze, the smooth-pursuit sys-
tem briefly moves the eye away from the target before 
the saccade is initiated (Figure 35–6B). The subsequent 
saccade then brings the eye to the target. Neurons that 
signal eye velocity for smooth pursuit are found in the 
medial vestibular nucleus and the nucleus prepositus 
hypoglossi. They receive projections from the flocculus 
of the cerebellum and project to the abducens nucleus as 
well as the oculomotor nuclei in the midbrain.
Neurons in both the flocculus and vermis transmit 
an eye-velocity signal that correlates with smooth pur-
suit. These areas receive signals from the cerebral cor-
tex relayed by the dorsolateral pontine nucleus (Figure 
35–15). Thus, lesions in the dorsolateral pons disrupt 
ipsiversive smooth pursuit.
Frontal
eye ﬁeld
Middle temporal (MT) 
and medial superior
temporal (MST) areas
Striate
cortex
Cerebellum
(ﬂocculus 
and vermis)
Dorsolateral
pontine nuclei/
Nucleus reticularis 
tegmenti pontis
Vestibular
nuclei
Motion 
information
processed
Computation 
of eye velocity
Translation into 
motor signals 
for smooth 
pursuit
There are two major cortical inputs to the smooth-
pursuit system in monkeys. One arises from motion-
sensitive regions in the superior temporal sulcus and 
the middle temporal and medial superior temporal 
areas. The other arises from the frontal eye field.
The middle temporal and medial superior temporal 
areas were named because of their position in sulcus-
free cortex of the owl monkey, a New World monkey. 
In humans and Old World monkeys, these areas lie in 
the superior temporal sulcus, at the junction between 
the occipital and parietal lobes. Neurons in both the 
middle temporal and medial superior temporal areas 
calculate the velocity of the target. When the eye accel-
erates to match the target’s speed, the rate of the target’s 
motion across the retina decreases. As the speed of the 
retinal image decreases, neurons in the middle tempo-
ral area, whose activity signals retinal-image motion, 
stop firing, even though the target continues to move 
in space. Neurons in the medial superior temporal area 
continue to fire even if the target disappears briefly. 
These neurons have access to a process that adds the 
speeds of the moving eye and the target moving on the 
retina to compute the speed of the target in space.
Lesions of either the middle temporal or medial 
superior temporal area disrupt the ability of a subject 
to respond to targets moving in regions of the visual 
field represented in the damaged cortical area. Lesions 
of the latter area also diminish smooth-pursuit move-
ments toward the side of the lesion, no matter where 
the target lies on the retina.
The two motion-selective areas provide the sensory 
information to guide pursuit movements but may not 
be able to initiate them. Electrical stimulation of either 
area does not initiate smooth pursuit but can affect pur-
suit movement, accelerating ipsiversive pursuit and 
slowing contraversive pursuit. The frontal eye field may 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    879
Figure 35–16  Vergence movements. When the eyes 
focus on a distant mountain, images of the mountain lie on 
the foveae, while those of the tree in the forefront occupy 
different retinal positions, yielding the percept of a double 
image. When the viewer looks instead at the tree, the ver-
gence system must rotate each eye inward. Now the tree’s 
image occupies similar positions on both foveae and is 
seen as one object, but the mountain’s images occupy  
different locations on the retinas and appear double. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from F.A. Miles.)
be more important for initiating pursuit. This area has 
neurons that fire in association with ipsiversive smooth 
pursuit. Electrical stimulation of the frontal eye field 
initiates ipsiversive pursuit, whereas lesions of this area 
diminish but do not eliminate smooth pursuit.
In humans, disruption of the pursuit pathway any-
where along its course, including lesions at the level 
of cortical, cerebellar, and brain stem areas, prevents 
adequate smooth-pursuit eye movements. Instead, 
moving targets are tracked using a combination of 
defective smooth-pursuit movements (the velocity is 
less than that of the target) and small saccades. Patients 
with brain stem and cerebellar lesions cannot pursue 
targets moving toward the side of the lesion.
Patients with parietal deficits that include the 
motion-sensitive areas have two different types of 
deficit. The first is a directional deficit that resem-
bles that of monkeys with lesions of the medial supe-
rior temporal area: targets moving toward the side 
of the lesion cannot be tracked. The second is a reti-
notopic deficit that resembles the deficit of monkeys 
Focus on mountain
Focus on tree
Mountain
Tree
Fovea
Fovea
with lesions of the middle temporal area: There is an 
impairment of smooth pursuit of a stimulus limited to 
the visual hemifield opposite the lesion, regardless of 
the direction of motion.
The Vergence System Aligns the Eyes to  
Look at Targets at Different Depths
The smooth-pursuit and saccade systems produce 
conjugate eye movements: Both eyes move in the same 
direction and at the same speed. In contrast, the ver-
gence system produces disconjugate movements of 
the eyes. When we look at an object that is close to us, 
our eyes converge or rotate toward each other; when 
we look at an object that is farther away, they diverge 
or rotate away from each other (Figure 35–16). These 
disconjugate movements ensure that the image of the 
object falls on the foveae of both retinas. Whereas 
the visual system uses slight differences in left and 
right retinal positions, or retinal disparity, to create a 


===== Page 5 =====
880    Part V / Movement
sense of depth, vergence movements eliminate retinal 
disparity at the fovea.
Vergence is a function of the horizontal rectus 
muscles only, because the two eyes are horizontally, 
not vertically, displaced. Convergence of the eyes for 
near-field viewing is accomplished by simultaneously 
increasing the tone of the medial recti muscles and 
decreasing the tone of the lateral recti muscles to con-
verge the eyes. Conversely, distance viewing is accom-
plished by reducing the tone of the medial rectus and 
increasing the tone of the lateral rectus.
At any given time, the entire visual field is not in 
focus on the retina. When we look at something nearby, 
distant objects are blurred. When we look at something 
far away, near objects are blurred. When we wish to 
focus on an object in a closer plane in the visual field, 
the oculomotor system contracts the ciliary muscle, 
thereby changing the radius of curvature of the lens. 
This process is called accommodation. With age, accom-
modation declines owing to increased rigidity of the 
lens; reading glasses are then needed to focus images 
at short distances.
Accommodation and vergence are linked. Accom-
modation is elicited by the blurring of an image, and 
whenever accommodation occurs, the eyes also con-
verge. Conversely, retinal disparity induces vergence, 
and whenever the eyes converge, accommodation also 
takes place. At the same time, the pupils transiently con-
strict to increase the depth of field of the focus. The linked 
phenomena of accommodation, vergence, and pupillary 
constriction comprise the near response. Accommodation 
and vergence are controlled by midbrain neurons in the 
region of the oculomotor nucleus. Neurons in this region 
discharge during vergence, accommodation, or both.
Highlights
  1.  The oculomotor system provides a valuable win-
dow into the nervous system for both the clini-
cian and the scientist. Patients with oculomotor 
deficits may experience alarming symptoms 
such as double vision that quickly send them 
to seek medical help. A physician with a thor-
ough knowledge of the oculomotor system can 
describe and diagnose most oculomotor deficits 
at the bedside and localize the site of the lesion 
within the brain based on the neuroanatomy and 
neurophysiology of eye movements.
  2.  The purpose of eye movements is to rotate the 
eye in the orbit in order to direct the fovea, the 
area of the retina with best acuity, to the point of 
greatest interest in the visual scene and then to 
keep the image steady.
  3.  Six muscles work together to move each eye. These 
eye muscles are yoked in three pairs. The lateral 
rectus abducts the eye horizontally, and the medial 
rectus adducts it. The cyclovertical eye muscles 
move the eye both vertically and torsionally.
  4.  Motor neurons for the extraocular muscles lie in 
three brainstem nuclei. The abducens nucleus 
in the pons contains the neurons for the lateral 
rectus. The other oculomotor neurons are in 
the midbrain: The trochlear nucleus contains 
superior oblique neurons, and the oculomotor 
nucleus has the motor neurons for the medial, 
superior, and inferior rectus muscles and the 
inferior oblique muscle. Neurons that constrict 
the pupil and those that elevate the eyelid also lie 
in the oculomotor nucleus.
  5.  There are six different types of eye movements, 
with different control systems: (1) Saccades 
shift the fovea rapidly to a new visual target. (2) 
Smooth-pursuit movements keep the image of a 
moving object on the fovea. (3) Vergence move-
ments rotate the eyes in opposite directions so that 
the image of an object of interest is positioned on 
both foveae regardless of its distance. (4) Vestibulo-
ocular reflexes hold images still on the retina dur-
ing brief, rapid head movements. (5) Optokinetic 
movements hold images stationary during sus-
tained or slow head movements. (6) Fixation is an 
active process that keeps the eye still during intent 
gaze when the head is not moving.
  6.  The firing pattern of eye muscle neurons com-
bines independent signals that code eye posi-
tion and velocity. The neurons that generate the 
velocity signal for horizontal saccades lie in the 
paramedian pontine reticular formation, and this 
velocity signal is integrated in the medial vestib-
ular nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi 
to provide the position signal.
  7.  The mesencephalic reticular formation provides 
the position and velocity signals for vertical and 
torsional eye movements as well as vergence eye 
movements.
  8.  Presaccadic burst neurons in the superior colli-
culus project a desired displacement signal to the 
reticular formation. These neurons are inhibited 
by a GABAergic projection from the substantia 
nigra and excited by projections from the fron-
tal eye field and the posterior parietal cortex. A 
motor signal from the frontal eye field excites the 
caudate nucleus, which then inhibits the substan-
tia nigra, allowing a saccade to occur.
  9.  The posterior parietal cortex projects an atten-
tional signal to the superior colliculus that does 
not distinguish between attention and movement.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    881
10.  Most large gaze shifts involve head movements 
as well as eye movements. Because the eye 
moves faster than the head, it typically reaches 
the target first. The vestibulo-ocular reflex main-
tains the eye on target by driving the eye with a 
velocity opposite to that of the head movement.
11.  The cerebellum calibrates eye movements based 
on visual feedback and mediates the learning 
process that keeps them accurate over time.
12.  Smooth pursuit is driven by a network that 
includes the medial vestibular nucleus, the floc-
culus of the cerebellum, the dorsolateral pontine 
nucleus, and two motion-selective areas that are 
found in the superior temporal sulcus of some 
monkeys—the middle temporal and medial 
superior temporal areas. Homologous areas in 
the human brain are located at the parieto-occipital 
junction. The pursuit area of the frontal eye fields 
initiates smooth-pursuit movements.
13.  Although the motor programming of eye move-
ments is well understood, the great bulk of physi-
ological research in this field was done with a 
monkey making a directed saccade to a spot of light. 
The neural mechanisms underlying the free choice 
of saccade targets as we explore the visual world are 
poorly understood. This question, lying at the inter-
section of cognition and motor control, is one of the 
great unknowns in neuroscience and will be at the 
center of oculomotor research in the future.
 Michael E. Goldberg  
 Mark F. Walker 
Selected Reading
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, intention, and pri-
ority in the parietal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:1–21.
Krauzlis RJ, Goffart L, Hafed ZM. 2017. Neuronal control of 
fixation and fixational eye movements. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 372:20160205.
Leigh RJ, Zee DS. 2015. The Neurology of Eye Movements, 6th 
ed. Philadelphia: FA Davis.
Lisberger SG. Visual guidance of smooth-pursuit eye move-
ments: sensation, action, and what happens in between. 
Neuron 2010:477–491.
Sparks D. 2002. The brainstem control of saccadic eye move-
ments. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:952–964.
Wurtz RH, Joiner WM, Berman RA. 2011. Neuronal mecha-
nisms for visual stability: progress and problems. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:492–503.
Yarbus AL. 1967. Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum.
References
Andersen RA, Asanuma C, Essick G, Siegel RM. 1990. Cor-
ticocortical connections of anatomically and physiologi-
cally defined subdivisions within the inferior parietal 
lobule. J Comp Neurol 296:65–113.
Andersen RA, Cui H. 2009. Intention, action planning, and 
decision making in parietal-frontal circuits. Neuron 
63:568–583.
Barnes GR. 2008. Cognitive processes involved in smooth 
pursuit eye movements. Brain Cogn 68:309–326.
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2006. Neural correlates of atten-
tion and distractibility in the lateral intraparietal area.  
J Neurophysiol 95:1696–1717.
Bruce CJ, Goldberg ME. 1985. Primate frontal eye fields. I. 
Single neurons discharging before saccades. J Neurophysiol 
53:603–635.
Büttner-Ennever JA, Büttner U, Cohen B, Baumgartner 
G. 1982. Vertical gaze paralysis and the rostral intersti-
tial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Brain 
105:125–149.
Büttner-Ennever JA, Cohen B, Pause M, Fries W. 1988. Raphe 
nucleus of the pons containing omnipause neurons of the 
oculomotor system in the monkey, and its homologue in 
man. J Comp Neurol 267:307–321.
Cannon SC, Robinson DA. 1987. Loss of the neural integra-
tor of the oculomotor system from brain stem lesions in 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 57:1383–1409.
Cohen B, Henn V. 1972. Unit activity in the pontine reticu-
lar formation associated with eye movements. Brain Res 
46:403–410.
Colby CL, Duhamel J-R, Goldberg ME. 1996. Visual, presac-
cadic and cognitive activation of single neurons in monkey 
lateral intraparietal area. J Neurophysiol 76:2841–2852.
Cumming BG, Judge SJ. 1986. Disparity-induced and blur-
induced convergence eye movement and accommodation 
in the monkey. J Neurophysiol 55:896–914.
Curtis CE, Connolly JD. 2008. Saccade preparation signals in 
the human frontal and parietal cortices. J Neurophysiol 
99:133–145.
Dash S, Thier P. 2014. Cerebellum-dependent motor learning: 
lessons from adaptation of eye movements in primates. 
Prog Brain Res 210:121–155.
Demer JL, Miller JM, Poukens V, Vinters HV, Glasgow BJ. 1995. 
Evidence for fibromuscular pulleys of the recti extraocu-
lar muscles. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 36:1125–1136.
Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1992. The updating 
of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by 
intended eye movements. Science 255:90–92.
Dürsteler MR, Wurtz RH, Newsome WT. 1987. Directional 
pursuit deficits following lesions of the foveal representa-
tion within the superior temporal sulcus of the macaque 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 57:1262–1287.
Fuchs AF, Luschei ES. 1970. Firing patterns of abducens neu-
rons of alert monkeys in relationship to horizontal eye 
movement. J Neurophysiol 33:382–392.
Funahashi S, Bruce CJ, Goldman-Rakic PS. 1989. Mnemonic 
coding of visual space in the monkey’s dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex. J Neurophysiol 61:331–349.


===== Page 7 =====
882    Part V / Movement
Gottlieb JP, MacAvoy MG, Bruce CJ. 1994. Neural responses 
related to smooth-pursuit eye movements and their cor-
respondence with electrically elicited smooth eye move-
ments in the primate frontal eye field. J Neurophysiol 
74:1634–1653.
Hécaen J, de Ajuriaguerra J. 1954. Balint’s syndrome (psychic 
paralysis of visual fixation). Brain 77:373–400.
Henn V, Hepp K, Büttner-Ennever JA. 1982. The primate ocu-
lomotor system. II. Premotor system. A synthesis of ana-
tomical, physiological, and clinical data. Hum Neurobiol 
12:87–95.
Highstein SM, Baker R. 1978. Excitatory termination of abdu-
cens internuclear neurons on medial rectus motoneurons: 
relationship to syndrome of internuclear ophthalmople-
gia. J Neurophysiol 41:1647–1661.
Hikosaka O, Wurtz RH. 1983. Visual and oculomotor functions 
of monkey substantia nigra pars reticulata. IV. Relation 
of substantia nigra to superior colliculus. J Neurophysiol 
49:1285–1301.
Hikosaka O, Sakamoto M, Usui S. 1989. Functional proper-
ties of monkey caudate neurons. I. Activities related to 
saccadic eye movements. J Neurophysiol 61:780–798.
Hikosaka O, Wurtz RH. 1989. The basal ganglia. Rev Oculo-
motor Res 3: 257–281.
Huk A, Dougherty R, Heeger D. 2002. Retinotopy and 
functional subdivision of human areas MT and MST.  
J Neurosci 22:7195–7205.
Keller EL. 1974. Participation of medial pontine reticular 
formation in eye movement generation in monkey.  
J Neurophysiol 37:316–332.
Laurutis VP, Robinson DA. 1986. The vestibular reflex during 
human saccadic eye movements. J Physiol (Lond) 373: 
209–233.
Luschei ES, Fuchs AF. 1972. Activity of brain stem neurons 
during eye movements of alert monkeys. J Neurophysiol 
35:445–461.
Lynch JC, Graybiel AM, Lobeck LJ. 1985. The differential pro-
jection of two cytoarchitectonic subregions of the inferior 
parietal lobule of macaque upon the deep layers of the 
superior colliculus. J Comp Neurol 235:241–254.
McFarland JL, Fuchs AF. 1992. Discharge patterns in nucleus 
prepositus hypoglossi and adjacent medial vestibular 
nucleus during horizontal eye movement in behaving 
macaques. J Neurophysiol 68:319–332.
Munoz DP, Wurtz RH. 1993. Fixation cells in monkey superior 
colliculus. I. Characteristics of cell discharge. J Neurophysiol 
70:559–575.
Mustari MJ, Fuchs AF, Wallman J. 1988. Response properties 
of dorsolateral pontine units during smooth pursuit in the 
rhesus macaque. J Neurophysiol 60:664–686.
Newsome WT, Wurtz RH, Komatsu H. 1988. Relation of corti-
cal areas MT and MST to pursuit eye movements. II. Differ-
entiation of retinal from extraretinal inputs. J Neurophysiol 
60:604–620.
Olson CR, Gettner SN. 1995. Object-centered direction selec-
tivity in the macaque supplementary eye field. Science 
269:985–988.
Powell KD, Goldberg ME. 2000. Response of neurons in the 
lateral intraparietal area to a distractor flashed during the 
delay period of a memory-guided saccade. J Neurophysiol 
84:301–310.
Quaia C, Aizawa H, Optican LM, Wurtz RH. 1998. Revers-
ible inactivation of monkey superior colliculus. II. Maps 
of saccadic deficits. J Neurophysiol 79:2097–2110.
Quaia C, Lefevre P, Optican LM. 1999. Model of the con-
trol of saccades by superior colliculus and cerebellum.  
J Neurophysiol 82:999–1018.
Ramat S, Leigh RJ, Zee DS, Optican LM. 2007. What clinical 
disorders tell us about the neural control of saccadic eye 
movements. Brain 130:10–35.
Rao HM, Mayo JP, Sommer MA. 2016. Circuits for presac-
cadic visual remapping. J Neurophysiol 116:2624–2636.
Raybourn MS, Keller EL. 1977. Colliculo-reticular organization 
in primate oculomotor system. J Neurophysiol 269:985–988.
Robinson DA. 1970. Oculomotor unit behavior in the mon-
key. J Neurophysiol 33:393–404.
Schall JD. 1995. Neural basis of saccade target selection. Rev 
Neurosci 6:63–85.
Schiller PH, Koerner F. 1971. Discharge characteristics of sin-
gle units in superior colliculus of the alert rhesus monkey. 
J Neurophysiol 34:920–936.
Schiller PH, True SD, Conway JL. 1980. Deficits in eye move-
ments following frontal eye field and superior colliculus 
ablations. J Neurophysiol 44:1175–1189.
Scudder C, Kaneko C, Fuchs A. 2002. The brainstem burst 
generator for saccadic eye movements—a modern syn-
thesis. Exp Brain Res 142:439–462.
Segraves MA, Goldberg ME. 1987. Functional properties of 
corticotectal neurons in the monkey’s frontal eye field.  
J Neurophysiol 58:1387–1419.
Silver MA, Kastner S. 2009. Topographic maps in human 
frontal and parietal cortex. Trends Cogn Sci (Regul Ed) 13: 
488–495.
Strupp M, Kremmyda O, Adamczyk C, et al. 2014. Central 
ocular motor disorders, including gaze palsy and nystag-
mus. J Neurol 261:S542–S558.
Stuphorn V, Brown JW, Schall JD. 2010. Role of supplemen-
tary eye field in saccade initiation: executive, not direct, 
control. J Neurophysiol 103:801–816.
Takagi M, Zee DS, Tamargo RJ. 1998. Effects of lesions of the 
oculomotor vermis on eye movements in primate: sac-
cades. J Neurophysiol 80:1911–1931.
von Noorden GK, Campos EC. 2002. Binocular Vision and 
Ocular Motility: Theory and Management of Strabismus, 6th 
ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Wurtz RH, Goldberg ME. 1972. Activity of superior collicu-
lus in behaving monkey. III. Cells discharging before eye 
movements. J Neurophysiol 35:575–586.
Xu-Wilson M, Chen-Harris H, Zee DS, Shadmehr R. 2009. 
Cerebellar contributions to adaptive control of saccades 
in humans. J Neurosci 29:12930–12939.
Zee DS. 1977. Disorders of eye-head coordination. In B 
Brooks, FJ Bajandas (Eds.), Eye Movements, Plenum Press, 
New York, 1977, pp. 9–40.


===== Page 8 =====
36
Posture
The Spinocerebellum and Basal Ganglia Are Important  
in Adaptation of Posture
Cerebral Cortex Centers Contribute to Postural Control
Highlights
T
he control of posture involves two inter-
related goals,  equilibrium (balance) and ori-
entation, crucial for most tasks of daily living. 
Balance control maintains the body in stable equilib-
rium to avoid falls. Orientation aligns the body seg-
ments with respect to each other and to the world, 
such as maintaining the head vertical. Both balance 
and orientation use several different types of control: 
automatic postural responses, anticipatory postural 
adjustments, postural sway in stance, sensory inte-
gration for a body schema, orientation to vertical, and 
dynamic stability during gait.
To appreciate the complexity of maintaining bal-
ance and orientation, imagine that you are waiting 
tables on a tour boat. You have a tray full of drinks to 
be delivered to a table on the other side of the rolling 
deck. Even as your mind is occupied with remember-
ing customer orders, unconscious but complex senso-
rimotor processes for controlling postural orientation 
and balance allow you to move about in an efficient 
and coordinated manner without falling. As you 
cross the rolling deck, your brain rapidly integrates 
and interprets sensory information and adjusts motor 
output to maintain your balance and the upright ori-
entation of your head and trunk, as well as stabilize 
the arm supporting the tray of full glasses. Sudden 
Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie Posture Control
Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body’s  
Center of Mass
Postural Orientation Anticipates Disturbances to Balance
Postural Responses and Anticipatory Postural Adjustments 
Use Stereotyped Strategies and Synergies
Automatic Postural Responses Compensate for  
Sudden Disturbances
Anticipatory Postural Adjustments Compensate for 
Voluntary Movement
Posture Control Is Integrated With Locomotion
Somatosensory, Vestibular, and Visual Information Must Be 
Integrated and Interpreted to Maintain Posture
Somatosensory Signals Are Important for Timing and 
Direction of Automatic Postural Responses
Vestibular Information Is Important for Balance on 
Unstable Surfaces and During Head Movements
Visual Inputs Provide the Postural System With 
Orientation and Motion Information
Information From a Single Sensory Modality  
Can Be Ambiguous
The Postural Control System Uses a Body Schema That 
Incorporates Internal Models for Balance
Control of Posture Is Task Dependent
Task Requirements Determine the Role of Each Sensory 
System in Postural Equilibrium and Orientation
Control of Posture Is Distributed in the Nervous System
Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining 
Antigravity Support but Not Balance
The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate Sensory 
Signals for Posture


===== Page 9 =====
884    Part V / Movement
unexpected motions of the boat evoke automatic pos-
tural responses that prevent falls. Before you reach 
out to place a glass on the table, your nervous system 
makes anticipatory postural adjustments to maintain 
your balance.
Somatosensory, vestibular, and visual information 
are integrated to provide a coherent sense of the posi-
tion and velocity of the body in space with respect to 
the support surface, gravity, and visual environment. 
Since the surface is unstable and vision is not provid-
ing earth-stable information, your dependence on ves-
tibular information is greater than usual. Your head is 
kept stable while your trunk motions and walking pat-
tern adjust for disequilibrium caused by the moving 
surface. You notice that both your voluntary tasks and 
your balance control deteriorate when trying to attend 
to both goals.
Equilibrium and Orientation Underlie  
Posture Control
Postural equilibrium refers to the ability to actively sta-
bilize the upper body by resisting external forces act-
ing on the body. Although the dominant external force 
affecting equilibrium on earth is gravity, other inertial 
forces and external perturbations must also be resisted. 
Depending on the particular task or behavior, different 
sets of muscles are activated in response to or in antici-
pation of disturbance to equilibrium.
Postural orientation refers to the ability to actively 
align body segments, such as the trunk and head, with 
respect to each other and to the environment. Depend-
ing on the particular task or behavior, body segments 
may be aligned with respect to gravitational vertical, 
visual vertical, or the support surface. For example, 
when skiing downhill, the head may be oriented to 
gravitational and inertial vertical, but not to the visual 
or support surface references that are inclined.
The biomechanical requirements of postural con-
trol depend on anatomy and postural orientation and 
thus vary among species. Nevertheless, in a variety 
of species, the control mechanisms for postural equi-
librium and orientation have many common features. 
The sensorimotor mechanisms for postural control are 
quite similar in humans and quadrupedal mammals 
even though their habitual stance is different.
Postural Equilibrium Controls the Body’s  
Center of Mass
With many segments linked by joints, the body is 
mechanically unstable. To maintain balance, the 
nervous system must control the position and motion 
of the body’s center of mass as well as the body’s rota-
tion about it. The center of mass is a point that repre-
sents the average position of the body’s total mass. In 
the standing adult, for example, the center of mass is 
located about 2 cm in front of the second lumbar ver-
tebra; in a young child, it is higher. The location of the 
center of mass is not fixed but depends on postural ori-
entation. For example, when you flex at the hips while 
standing, the center of mass moves from a location 
inside the body to a position outside the body.
Although gravity pulls on all body segments, 
the net effect on body equilibrium acts through 
the body’s center of mass. The force due to gravity 
is opposed by the forces between the feet and the 
ground. Each point on the surface will generate a 
force on the foot. All the forces acting between the 
foot and the ground can be summed to yield a sin-
gle force vector termed the ground reaction force. This 
origin of the ground reaction force vector on the sur-
face is the point at which the rotational effect of all 
the forces on the feet are balanced and is termed the 
center of pressure (Box 36–1).
Maintaining balance while standing requires keep-
ing the downward projection of the center of mass 
within the base of support, an imaginary area defined 
by those parts of the body in contact with the environ-
ment. For example, the two feet or one foot of a stand-
ing human define a base of support (Box 36–1). However, 
when a standing person leans against a wall or is sup-
ported by crutches, the base of support extends from 
the ground under the feet to the contact point between 
the body and the wall or crutches. Because the body 
is always in motion, even during stable stance, the 
body’s center of mass continually moves about with 
respect to the base of support. Postural instability is 
determined by how fast the center of mass is acceler-
ating toward and beyond the boundary of its base of 
support and how close the downward projection of the 
body’s center of mass is to the boundary.
Upright stance requires two actions: (1) maintain-
ing support against gravity by keeping the center of 
mass at some height and joints stable and (2) maintain-
ing balance by controlling the trajectory of the center 
of mass in the horizontal plane. Balance and antigrav-
ity support are controlled separately by the nervous 
system and may be differentially affected in certain 
pathological conditions. For example, antigravity sup-
port can be excessive when spasticity is present after a 
stroke or insufficient in the hypotonia of cerebral palsy, 
although balance control may be preserved. Alterna-
tively, in vestibular disorders, antigravity support can 
be normal, although balance control is disordered.


