===== Page 1 =====
1172    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 47–12  The axons of retinal ganglion cells grow to 
the optic tectum in discrete steps.  Two neurons that carry 
information from the nasal half of the retina are shown. The 
axon of one crosses the optic chiasm to reach the contralateral 
optic tectum. The axon of the other also crosses the optic chi-
asm but projects to the lateral geniculate nucleus. The numbers 
indicate important landmarks on the axon’s journey. The grow-
ing axon is directed toward the optic nerve head (the junction 
of the nerve with the retina) (1), enters into the optic nerve 
(2), extends through the optic nerve (3), swerves to remain 
ipsilateral (not shown) or crosses to the contralateral side at the 
optic chiasm (4), extends through the optic tract (5), enters into 
the optic tectum or lateral geniculate nucleus (not shown) (6), 
navigates to an appropriate rostrocaudal and dorsoventral position 
on the tectum (7), turns to enter the neuropil (descends in chicks 
as shown here; ascends in mammals) (8), stops at an appropriate 
layer where a rudimentary terminal arbor is formed (9), and finally 
is remodeled (10). (Abbreviations: A, anterior; P, posterior).
A
P
1
2
3
Optic chiasm
6
7
4
5
Optic 
nerve
Optic 
tract
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Optic tectum
(superior colliculus)
8
9
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
16
colliculus, and small numbers project to the pulvinar, 
superchiasmatic nucleus, and pretectal nuclei. Within 
these targets, different retinal axons project to differ-
ent regions. As Sperry showed, the retinal axons form 
a precise retinotopic map on the tectal surface. Similar 
maps form in other areas innervated by retinal axons 
such as the lateral geniculate nucleus.
Having reached an appropriate position within 
the tectum, retinal axons need to find an appropriate 
synaptic partner. To achieve this last leg of their jour-
ney, retinal axons turn and dive into the tectal neuropil 
(Figure 47–12), descending (or, in mammals, ascend-
ing) along the surface of radial glial cells, which pro-
vide a scaffold for radial axonal growth. Although 
radial glial cells span the entire extent of the neu-
roepithelium, each retinal axon confines its synaptic 
terminals to a single layer. The dendrites of many post-
synaptic cells extend through multiple layers and form 
synapses along their entire length, but retinal inputs 
are restricted to a small fraction of the target neuron’s 
dendritic tree. These organizational features imply that 
layer-specific cues arrest axonal elongation and trigger 
arborization.
The problem of long-distance axon navigation is 
therefore solved by dividing the journey into short 
segments in which intermediate targets guide the 
axons along the path to their final targets. Some inter-
mediate targets, such as the optic chiasm, are “decision” 
regions where axons diverge.
Reliance on intermediate targets is an effective 
solution to the problem of long-distance axonal navi-
gation but is not the only one. In some cases, the first 
axons reach their targets when the embryo is small and 
the distance to be covered is short. These “pioneer” 
axons respond to molecular cues embedded in cells 
or the extracellular matrix along their way. The first 
axons to exit the retina fall within this class. Axons that 
appear later, when distances are longer and obstacles 
more numerous, can reach their targets by following 
the pioneers. Yet another guidance mechanism is a 
molecular gradient. Indeed, as we will see, gradients 
of cell-surface molecules in the tectum inform axons 
about their proper termination zone.
Gradients of Ephrins Provide Inhibitory  
Signals in the Brain
So far, we have seen how retinal axons reach the tectum 
by responding to a series of discrete directional cues. 
However, these choices during growth do not account 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1173
Figure 47–13  Axons of retinal ganglion neurons diverge as 
they reach the optic chiasm.
A. A time lapse series shows axons approaching the midline. 
Axons that arise from the nasal hemiretina cross the optic chi-
asm and project to the contralateral tectum (left). In contrast, 
axons from the temporal hemiretina reach the chiasm but fail 
to cross and thus project toward the ipsilateral tectum (right). 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Godement, Wang, and 
Mason 1994.)
B. The axons of neurons from the temporal hemiretina, which 
express the tyrosine kinase receptor EphB1, encounter ephrin-
B2 expressed by midline radial glial cells at the optic chiasm 
and so are prevented from crossing the midline. The axons of 
nasal hemiretina neurons, which lack EphB1 receptors, are 
unaffected by the presence of ephrin-B2 and cross to the  
contralateral side. (Abbreviations: A, anterior; P, posterior.)
C. Higher-power view illustrating the trajectories of retinal  
ganglion cell axons at the chiasm.
0
0
27
12
98
134
191
209 m
B  
A  
EphB1
expression
A
P
Radial glia 
express
ephrin-B2
No  EphB1
expression
63
114
147 m
Midline
Midline
Ephrin-B2
EphB1
Contralateral projection
Ipsilateral projection
C  
Radial glial cells
for the smoothly graded connections implied by Sper-
ry’s analysis of the retinotopic map in the tectum. The 
quest for the hypothetical “map molecules” became a 
major focus for developmental neurobiologists, and so 
we describe it in some detail.
A key breakthrough in the quest for these mole-
cules came with the development of bioassays in which 
explants from defined portions of the retina were laid 
on substrates of tectal membrane fragments. The mem-
brane fragments were taken from defined anteroposte-
rior portions of the tectum and arranged in alternating 
stripes. Axons from the temporal (posterior) hemiretina 
were found to grow preferentially on membranes from 
anterior tectum, a preference similar to that exhibited 
in vivo (Figure 47–14). This preference was found to 
result from the presence of inhibitory factors in poste-
rior membranes rather than from attractive or adhesive 
substances in anterior membranes. This observation 
was one of the first to demonstrate the role of inhibitory 
or repellent substances in axon guidance.
This stripe assay permitted the characterization 
of an inhibitory cue, present in membranes from the 
posterior but not the anterior tectum. Independently, 
molecular biologists identified a family of receptor 
tyrosine kinases, the Eph kinases, and a large family of 
membrane-associated ligands, the ephrins. Both recep-
tors and ligands are divided into A and B subfamilies. 
The ephrin-A proteins bind and activate EphA kinases; 
conversely, ephrin-B proteins bind and activate EphB 
kinases (Figure 47–11C).
The two lines of research converged when the tec-
tal inhibitory cue was identified as ephrin-A5. We now 
know that the Eph kinases and ephrins serve many 
functions in neural and nonneural tissues and that 
each class of proteins can serve as ligands or recep-
tors, depending on cellular context. In the developing 


===== Page 3 =====
1174    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 47–14  Repellent signals 
guide developing retinal axons in 
vitro.
A. Retinal ganglion axons from the 
posterior (temporal) hemiretina 
project into the anterior developing 
tectum. Conversely, axons from the 
anterior (nasal) hemiretina project into 
the posterior tectum.
B. Fragments of membrane were 
taken from specified anteroposterior 
portions of the tectum and arranged 
in alternating strips. Axons from 
explants of posterior retina grow 
selectively on the fragments from 
anterior tectum. The preferential 
growth of axons on anterior mem-
brane results from an inhibitory cue in 
the posterior membrane. In contrast, 
axons from anterior retina grow on 
both anterior and posterior tectal 
membrane fragments. (Abbreviations: 
A, anterior; P, posterior.) (Adapted, 
with permission, from Walter,  
Henke-Fahle, and Bonhoeffer 1987.)
Retina
Tectum
A
P
A
P
Tectal 
membrane
Retinal
tissue
A
B
Anterior
Posterior
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
A
P
nervous system, these proteins comprise a major group 
of repellent signals.
Ephrin–Eph interactions account in large part for 
formation of the retinotopic map in the tectum. Levels 
of ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 in the tectum as well as  
levels of the Eph receptors in the retina are graded along 
the anteroposterior axis. These gradients run in the 
same direction.  Ephrin-A concentrations run from pos-
terior-high to anterior-low in tectum, while Eph A con-
centrations run from posterior-high to anterior-low in 
retina (Figure 47–15A). Such counter-gradients account, 
at least in part, for topographic mapping. Axons from 
posterior retinal ganglion cells with high levels of EphA 
receptors are repelled most strongly by the high level of 
ephrin-A in the posterior tectum and thus are confined 
to the anterior tectum. The less sensitive axons from the 
anterior retina are able to penetrate further into the pos-
terior domain of the tectum. Ephrin-A2 and ephrin-A5 
are therefore strong candidates for chemospecificity fac-
tors of the type postulated by Sperry.
The crucial role of the interaction of ephrins and 
Eph kinases in the formation of retinotopic maps has 
been confirmed in vivo. Overexpression of ephrin-A2 
in the developing optic tectum of chick embryos gen-
erates small patches of cells in the rostral tectum that 
are abnormally rich in ephrin-A2. Temporal retinal 
axons, which normally avoid the ephrin-rich caudal 
tectum, also avoid these patches in the rostral tectum, 
and they terminate in abnormal positions. In contrast, 
nasal retinal axons, which normally grow toward the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1175
Figure 47–15  The formation of retinotopic maps in vivo 
depends on ephrin-Eph kinase signaling.
A. In the retina, EphA receptors are expressed in an  
anteroposterior (A-P) gradient, and ephrin-B is expressed in a 
dorsoventral (D-V) gradient. In the tectum, ephrin-A receptors 
are distributed in an anteroposterior gradient and EphB in a  
dorsoventral gradient.
B. Expression of EphA in retinal axons that derive from neu-
rons in the posterior (temporal) retina directs axon growth to 
the anterior tectum through avoidance of ephrin-A proteins. In 
EphA mutant mice, posterior retinal axons are able to project to 
a more posterior domain within the tectum.
C. EphB signaling directs the projection of dorsal retinal axons 
to the ventral tectum. Blocking ephrin-B signaling with soluble 
EphB protein causes dorsal axons to project to an abnormally 
dorsal domain within the tectum.
A
B  Repulsion: forward signaling
Ephrin-As
EphA
EphA
Ephrin-A
Left optic 
tectum
Wild type
EphA mutant
Ephrin-B signaling blocked
A
A
P
P
A
A
P
P
C  Attraction: reverse signaling
Ephrin-B
Ephrin-B
EphB
EphB
Wild type
V
V
D
D
Right 
eye
D
V
A
P
D
V
A
P
D
V
A
P
D
V
D
V
caudal tectum, are not perturbed by encounters with 
excess ephrin-A.
Conversely, in mice with targeted mutations in 
the relevant ephA or ephrin-A genes, some posterior 
retinal axons terminate in inappropriately posterior 
tectal regions (Figure 47–15B). Anterior retinal axons, 
which naturally express low levels of EphA proteins, 
project normally in these mutants. In mice lacking 
both ephrin-A proteins, these deficits are more severe 
than with either single mutant. Thus, the interaction of 
ephrin-A with EphA receptors is crucial for the target-
ing of retinal axons in the tectum. These ephrin/EphA 
pairs possess the properties of the recognition mol-
ecules that Sperry predicted were necessary to direct 


===== Page 5 =====
1176    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
topographic mapping along the anteroposterior axis of 
the tectum.
Of course, the retinal map also has a dorsoventral 
axis. Ephrin/EphB pairs are involved in establishing 
order along this axis. Just as ephrin-A and EphA are 
graded along the anteroposterior axis, ephrin-B and 
EphB are graded along the dorsoventral axis, and 
manipulation of ephrin-B and EphB levels affects dor-
soventral mapping (Figure 47–15C). Thus, at a simple 
level, the retinotopic map is arranged in rectangular 
coordinates with ephrin-A/EphA and ephrin-B/EphB 
labeling the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes, 
respectively.
Although this simple view is satisfying, the real-
ity is more complex. First, EphB kinases are expressed 
in the tectum as well as in the retina, and ephrins-A 
are expressed in the retina as well as in the tectum. 
Thus, so-called “cis” interactions (Eph and ephrin on 
the same cell) as well as “trans” interactions (Eph on 
growth cone, ephrin on target cell) may be involved. 
Second, both ligands and receptors are present at mul-
tiple points along the optic pathway and play multiple 
roles. As we have seen, ephrin-B/EphB interactions 
affect not only dorsoventral mapping but also the 
decision of an axon to cross to the contralateral side 
at the optic chiasm. Finally, in developing visual cir-
cuits, more precise spatial mapping of retinal inputs is 
regulated by patterns of neural activity, as discussed in 
the next two chapters. Nonetheless, we now have the 
outline of a molecular strategy for the initial formation 
of topographic projections from the eye to the brain.
Axons From Some Spinal Neurons Are  
Guided Across the Midline
One of the fundamental features of the central nervous 
system is the need to coordinate activity on both sides 
of the body. To accomplish this task, certain axons need 
to project to the opposite side.
We have seen one example of axonal crossing in the 
optic chiasm. Another example that has been studied in 
detail is the axonal crossing of commissural neurons that 
convey sensory information from the spinal cord to the 
brain at the ventral midline of the spinal cord across 
the floor plate. After crossing, axons turn abruptly 
and grow up toward the brain. This simple trajectory 
raises several questions. How do these axons reach the 
ventral midline? How do they cross the midline, and 
after crossing, how do they ignore cues that axons on 
the other side are using to get to the midline? In other 
words, why do they turn toward the brain instead of 
crossing back?
Netrins Direct Developing Commissural Axons 
Across the Midline
Many of the neurons that send axons across the ven-
tral midline are generated in the dorsal half of the 
spinal cord. The first task for these axons is to reach 
the ventral midline. Ramón y Cajal considered the 
possibility that chemotactic factors emitted by tar-
gets could attract axons, but this idea lay dormant 
for nearly a century. We now know that such factors 
do exist, and one of them, the protein netrin-1, is 
expressed by cells of the floor plate as well as by pro-
genitors along the ventral midline. When presented 
in culture, netrin attracts commissural axons; when 
mice are deprived of netrin-1 function, axons fail 
to reach the floor plate (Figure 47–16). It may act as 
both a secreted factor (chemotaxis) and a membrane 
guidance molecule (haptotaxis) to guide the axons of 
commissural neurons to the floor plate.
The netrin protein is structurally related to the pro-
tein product of unc-6, a gene shown to regulate axon 
guidance in the nematode Clostridia elegans. Two other 
C. elegans genes, unc-5 and unc-40, encode receptors 
for the unc-6 protein. Vertebrate netrin receptors are 
related to the unc-5 and unc-40 receptors. The unc-
5H proteins are homologs of unc-5, and DCC (deleted 
in colorectal cancer) are related to unc-40 (see Figure 
47–11G). These receptors are members of the immu-
noglobulin superfamily, and their functions have been 
remarkably conserved throughout animal evolution 
(Figure 47–17). This conservation supports the use 
of simple and genetically accessible invertebrates to 
unravel developmental complexities. In no area has 
this approach been more fruitful than in the analysis 
of axon guidance. Dozens of genes that affect this 
process were first identified and cloned in Drosophila 
and C. elegans and then shown to play important and 
related roles in mammals.
Chemoattractant and Chemorepellent Factors 
Pattern the Midline
Other signaling systems work with netrins to guide 
commissural axons. One group consists of bone mor-
phogenetic proteins, which are secreted by the roof 
plate. They act as repellents, directing commissural 
axons ventrally as they begin their journey. Additional 
factors from the floor plate, such as the hedgehog 
proteins initially involved in patterning the spinal cord 
(Chapter 45), may collaborate with netrins at a later 
stage, serving as axonal attractants.
Once commissural axons reach the midline, they 
find themselves exposed to the highest available levels 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1177
Figure 47–16  Netrin signaling attracts the 
axons of spinal commissural neurons to 
the floor plate. (Micrographs reproduced, 
with permission, from Marc Tessier-Lavigne.)
A. Netrin-1 is generated by floor plate cells 
and ventral neural progenitors. It attracts the 
axons of commissural neurons to the floor 
plate (FP) at the ventral midline of the spinal 
cord.
B. Most commissural axons fail to reach the 
floor plate when netrin or deleted in colorec-
tal cancer (DCC)  proteins are eliminated.
Floor plate
Commissural 
axon
Netrin-1
A  Wild type
B  Netrin or DCC mutants
FP
FP
FP
FP
Commissural
axons
Commissural
axons
Commissural
axons
Commissural
axons
Netrin-1 mutant
DCC mutant
of netrin-1 and sonic hedgehog. Yet this netrin-rich 
environment does not keep the axons at the midline 
indefinitely. Instead they cross to the other side of the 
spinal cord, even while their contralateral counterparts 
are navigating up the netrin chemoattractant gradient.
This puzzling behavior is explained by the fact that 
growth cones change their responsiveness to attractive 
and repellent signals as a consequence of exposure to 
floor plate signals. This switch illustrates an impor-
tant property of intermediate targets involved in axon 
guidance. Factors presented by intermediate targets 
not only guide the growth of axons but also change the 
sensitivity of the growth cone, preparing it for the next 
leg of its journey.


===== Page 7 =====
1178    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Worm
unc-6
unc-40
receptor
unc-40
+
unc-5
receptors
Vertebrate
Netrin-1
DCC
receptor
DCC
+
unc-5H
receptors
Fly
Netrin-A
Frazzled
receptor
Figure 47–17  The expression and activity of netrins have 
been conserved throughout evolution. Netrins are secreted 
by ventral midline cells in worms, flies, and vertebrates and 
interact with receptors on cells or axons that migrate or extend 
along the dorsoventral axis. The netrin receptors unc-40 (worm), 
frazzled (fly), and deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) (vertebrate) 
mediate netrin’s attractant activity, whereas unc-5 class recep-
tors mediate its repellent activity.
–––––
–––––
A
B
C
Netrin-DCC signaling attracts 
axons to the ﬂoor plate.
BMP signaling directs axons 
ventrally, away from the roof 
plate.
Slit interacts with Robo 
receptors on axons to 
prevent midline recrossing. 
BMP
Wnt
Netrin
BMPR
DCC
Fz
Robo
Slit
–––
D
Axons turn and travel rostrally, 
guided by Wnts.
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 47–18  Guidance cues expressed by roof plate and 
floor plate cells guide commissural axons in the developing 
spinal cord.
A. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) secreted by roof plate 
cells interact with BMP receptors (BMPR) on commissural 
axons to direct the axons away from the roof plate.
B. Netrin expressed by floor plate cells attracts deleted in colo-
rectal cancer (DCC)-expressing commissural axons to the ven-
tral midline of the spinal cord. Sonic hedgehog has also been 
implicated in the ventral guidance of commissural axons.
C. Slit proteins secreted by floor plate cells interact with Robo 
receptors on commissural axons to prevent these axons from 
recrossing the midline. Prior to crossing, but not after, com-
missural axons express robo3 (Rig-1) in addition to robo1 and 
robo2. The Rig-1 protein inactivates the Robo receptors, pre-
venting the axons from responding to the repellent effects of 
Slits as they approach the ventral midline.
D. After commissural axons cross the midline, Wnt proteins 
secreted from floor plate cells and distributed in a rostrocaudal 
gradient interact with frizzled (Fz) proteins on the commissural 
axons, guiding the axons toward the brain.
Once axons arrive at the floor plate, they become 
sensitive to Slit, a chemorepellent signal secreted by 
floor plate cells (Figure 47–18). Before commissural 
axons reach the floor plate, the Robo proteins that serve 
as Slit receptors are kept inactive by expression of a 
related protein, Rig-1. As axons reach the floor plate, 
levels of Rig-1 on their surface decline, unleashing Robo 
activity and causing axons to respond to the repellant 
actions of Slit. This repellent action propels growth 
cones down the Slit gradient into the contralateral side 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1179
of the spinal cord. In addition, activated Robo forms a 
complex with DCC, rendering these Netrin receptors 
incapable of responding to their ligand. The decreased 
sensitivity of growth cones to the attractive proper-
ties of the floor plate helps to account for the transient 
influence of floor plate signals on axons.
Finally, once axons have left the floor plate, they 
turn rostrally toward their eventual synaptic targets 
in the brain. A rostrocaudal gradient of Wnt proteins 
expressed by floor plate cells appears to direct axon 
growth rostrally at the ventral midline (Figure 47–18D). 
Thus, different cues guide commissural axons during 
distinct phases of their overall trajectory. This same 
process is presumably played out for hundreds and 
even thousands of classes of neurons to establish the 
mature pattern of brain wiring.
Highlights
  1.  As neurons extend processes, one generally 
becomes an axon and the others become den-
drites. This process is called polarization. The 
two types of processes differ in structure and 
molecular architecture as well as function.
  2.  Cell types differ markedly in the shape, size, 
and branching patterns of their dendrites. 
Type-specific dendritic features arise both from 
intrinsic differences in transcriptional programs 
among types and from extrinsic influences on the 
developing dendrites.
  3.  Interactions among dendrites are critical for 
dendritic 
patterning. 
Repellent 
interactions 
among the dendrites of a single cell, a process 
called self-avoidance, leads to even coverage of 
an area, with minimal gaps or clumps. Repel-
lent actions between dendrites of neighboring 
cells, a process called tiling, minimizes over-
lap of dendritic fields. In some cases, dendrites 
avoid other dendrites from their own neuron 
but interact with dendrites of nominally identi-
cal neighboring cells. This process is called self-/
non–self-discrimination.
  4.  Growth cones at the tips of axons serve as both 
sensory and motor elements to guide axons to 
their destinations. Cytoskeletal elements of the 
growth cone, including actin and myosin, propel 
the growth.
  5.  Receptors on the growth cone recognize and 
bind ligands in the environment through which 
the axon is extending, guiding the growth. These 
interactions lead to generation of their second 
messengers that mediate growth, turning and 
stopping of the growth cone, and branching of 
the axon.
  6.  Some growth cones contain protein synthetic 
machinery including messenger RNAs. In these 
cases, receptors can promote local synthesis of 
specific proteins that mediate growth or turning.
  7.  Ligand–receptor pairs include several key fami-
lies of molecules including cadherins, Slits and 
their Robo receptors, semaphorins and their 
plexin receptors, and ephrins and their Eph 
kinase receptors.
  8.  The growth of an axon to a distant target is bro-
ken into discrete shorter steps. At each step, 
molecules on the surface of or secreted by neigh-
boring structures guide the axon. They can also 
lead to alterations in the growth cone’s comple-
ment of receptors, allowing it to respond to dif-
ferent sets of cues at the subsequent stage.
  9.  Roger Sperry proposed a chemospecificity 
hypothesis to explain the specific growth of axons 
from different parts of the retina to different parts 
of the optic tectum (superior colliculus), forming 
an orderly retinotopic map. The ephrins and their 
receptors, the Eph kinases, are key molecules that 
guide map formation. They are graded in expres-
sion along the retina and tectum and act in large 
part by repelling axons from incorrect positions 
rather than attracting them to correct positions.
10.  Both attractive and repellent molecules guide 
axons across midline structures, a process called 
decussation. Evolutionarily conserved signals 
include Slits, netrins, and Wnts. Mutations in 
genes that encode these ligands and receptors can 
result in developmental neurological disorders.
 Joshua R. Sanes 
Selected Reading
Bentley M, Banker G. 2016. The cellular mechanisms that 
maintain neuronal polarity. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:611–622.
Cang J, Feldheim DA. 2013. Developmental mechanisms of 
topographic map formation and alignment. Annu Rev 
Neurosci 36:51–77.
Dong X, Shen K, Bülow HE. 2015. Intrinsic and extrinsic 
mechanisms of dendritic morphogenesis. Annu Rev 
Physiol 77:271–300.
Herrera E, Erskine L, Morenilla-Palao C. 2017. Guidance of reti-
nal axons in mammals. Semin Cell Dev Biol pii: S1084-9521.


===== Page 9 =====
1180    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Jung H, Gkogkas CG, Sonenberg N, Holt CE. 2014. Remote 
control of gene function by local translation. Cell 
157:26–40. 
Lai Wing Sun K, Correia JP, Kennedy TE. 2011. Netrins: ver-
satile extracellular cues with diverse functions. Develop-
ment 138:2153–2169.
Lefebvre JL, Sanes JR, Kay JN. 2015. Development of dendritic 
form and function. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:741–777. 
Tojima T, Hines JH, Henley JR, Kamiguchi H. 2011. Second 
messengers and membrane trafficking direct and organ-
ize growth cone steering. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:191–203.
Zhang C, Kolodkin AL, Wong RO, James RE. 2017. Establish-
ing wiring specificity in visual system circuits: from the 
retina to the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:395–424.
Zipursky SL, Grueber WB. 2013. The molecular basis of self-
avoidance. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:547–568.
References
Barnes AP, Lilley BN, Pan YA, et al. 2007. LKB1 and SAD 
kinases define a pathway required for the polarization of 
cortical neurons. Cell 129:549–563.
Bridgman PC, Dailey ME. 1989. The organization of myosin 
and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones. J Cell Biol 
108:95–109.
Campbell DS, Holt CE. 2001. Chemotropic responses of reti-
nal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthe-
sis and degradation. Neuron 32:1013–1026.
Fazeli A, Dickinson SL, Hermiston ML, et al. 1997. Pheno-
type of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal can-
cer (Dcc) gene. Nature 386:796–804.
Forscher P, Smith SJ. 1988. Actions of cytochalasins on the 
organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neu-
ronal growth cone. J Cell Biol 107:1505–1516.
Frisen J, Yates PA, McLaughlin T, Friedman GC, O’Leary DD, 
Barbacid M. 1998. Ephrin-A5 (AL-1/RAGS) is essential for 
proper retinal axon guidance and topographic mapping 
in the mammalian visual system. Neuron 20:235–243.
Godement P, Wang LC, Mason CA. 1994. Retinal axon diver-
gence in the optic chiasm: dynamics of growth cone 
behavior at the midline. J Neurosci 14:7024–7039.
Grueber WB, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2003. Different levels of the 
homeodomain protein cut regulate distinct dendrite 
branching patterns of Drosophila multidendritic neurons. 
Cell 112:805–818.
Harrison RG. 1959. The outgrowth of the nerve fiber as a 
mode of protoplasmic movement. J Exp Zool 142:5–73.
Heidemann SR. 1996. Cytoplasmic mechanisms of axonal and 
dendritic growth in neurons. Int Rev Cytol 165:235–296.
Kaech S, Banker G. 2006. Culturing hippocampal neurons. 
Nat Protoc 1:2406–2415.
Kalil K, Dent EW. 2014. Branch management: mechanisms 
of axon branching in the developing vertebrate CNS. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 15:7–18.
Kapfhammer JP, Grunewald BE, Raper JA. 1986. The selec-
tive inhibition of growth cone extension by specific neur-
ites in culture. J Neurosci 6:2527–2534.
Keino-Masu K, Hinck L, Leonardo ED, Chan SS, Culotti 
JG, Tessier-Lavigne M. 1996. Deleted in colorectal cancer 
(DCC) encodes a netrin receptor. Cell 87:75–85.
Kidd T, Brose K, Mitchell KJ, et al. 1998. Roundabout controls 
axon crossing of the CNS midline and defines a novel sub-
family of evolutionarily conserved guidance receptors. 
Cell 92:205–215.
Kishi M, Pan YA, Crump JG, Sanes JR. 2005. Mammalian 
SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization. 
Science 307:929–932.
Lefebvre JL, Kostadinov D, Chen WV, Maniatis T, Sanes JR. 
2012. Protocadherins mediate dendritic self-avoidance in 
the mammalian nervous system. Nature 488:517–521.
Letourneau PC. 1979. Cell-substratum adhesion of neurite 
growth cones, and its role in neurite elongation. Exp Cell 
Res 124:127–138.
Leung K-M, van Horck FPG, Lin AC, Allison R, Standart N, 
Holt CE. 2006. Asymmetrical beta-actin mRNA translation 
in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin-1. 
Nat Neurosci 9:1247–1256.
Ming GL, Song HJ, Berninger B, Holt CE, Tessier-Lavigne M, 
Poo MM. 1997. cAMP-dependent growth cone guidance 
by netrin-1. Neuron 19:1225–1235.
Polleux F, Morrow T, Ghosh A. 2000. Semaphorin 3A is a 
chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites. Nature 
404:567–573.
Serafini T, Colamarino SA, Leonardo ED, et al. 1996. Netrin-1 
is required for commissural axon guidance in the devel-
oping vertebrate nervous system. Cell 87:1001–1014.
Shigeoka T, Jung H, Jung J, et al. 2016. Dynamic axonal translation 
in developing and mature visual circuits. Cell 166:181–192.
Sperry RW. 1943. Visuomotor coordination in the newt 
(Triturus viridescens) after regeneration of the optic nerve.  
J Compar Neurol 79:33–55.
Sperry RW. 1945. Restoration of vision after crossing of optic 
nerves and after contralateral transplantation of eye.  
J Neurophysiol 8:17–28.
Thu CA, Chen WV, Rubinstein R, et al. 2014. Single-cell iden-
tity generated by combinatorial homophilic interactions 
between α, β, and γ protocadherins. Cell 158:1045–1059.
Walter J, Henke-Fahle S, Bonhoeffer F. 1987. Avoidance of 
posterior tectal membranes by temporal retinal axons. 
Development 101:909–913.
Wang L, Marquardt T. 2013. What axons tell each other: 
axon-axon signaling in nerve and circuit assembly. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 23:974–982.
Weiss P. 1941. Nerve patterns: the mechanics of nerve growth. 
Growth 5:163–203. Suppl.
Zhang XH, Poo MM. 2002. Localized synaptic potentiation 
by BDNF requires local protein synthesis in the developing 
axon. Neuron 36:675–688.


