===== Page 1 =====
532    Part IV / Perception
Stimulus pattern
Firing rate
2
1
0
Time (s)
2
1
0
Time (s)
Stimulus
OFF cells
ON cells
4  Center and
 
surround
 
opposite
3  Center and
 
surround 
 
uniform
2  Surround
 
only
1  Center
 
only
Transient cells
Sustained cells
Stimuli
On area
Off area
Figure 22–10  Responses of retinal ganglion cells with 
center-surround receptive fields. In these idealized experi-
ments, the stimulus changes from a uniform gray field to the 
pattern of bright (yellow) and dark (black) regions indicated 
on the left. This leads to the firing rate responses shown 
on the right. 1. ON cells are excited by a bright spot in the 
receptive field center, OFF cells by a dark spot. In  
sustained cells, the excitation persists throughout 
stimulation, whereas in transient cells, a brief burst of spikes 
occurs just after the onset of stimulation. 2. If the same 
stimulus that excites the center is applied to the surround, 
firing is suppressed. 3. Uniform stimulation of both center 
and surround elicits a response like that of the center, but 
much smaller in amplitude. 4. Stimulation of the center com-
bined with the opposite stimulus in the surround produces 
the strongest response.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    533
Figure 22–11  Responses of ganglion cells in the cat retina 
to moving objects.
A. The firing rate of an ON ganglion cell in response to a vari-
ety of bars (white or black, various widths) moving across the 
retina. Each bar moves at 10° per second; 1° corresponds to 
180 μm on the retina. In response to the white bar, the firing 
rate first decreases as the bar passes over the receptive-field 
surround (1), increases as the bar enters the center (2), and 
decreases again as the bar passes through the surround on 
the opposite side (3). The dark bar elicits responses of the 
opposite sign. Because ganglion cells similar to this one are 
distributed throughout the retina, one can also interpret this 
curve as an instantaneous snapshot of activity in a population 
of ganglion cells, where the horizontal axis represents loca-
tion on the retina. In effect, this activity profile is the neural 
representation of the moving bar transmitted to the brain. A 
complementary population of OFF ganglion cells (not shown 
here) conveys another neural activity profile in parallel. In this 
way, both bright and dark edges can be signaled by a sharp 
increase in firing.
B. A simple model of retinal processing that incorporates 
center-surround antagonism and a transient temporal filter is 
used to predict ganglion-cell firing rates. The predictions match 
the essential features of the responses in part A. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Rodieck 1965. Copyright © 1965  
Elsevier Ltd.)
50 spikes/s
1 s
2°
5°
0.5°
2
1
3
White bar
Black bar
A  ON cell response
B  Model prediction


===== Page 3 =====
Figure 22–12  Sinusoid grating displays used in psy-
chophysical experiments with human subjects. Such 
stimuli were used in the experiments discussed in 
Figure 22–13.
Although small spots of light are useful for probing the 
receptive fields of single neurons in visual pathways, 
different stimuli are needed to learn about human visual 
perception. Grating stimuli are commonly used to probe 
how our visual system deals with spatial and temporal 
patterns.
The subject views a display in which the intensity 
varies about the mean as a sinusoidal function of space 
(Figure 22–12). Then the contrast of the display—defined 
as the peak-to-peak amplitude of the sinusoid divided 
by the mean—is reduced to a threshold at which the 
grating is barely visible. This measurement is repeated 
for gratings of different spatial frequencies.
When the inverse of this threshold is plotted against 
the spatial frequency, the resulting contrast sensitivity 
curve provides a measure of sensitivity of visual percep-
tion to patterns of different scales (Figure 22–13A). When 
measured at high light intensity, sensitivity declines 
sharply at high spatial frequencies, with an absolute 
threshold at approximately 50 cycles per degree. This 
sensitivity is limited fundamentally by the quality of the 
optical image and the spacing of cone cells in the fovea 
(see Figure 22–1C).
Interestingly, sensitivity also declines at low spatial 
frequencies. Patterns with a frequency of approximately 
5 cycles per degree are most visible. The visual system is 
said to have band-pass behavior because it rejects all but 
a band of spatial frequencies.
One can use the same techniques to measure the 
sensitivity of individual retinal ganglion cells in pri-
mates. The results resemble those for human subjects 
(Figure 22–13), suggesting that these basic features of 
visual perception are determined by the retina.
The band-pass behavior can be understood on the 
basis of spatial antagonism in center-surround recep-
tive fields. A very fine grating presents many dark and 
bright stripes within the receptive-field center; their 
effects cancel one another and thus provide no net exci-
tation. A very coarse grating presents a single stripe to 
both the center and surround of the receptive field, and 
their antagonism again provides the ganglion cell little 
net excitation. The strongest response is produced by a 
grating of intermediate spatial frequency that just covers 
the center with one stripe and most of the surround with 
stripes of the opposite polarity (Figure 22–13B).
In dim light, the visual system’s contrast sensitiv-
ity declines, but more so at high than at low spatial 
frequencies (Figure 22–13A). Thus, the peak sensitivity 
shifts to lower spatial frequencies, and eventually the 
curve loses its peak altogether. In this state, the visual 
system has so-called low-pass behavior, for it preferen-
tially encodes stimuli of low spatial frequency. The fact 
that in dim light the receptive fields of ganglion cells 
lose their antagonistic surrounds explains the transi-
tion from band-pass to low-pass spatial filtering 
(Figure 22–13B).
Similar experiments can be done to test visual sen-
sitivity to temporal patterns. Here, the intensity of a test 
stimulus flickers sinusoidally in time, while the contrast 
is gradually brought to the threshold level of detection. 
For humans, contrast sensitivity declines sharply at very 
high flicker frequencies, but declines also at very low 
frequencies (Figure 22–14A). Flicker at approximately 
10 Hz is the most effective stimulus. One finds similar 
band-pass behavior in the flicker sensitivity of macaque 
retinal ganglion cells (Figure 22–14B).
Sensitivity to temporal contrast also depends on 
the mean light level. For human subjects, the optimum 
flicker frequency shifts downward at lower stimulus 
intensities and the peak in the curve becomes less and 
less prominent (Figure 22–14). The fact that primate reti-
nal ganglion cells duplicate this behavior suggests that 
retinal processing limits the performance of the entire 
visual system in these simple tasks.
Box 22–1  Spatiotemporal Sensitivity of Human Perception
Low spatial frequency
High spatial frequency, 
high contrast
High spatial frequency, 
low contrast


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 22–13  Spatial contrast sensitivity.
A. 1. The contrast sensitivity of human subjects was 
measured using gratings with different spatial frequen-
cies (see Figure 22–12). At each frequency, the contrast 
was increased to the threshold for detection, and the 
inverse of that contrast value was plotted against spatial 
frequency, as shown here. The curves were obtained at 
different mean intensities, decreasing by factors of 10 
from the top to the bottom curve. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from De Valois, Morgan, and Snodderly 
1974.) 2. Contrast sensitivity of a P-type ganglion cell in 
the macaque retina measured at high intensity. At each 
spatial frequency, the contrast was gradually increased 
until it produced a detectable change in the neuron’s 
firing rate. The inverse of that threshold contrast was 
plotted as in part A-1. The isolated dot at left marks the 
sensitivity at zero spatial frequency, a spatially uniform 
field. (Reproduced, with permission, from Derrington and 
Lennie 1984.)
B. Stimulation of a center-surround receptive field with 
sinusoid gratings. The neuron’s sensitivity to light at dif-
ferent points on the retina is modeled as a “difference-of-
Gaussians” receptive field, with a narrow positive Gaussian 
for the excitatory center and a broad negative Gaussian for 
the inhibitory surround. Multiplying the profile of the grating 
stimulus (intensity vs position) with the profile of the recep-
tive field (sensitivity vs position) and integrating over all 
space calculates the stimulus strength delivered by a partic-
ular grating. The resulting sensitivity of the receptive field to 
gratings of different frequency is shown in the plot on the 
right. At low spatial frequencies, the negative contribution 
from the surround cancels the contribution from the center, 
leading to a drop in the difference curve. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Enroth-Cugell and Robson 1984.)
Figure 22–14  Temporal contrast sensitivity. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Lee et al. 1990.)
A. The sensitivity of human subjects to temporal flicker 
was measured by methods similar to those in Figure 
22–13A, but the stimulus was a large spot whose intensity 
varied sinusoidally in time rather than in space. The inverse 
of the threshold contrast required for detection is plotted 
against the frequency of the sinusoidal flicker. Sensitivity 
declines at both high and low frequencies. The mean light 
level varied, decreasing by factors of 10 from the top to 
the bottom trace.
B. The flicker sensitivity of M-type ganglion cells in the 
macaque retina was measured by the same method applied 
to human subjects in part A. The detection threshold for the 
neural response was defined as a variation of 20 spikes per 
second in the cell’s firing rate in phase with the flicker.
Contrast sensitivity
200
Responsivity
1.0
0.1
0.01
100
10
1
0.5
1
5
10 20
50
Bright
Dim
A  Sensitivity of humans and monkeys
B  Sensitivity of ganglion cell receptive ﬁeld
1  Human subject
Low 
Intermediate
High 
Center
Difference
(receptive 
ﬁeld proﬁle)
Surround
Spatial 
frequency
Spatial frequency (cycle/deg)
0.01
0.1
1.0
Center
Low Intermediate High 
Difference
Surround
Contrast sensitivity
10
1
2  Macaque ganglion cell
20
10
1
0.1
Spatial frequency (cycle/deg)
Contrast sensitivity
100
10
1
Contrast sensitivity
100
10
1
2000 Td
2000 Td
2
2
20
20
200
200
Frequency (Hz)
1
10
Frequency (Hz)
1
10
100
A  Human subjects
B  Macaque ganglion cells
100


===== Page 5 =====
536    Part IV / Perception
(sustained or transient), spectral filtering (broadband 
or dominated by red, green, or blue), and selectivity 
for other image features such as motion.
These neural representations are directed to vari-
ous visual centers in the brain, including the lateral 
geniculate nucleus of the thalamus, a relay to the vis-
ual cortex; the superior colliculus, a midbrain region 
involved in spatial attention and orienting move-
ments; the pretectum, involved in control of the pupil; 
the accessory optic system, which analyzes self-motion 
to stabilize gaze; and the suprachiasmatic nucleus, a 
central clock that directs circadian rhythm and whose 
phase can be set by light cues (Chapter 44). In many 
cases, the axons of one type of ganglion cell extend col-
laterals to multiple areas of the central nervous system. 
M-cells, for example, project to the thalamus and the 
superior colliculus.
A Network of Interneurons Shapes the  
Retinal Output
We now consider in more detail the retinal circuit and 
how it accounts for the intricate response properties of 
retinal ganglion cells.
Parallel Pathways Originate in Bipolar Cells
The photoreceptor forms synapses with bipolar cells 
and horizontal cells (see Figure 22–3A). In the dark, the 
photoreceptor’s synaptic terminal releases glutamate 
continuously. When stimulated by light, the photore-
ceptor hyperpolarizes, less calcium enters the terminal, 
and the terminal releases less glutamate. Photorecep-
tors do not fire action potentials; like bipolar cells, they 
release neurotransmitter in a graded fashion using a 
specialized structure, the ribbon synapse. In fact, most 
retinal processing is accomplished with graded mem-
brane potentials: Action potentials occur primarily in 
certain amacrine cells and in the retinal ganglion cells.
The two principal varieties of bipolar cells, ON and 
OFF cells, respond to glutamate at the synapse through 
distinct mechanisms. The OFF cells use ionotropic 
receptors, namely glutamate-gated cation channels 
of the AMPA-kainate variety (AMPA = α-amino-3-
hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate). The gluta-
mate released in darkness depolarizes these cells. The 
ON cells use metabotropic receptors that are linked 
to a G protein whose action ultimately closes cation 
channels. Glutamate activation of these receptors thus 
hyperpolarizes the cells in the dark.
Bipolar ON and OFF cells differ in shape and 
especially in the levels within the inner plexiform 
layer where their axons terminate. The axons of ON 
cells end in the proximal (lower) half, while those of 
OFF cells end in the distal (upper) half (Figure 22–15). 
There, they form specific synaptic connections on the 
dendrites of amacrine and ganglion cells. The ON 
bipolar cells excite ON ganglion cells, while OFF bipo-
lar cells excite OFF ganglion cells (see Figure 22–3A). 
Thus, the two principal subdivisions of retinal output, 
the ON and OFF pathways, are already established at 
the level of bipolar cells.
Bipolar cells can also be distinguished by the mor-
phology of their dendrites (Figure 22–15). In the cen-
tral region of the primate retina, the midget bipolar cell 
receives input from a single cone and excites a P-type 
ganglion cell. This explains why the centers of P-cell 
receptive fields are so small. The diffuse bipolar cell 
receives input from many cones and excites an M-type 
ganglion cell. Accordingly, the receptive-field centers 
of M-cells are much larger. Thus, stimulus representa-
tions in the ganglion cell population originate in dedi-
cated bipolar cell pathways that are differentiated by 
their selective connections to photoreceptors and post-
synaptic targets.
Spatial Filtering Is Accomplished by  
Lateral Inhibition
Signals in the parallel on and off pathways are modi-
fied by interactions with horizontal and amacrine cells 
(see Figure 22–3A). Horizontal cells have broadly arbo-
rizing dendrites that spread laterally in the outer plexi-
form layer. Photoreceptors contact the tips of these 
arbors at glutamatergic terminals shared with bipolar 
cells. In addition, horizontal cells are electrically cou-
pled to each other through gap junctions.
A horizontal cell effectively measures the aver-
age level of excitation of the photoreceptor popula-
tion over a broad region. This signal is fed back to the 
photoreceptor terminal through an inhibitory synapse. 
Thus, the photoreceptor terminal is under two oppos-
ing influences: light falling on the receptor hyperpo-
larizes it, but light falling on the surrounding region 
depolarizes it through the sign-inverting synapses 
from horizontal cells. As a result, the bipolar cell has 
an antagonistic receptive-field structure.
This spatial antagonism in the receptive field is 
enhanced by lateral inhibition from amacrine cells in 
the inner retina. Amacrine cells are neurons whose 
processes ramify only in the inner plexiform layer. 
Approximately 30 types of amacrine cells are known, 
some with small arbors only tens of micrometers 
across, and others with processes that extend across 
the entire retina. Amacrine cells generally receive 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    537
Figure 22–15  Bipolar cells in the macaque retina.  The cells 
are arranged according to the depth of their terminal arbors in 
the inner plexiform layer. The horizontal line dividing the distal 
(upper) and proximal (lower) levels of this layer represents 
the border between the axonal terminals of OFF and ON type 
cells. Terminals in the upper half are presumed to be those of 
OFF cells, and those in the lower half ON cells. Cell types are 
diffuse bipolar cells (DB), ON and OFF midget bipolars (IMB, 
FMB), S-cone ON bipolar (BB), and rod bipolar (RB). (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Boycott and Wässle 1999.)
OFF cells
ON cells
Outer 
plexiform 
layer
Inner 
nuclear 
layer
Inner 
plexiform 
layer
Ganglion 
cell layer
DB 5 
IMB 
DB 6
BB
RB
DB 1 
FMB 
DB 2
DB 3
DB 4 
excitatory signals from bipolar cells at glutamatergic 
synapses. Some amacrine cells feed back directly to the 
presynaptic bipolar cell at a reciprocal inhibitory synapse. 
Some amacrine cells are electrically coupled to others 
of the same type, forming an electrical network much 
like that of the horizontal cells.
Through this inhibitory network, a bipolar cell ter-
minal can receive inhibition from distant bipolar cells, 
in a manner closely analogous to the lateral inhibition of 
photoreceptor terminals (see Figure 22–3A). Amacrine 
cells also inhibit retinal ganglion cells directly. These 
lateral inhibitory connections contribute substantially 
to the antagonistic receptive field component of retinal 
ganglion cells.
Temporal Filtering Occurs in Synapses and 
Feedback Circuits
For many ganglion cells, a step change in light inten-
sity produces a transient response, an initial peak in 
firing that declines to a smaller steady rate (see Figure 
22–10). Part of this sensitivity originates in the negative-
feedback circuits involving horizontal and amacrine 
cells. For example, a sudden decrease in light intensity 
depolarizes the cone terminal, which excites the hori-
zontal cell, which in turn repolarizes the cone terminal 
(see Figure 22–3A). Because this feedback loop involves 
a brief delay, the voltage response of the cone peaks 
abruptly and then settles to a smaller steady level. Simi-
lar processing occurs at the reciprocal synapses between 
bipolar and amacrine cells in the inner retina.
In both cases, the delayed-inhibition circuit favors 
rapidly changing inputs over slowly changing inputs. 
The effects of this filtering, which can be observed 
in visual perception, are most pronounced for large 
stimuli that drive the horizontal and amacrine cell net-
works most effectively. For example, a large spot can 
be seen easily when it flickers at a rate of 10 Hz but not 
at a low rate (see Figure 22–14).
In addition to these circuit properties, certain cel-
lular processes contribute to shaping the temporal 
response. For example, the AMPA-kainate type of 
glutamate receptor undergoes strong desensitization. 
A step increase in the concentration of glutamate at 
the dendrite of a bipolar or ganglion cell leads to an 
immediate opening of additional glutamate receptors. 
As these receptors desensitize, the postsynaptic con-
ductance decreases again. The effect is to render a step 
response more transient.
Retinal circuits seem to go to great lengths to speed 
up their responses and emphasize temporal changes. 
One likely reason is that the very first cell in the reti-
nal circuit, the photoreceptor, is exceptionally slow 
(see Figure 22–7C). Following a flash of light, a cone 
takes about 40 ms to reach the peak response, an intol-
erable delay for proper visual function. Through the 
various filtering mechanisms in retinal circuitry, sub-
sequent neurons respond most vigorously during the 
rising phase of the cone’s response. Indeed, some gan-
glion cells have a response peak only 20 ms after the 
flash. Temporal processing in the retina clearly helps 
to reduce visual reaction times, a life-extending trait as 


===== Page 7 =====
538    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–16  A test for some forms of color blindness. The 
numerals embedded in this color pattern can be distinguished 
by people with trichromatic vision but not by dichromats who 
are weak in red–green discrimination. If you don’t see any num-
bers please have your vision tested. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Ishihara 1993.)
important in highway traffic as on the savannas of our 
ancestors.
Color Vision Begins in Cone-Selective Circuits
Throughout recorded history, philosophers and sci-
entists have been fascinated by color perception. This 
interest was originally driven by the relevance of color 
to art, later by its relation to the physical properties of 
light, and finally by commercial interests in television 
and photography. The 19th century witnessed a profu-
sion of theories to explain color perception, of which 
two have survived modern scrutiny. They are based on 
careful psychophysics that placed strong constraints 
on the underlying neural mechanisms.
Early experiments demonstrated that any given 
natural light could be color-matched by mixing 
together appropriate amounts of three primary lights. 
This led to the trichromatic theory of color perception 
based on absorption of light by three mechanisms, 
each with a different sensitivity spectrum. These corre-
spond to the three cone types (see Figure 22–6), whose 
measured absorption spectra fully explain the color-
matching results both in normal individuals and those 
with genetic anomalies in the pigment genes.
The so-called opponent-process theory was pro-
posed to explain our perception of different hues. Accord-
ing to this theory, color vision involves three processes 
that respond in opposite ways to light of different colors: 
(y–b) would be stimulated by yellow and inhibited by 
blue light; (r–g) stimulated by red and inhibited by green; 
and (w–bk) stimulated by white and inhibited by black. 
We recognize some of these 19th century postulates in the 
postreceptor circuitry of the retina.
In the central 10° of the human retina, a single 
midget bipolar cell that receives input from a single 
cone excites each P-type ganglion cell. An L-ON gan-
glion cell, for example, has a receptive field center con-
sisting of a single L cone and an antagonistic surround 
involving a mixture of L and M cones. When this neu-
ron’s receptive field is stimulated with a large uniform 
spot of light that extends over both the center and the 
surround, this neuron is depolarized by red light and 
hyperpolarized by green light. Similar antagonism 
holds for the three other P-cells: L-OFF, M-ON, and 
M-OFF. These P-cells send their signals to the parvo-
cellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus.
A dedicated type of S-ON bipolar cell collects the 
signals of S-cones selectively and transmits them to 
ganglion cells of the small bistratified type. Because 
this ganglion cell also receives excitation from L-OFF 
and M-OFF bipolar cells, it is depolarized by blue light 
and hyperpolarized by yellow light. Another type of 
ganglion cell shows the opposite signature: S-OFF and 
(L + M)-ON. These signals are transmitted to the koni-
ocellular layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus.
The M-cells are excited by diffuse bipolar cells, 
which in turn collect inputs from many cones regard-
less of pigment type. These ganglion cells therefore 
have large receptive fields with broad spectral sensi-
tivity. Their axons project to the magnocellular layers 
of the lateral geniculate nucleus.
In this way, chromatic signals are combined and 
encoded by the retina for transmission to the thalamus 
and cortex. In circuits of the primary visual cortex, these 
signals are recombined in different ways, leading to a 
great variety of receptive field layouts. Only about 10% 
of cortical neurons are preferentially driven by color con-
trast rather than luminance contrast. This likely reflects 
the fact that color vision—despite its great aesthetic 
appeal—makes only a small contribution to our overall 
fitness. As an illustration of this, recall that colorblind 
individuals, who in a sense have lost half of their color 
space, can grow up without ever noticing that defect.
Congenital Color Blindness Takes Several Forms
Few people are truly colorblind in the sense of being 
wholly unable to distinguish a change in color from a 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    539
Figure 22–17  L- and M-pigment genes on the X 
chromosome.
A. The L- and M-pigment genes normally lie next to each other 
on the chromosome. The base of each arrow corresponds to 
the 5′ end of the gene, and the tip corresponds to the 3′ end. 
Males with normal color vision can have one, two, or three 
copies of the gene for the M pigment on each X chromosome. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Nathans, Thomas, and  
Hogness 1986. Copyright © 1986 AAAS.)
B. Recombinations of the L- and M-pigment genes can lead to 
the generation of a hybrid gene (3 and 4) or the loss of a gene 
(1), the patterns observed in colorblind men. Spurious recombi-
nation can also cause gene duplication (2), a pattern observed 
in some people with normal color vision. (Adapted from Streyer 
1988. Used with permission from J. Nathans.)
change in the intensity of light, but many individuals 
have impaired color vision and experience difficulties 
in making distinctions that for most of us are trivial, 
for example between red and green. Most such abnor-
malities of color vision are congenital and have been 
characterized in detail; some other abnormalities result 
from injury or disease of the visual pathway.
Some people have only two classes of cones instead 
of three. These dichromats find it difficult or impossi-
ble to distinguish some surfaces whose colors appear 
distinct to trichromats. The dichromat’s problem is that 
every surface reflectance function is represented by a 
two-value description rather than a three-value one, 
and this reduced description causes dichromats to con-
fuse many more surfaces than do trichromats. Simple 
tests for color blindness exploit this fact (Figure 22–16).
Although there are three forms of dichromacy, cor-
responding to the loss of each of the three types of cones, 
two kinds are much more common than the third. The 
common forms correspond to the loss of the L cones 
or M cones and are called protanopia and deuteranopia,  
respectively. Protanopia and deuteranopia almost 
always occur in males, each with a frequency of about 
1%. The conditions are transmitted by women who are 
not themselves affected, and so implicate genes on the 
X chromosome. A third form of dichromacy, tritanopia, 
involves loss or dysfunction of the S cone. It affects 
only about 1 in 10,000 people, afflicts women and men 
with equal frequency, and involves a gene on chromo-
some 7.
Because the L and M cones exist in large numbers, 
one might think that the loss of one or the other type 
would impair vision more broadly than just weaken-
ing color vision. In fact, this does not happen because 
the total number of L and M cones in the dichromat 
retina is not altered. All cells destined to become L or 
M cones are probably converted to L cones in deuter-
anopes and to M cones in protanopes.
In addition to the relatively severe forms of color-
blindness represented by dichromacy, there are milder 
forms, again affecting mostly males. These so-called 
anomalous trichromats have cones whose spectral 
sensitivities differ from those in normal trichromats. 
Anomalous trichromacy results from the replacement 
of one of the normal cone pigments by an altered pro-
tein with a different spectral sensitivity. Two common 
forms, protanomaly and deuteranomaly, together 
affect about 7% of males and represent, respectively, 
the replacement of the L or M cones by a pigment with 
some intermediate spectral sensitivity.
The genetics of color vision defects are well under-
stood. The genes for the L and M pigments reside on 
the X chromosome in a head-to-tail arrangement 
(Figure 22–17A). The pigment proteins have very simi-
lar structures, differing in only 4% of their amino acids. 
People with normal color vision possess a single copy 
of the gene for the L pigment and from one to three—
occasionally as many as five—nearly identical copies 
of the gene for the M pigment.
The proximity and similarity of these genes predis-
poses them to varied forms of recombination, leading 
either to the loss of a gene or to the formation of hybrid 
genes that account for the common forms of red–green 
defect (Figure 22–17B). Examination of these genes in 
dichromats reveals a loss of the L-pigment gene in pro-
tanopes and a loss of one or more M-pigment genes 
in deuteranopes. Anomalous trichromats have L-M 
or M-L hybrid genes that code for visual pigments 
with shifted spectral sensitivity; the extent of the shift 
L-pigment
M-pigment
or
or
1
2
3
4
or
×
A
B


===== Page 9 =====
540    Part IV / Perception
depends on the point of recombination. In tritanopes, 
the loss of S-cone function arises from mutations in the 
S-pigment gene.
Rod and Cone Circuits Merge in the Inner Retina
For vision under low-light conditions, the mammalian 
retina has an ON bipolar cell that is exclusively con-
nected to rods (see Figure 22–3B). By collecting inputs 
from up to 50 rods, this rod bipolar cell can pool the 
effects of dispersed single-photon absorptions in a 
small patch of retina. There is no corresponding OFF 
bipolar cell dedicated to rods.
Unlike all other bipolar cells, the rod bipolar cell 
does not contact ganglion cells directly but instead 
excites a dedicated neuron, the AII amacrine cell. This 
amacrine cell receives inputs from several rod bipolar 
cells and conveys its output to cone bipolar cells. It 
provides excitatory signals to ON bipolar cells through 
gap junctions as well as glycinergic inhibitory signals 
to OFF bipolar cells. These cone bipolar cells in turn 
excite ON and OFF ganglion cells, as described earlier. 
Thus, the rod signal is fed into the cone system after 
a detour that produces the appropriate signal polari-
ties for the ON and OFF pathways. The purpose of the 
added interneurons may be to allow greater pooling of 
rod signals than of cone signals.
Rod signals also enter the cone system through 
two other pathways. Rods can drive neighboring 
cones directly through electrical junctions, and they 
make connections with an OFF bipolar cell that ser-
vices primarily cones. Once the rod signal has reached 
the cone bipolars through these pathways, it can take 
advantage of the same intricate circuitry of the inner 
retina. Thus, the rod system of the mammalian retina 
may have been an evolutionary afterthought added to 
the cone circuits.
The Retina’s Sensitivity Adapts to Changes in 
Illumination
Vision operates under many different lighting condi-
tions. The intensity of the light coming from an object 
depends on the intensity of the ambient illumination 
and the fraction of this light reflected by the object’s 
surface, called the reflectance. The range of intensities 
encountered in a day is enormous, with variation span-
ning 10 orders of magnitude, but most of this variation 
is useless for the purpose of guiding behavior.
The illumination intensity varies by about nine 
orders of magnitude, mostly because our planet turns 
about its axis once a day, while the object reflectance 
varies much less, by about one order of magnitude 
in a typical scene. But this reflectance is the interest-
ing quantity for vision, for it characterizes objects and 
distinguishes them from the background. In fact, our 
visual system is remarkably good at calculating sur-
face reflectances independently of ambient illumina-
tion (Figure 22–18).
With an overall increase in ambient illumination, 
all points in the visual scene become brighter by the 
same factor. If the eye could simply reduce its sensi-
tivity by that same factor, the neural representation of 
the image would remain unchanged at the level of the 
ganglion cells and could be processed by the rest of the 
brain in the same way as before the change in illumina-
tion. Moreover, the retinal ganglion cells would only 
need to encode the 10-fold range of image intensities 
owing to the different object reflectances, instead of the 
10-billion-fold range that includes variations in ambi-
ent illumination. Some of this adjustment in sensitivity 
is performed by the pupil, which contracts in bright 
light, reducing retinal illumination by up to a factor of 
10. In addition, the retina itself performs an automatic 
gain control, called light adaptation, that approaches the 
ideal normalization we have imagined here.
Light Adaptation Is Apparent in Retinal Processing 
and Visual Perception
When flashes of light of different intensity are pre-
sented with a constant background illumination, the 
responses of a retinal ganglion cell fit a sigmoidal 
curve (Figure 22–19A). The weakest flashes elicit no 
response, a graded increase in flash intensity elicits 
graded responses, and the brightest flashes elicit satu-
ration. When the background illumination is increased, 
the response curve maintains the same shape but is 
shifted to higher flash intensities. Compensating for 
the increase in background illumination, the ganglion 
cell is now less sensitive to light variations: In the pres-
ence of a higher background, a larger change is needed 
to cause the same response. This lateral shifting of the 
stimulus–response relationship is a hallmark of light 
adaptation in the retina.
The consequences of this gain change for human 
visual perception are readily apparent in psychophysi-
cal experiments. When human subjects are asked to 
detect a flash in a background field of constant illu-
mination, detection on a brighter background neces-
sitates a brighter flash (Figure 22–19B). Under the ideal 
gain-control mechanism discussed earlier, two stimuli 
would produce the same response if they caused the 
same fractional change from the background inten-
sity. In that case, the threshold flash intensity should 


