===== Page 1 =====
Preceding Page
In Plato’s “Allegory of the Cave,” which addresses the origin of knowledge, his early 
insight into the constructive nature of perception offers illuminating metaphors for the 
process. The parable begins with the premise that a group of prisoners has never seen 
the outside world. Their experience is limited to shadows cast upon the wall of the 
cave by objects passing before a fire. The causes of those shadows—even the fact that 
they are shadows—is unknown to the prisoners. Nonetheless, over time, the shadows 
become imbued with meaning in the prisoners’ minds.  Metaphorically, the shadows 
represent sensations, which are fleeting and incoherent. The assignment of meaning 
represents the construction of intelligible percepts. The prisoner turning the corner of 
the wall has been freed to witness the larger world of causes, which he reports back 
to those still imprisoned. In a novel metaphorical take on this ancient story, this return-
ing prisoner represents the field of modern neuroscience, which sheds light on the 
relationship between our shadowy sensations and our rich perceptual experience of the 
world. (Plato’s Cave, 1604. Jan Pietersz Saenredam, after Cornelis Cornelisz van Haarlem. 
National Gallery, Washington D.C.)


===== Page 2 =====
IV
Perception
1Gardner J. 1971. Grendel. Alfred A. Knopf, New York. 
I understood that the world was nothing: a mechanical chaos of 
casual, brute enmity on which we stupidly impose our hopes and 
fears. I understand that, finally and absolutely, I alone exist. All 
the rest, I saw, is merely what pushes me, or what I push against, 
blindly—as blindly as all that is not myself pushes back. I create 
the whole universe, blink by blink…. Nevertheless, something will 
come of all this.1
J
ohn gardner’s heartrending tale of the tormented  
monster  Grendel’s perspective on life captures the fundamen-
tal nature of perceptual experience: It is a construct that we alone 
impose. Or, as Grendel keenly observes, “The mountains are what I 
define them as.” Isolated and tortured by loneliness, Grendel sees the 
world as do the shackled prisoners in Plato’s Cave, where mere shad-
ows are what is sensed, but those shadows are imbued with meaning, 
utility, agency, beauty, joy, and sadness, all through the constructive 
process of perception: “What I see, I inspire with usefulness . . . and all 
that I do not see is useless, void.”
Like the prisoner who escapes from Plato’s Cave to view a larger 
world of causes, or the all-knowing dragon who fills Grendel with 
ideas from another dimension—“But dragons, my boy, have a whole 
different kind of mind. . . . We see from the mountaintop: all time, all 
space”—modern neuroscience promises a mountaintop understand-
ing of perceptual experience, an understanding not simply of the 
things we construct from our shadowy sensations, but how we do 
so, and for what purpose.
This section on perception offers that expansive mountaintop 
view. For each of the sensory modalities in turn, these chapters 
begin by examining environmental stimuli—light, sound, gravity, 
touch, and chemicals—that are the origins of human experience and 
knowledge of the world. In hierarchical fashion, the chapters survey 
the mechanisms that enable stimulus detection and discrimination, 
the perceptual processes that fill evanescent sensations with mean-
ing, and the operations that support attention, decision, and action, 
based on what is perceived.
Vision—a sense both particularly well understood and heavily 
utilized by humans—acquires information through properties of 
light. Light reflected from objects in the environment varies in wave-
length and intensity and fluctuates over space and time, and through 


===== Page 3 =====
those physical properties conveys evidence of the world around 
us. Cast as patterned images upon the retina, luminous energy is 
transduced into neuronal signals by dedicated receptor cells. The 
evidential properties of these images are detected by a collection of 
specialized neuronal systems that sense forms of contrast and con-
vey this information to the rest of the brain.
Similarly, the auditory system acquires information about the 
world through the simple compression and rarefaction of air, as 
caused by spoken language, music, or environmental sounds. This 
sensory evidence is detected—even in minute quantities and with 
incredibly precise timing—by an extraordinarily intricate amplifica-
tion system consisting of small drums, levers, tubes, and hair cells, 
whose bendable stereocilia transduce mechanical energy into neu-
ronal signals. Similar motion-detecting hair cells serve the vestibular 
senses of balance, acceleration, and rotation of the head. 
The somatosensory system acquires information about physical 
stimuli impinging on the body in the form of pressure, vibration, 
and temperature—and, in the extreme, pain—as would be caused 
by touch, movement of the skin across a textured surface, or contact 
with a source of heat. The peripheral nerve endings of a variety of 
specialized detector neurons embedded in skin, viscera, and muscle 
transduce this mechanical energy into neuronal signals, which are 
carried via the spinal cord and cranial nerves to the brain. 
Finally, the senses of taste and smell acquire information about 
the chemical composition of the world, in the form of form of food, 
drink, and airborne molecules. From one of the most exciting and 
rapidly developing areas of sensory biology today, we now know 
that there are hundreds of olfactory receptors that have unique 
patterns of affinity for airborne molecules, which accounts for the 
human ability to detect and discriminate a staggering number and 
diversity of odors.
All of these receptive systems serve as filters, characterized by 
neural “receptive fields” that highlight certain forms of information 
and restrict others. These selective filters are tunable over different 
timescales, enhancing attention to salient stimuli and adapting to the 
statistics of the sensory world. This flexibility accommodates varia-
tions in both behavioral goals and environmental conditions.
Like the shackled prisoners in Plato’s cave, our sensory systems 
initially convey simple filtered representations of sensory input, 
which are fundamentally ambiguous, noisy, and incomplete. Alone 
they have no meaning. Quite remarkably, our brain enables us to 
ultimately experience this sensory information as the environmental 
objects and events that cause those patterns. The constructive tran-
sition from a world of sensory evidence to one of meaning lies at 
the heart of perception and has long been one of the most engag-
ing mysteries of human cognition. The 19th-century English phi-
losopher John Stuart Mill wrote “perception reflects the permanent 
possibilities of sensation,” and in doing so reclaims from transient 


===== Page 4 =====
sensory events the enduring structural and relational properties of 
the world.
This section reveals how perception overcomes the vagaries of 
sensory evidence to develop hypotheses or inferences about the 
causes of sensation, by reference to past knowledge. Much of this 
happens through the machinery of the cerebral cortex, where sen-
sory signals are linked both within and between modalities and to 
feedback from the memory store. Like a detective viewing a crime 
scene, informed by memory and context, the activity of cortical neu-
rons begins to yield what William James aptly called the “perception 
of probable things.” 
With this perceptual transformation also comes the ability to rec-
ognize objects familiar to us. We readily generalize across different 
sensory manifestations of the same or similar objects, in the form of 
perceptual constancies and categorical percepts, and we link these 
with other meaningful events. The sound of the coffee grinder in 
the morning, the smell of a lover’s perfume or the sight of her face 
expands our experience beyond the immediate to a realm of recall 
and imagination. The chapters in this collection review the brain 
structures and computations that underlie these associative func-
tions, which include highly specialized neuronal systems for recog-
nizing and interpreting complex and behaviorally significant objects, 
such as faces.
Perceptual experience of the world around us is a prerequisite for 
meaningful interaction with that world. Decisions are made based 
on the accumulation of sensory evidence in support of one percept 
versus another. Is that my suitcase on the carousel? Is this where we 
turn? Was that aria from Wagner or Strauss? Is that the fragrance of 
jasmine or gardenia? Cortical neurons form salience maps, which 
represent the outcome of these perceptual decisions with respect to 
behavioral goals and rewards and prioritize actions accordingly.
Perception is generally treated—as it is herein—as a distinct sub-
discipline of neuroscience. Increasingly we see this compartmentali-
zation breaking down. The relationship of perception to other brain 
functions—learning, memory, emotion, motor control, language, 
development—is ever clearer with the explosive growth of new 
concepts and experimental methods for monitoring and manipu-
lating brain structure and function, and for revealing the extensive 
anatomical and functional neural connections between seemingly 
distinct brain regions. Thus have we begun to fully appreciate how 
the brain’s system for acquiring and interpreting information, for 
becoming aware of and understanding the world—for perceiving—is 
the functional centerpiece of human cognition and behavior.
Part Editors: Thomas D. Albright and Randy M. Bruno


===== Page 5 =====
Part IV
Chapter 17 	 Sensory Coding
Chapter 18	
Receptors of the Somatosensory System
Chapter 19 	 Touch
Chapter 20 	 Pain
Chapter 21 	 The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing
Chapter 22 	 Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina
Chapter 23 	 Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and  
Visual Primitives
Chapter 24 	 High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision  
to Cognition
Chapter 25 	 Visual Processing for Attention and Action
Chapter 26 	 Auditory Processing by the Cochlea
Chapter 27 	 The Vestibular System
Chapter 28 	 Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System
Chapter 29 	 Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses


===== Page 6 =====
17
Sensory Coding
it, informed by our past experience and preparing 
us for probable futures. Sensation provides immedi-
ate answers to three ongoing and essential questions: 
Is something there? What is it? and What’s changed? To 
answer these questions, all sensory systems perform 
two fundamental functions: detection and discrimina-
tion. Because our world and our needed responses to 
it change with time, sensory systems can both preferen-
tially respond and adapt to changing stimuli in the short 
term, and also learn to modify our responses to stimuli 
as our needs and circumstances change.
Since ancient times, humans have been fascinated 
by the nature of sensory experience. Aristotle defined 
five senses—vision, hearing, touch, taste, and smell—
each linked to specific sense organs in the body: eyes, 
ears, skin, tongue, and nose. Pain was not considered 
to be a specific sensory modality but rather an afflic-
tion of the soul. Intuition, often referred to colloquially 
as a “sixth sense,” was not yet understood to depend 
upon the experience of the classic sensory systems. 
Today, neurobiologists recognize intuition as infer-
ences derived from previous experience and thus the 
result of cognitive as well as sensory processes.
In this chapter, we consider the organizational 
principles and coding mechanisms that are universal 
to all sensory systems. Sensory information is defined as 
neural activity originating from stimulation of receptor 
cells in specific parts of the body. Our senses include 
the classic five senses plus a variety of modalities not 
recognized by the ancients but essential to bodily func-
tion: the somatic sensations of pain, itch, temperature, 
and proprioception (posture and movement of our 
own body); visceral sensations (both conscious and 
Psychophysics Relates Sensations to the Physical Properties 
of Stimuli
Psychophysics Quantifies the Perception of Stimulus 
Properties
Stimuli Are Represented in the Nervous System by the Firing 
Patterns of Neurons
Sensory Receptors Respond to Specific Classes of 
Stimulus Energy
Multiple Subclasses of Sensory Receptors Are Found in 
Each Sense Organ
Receptor Population Codes Transmit Sensory 
Information to the Brain
Sequences of Action Potentials Signal the Temporal 
Dynamics of Stimuli
The Receptive Fields of Sensory Neurons Provide Spatial 
Information About Stimulus Location
Central Nervous System Circuits Refine Sensory Information
The Receptor Surface Is Represented Topographically in 
the Early Stages of Each Sensory System
Sensory Information Is Processed in Parallel Pathways in 
the Cerebral Cortex
Feedback Pathways From the Brain Regulate Sensory 
Coding Mechanisms
Top-Down Learning Mechanisms Influence Sensory 
Processing
Highlights
O
ur senses enlighten and empower us. Through 
 sensation, we form an immediate and rel-
evant picture of the world and our place in 


===== Page 7 =====
386    Part IV / Perception
unconscious) necessary for homeostasis; and the ves-
tibular senses of balance (the position of the body in the 
gravitational field) and head movement.
Sensation informs and enriches all life, and the 
fundamentals of sensory processing have been con-
served throughout vertebrate evolution. Specialized 
receptors in each of the sensory systems provide the 
first neural representation of the external and inter-
nal world, transforming a specific type of stimulus 
Figure 17–1  The major sensory modalities in humans are 
mediated by distinct classes of receptor neurons located 
in specific sense organs. Each class of receptor cell trans-
forms one type of stimulus energy into electrical signals that 
are encoded as trains of action potentials (see Figure 17–4). 
The principal receptor cells include photoreceptors (vision), 
chemoreceptors (smell, taste, and pain), thermal receptors, and 
mechanoreceptors (touch, hearing, balance, and propriocep-
tion). The classic five senses—vision, smell, taste, touch, and 
hearing—and the sense of balance are mediated by receptors 
in the eye, nose, mouth, skin, and inner ear, respectively. The 
other somatosensory modalities—thermal senses, pain, vis-
ceral sensations, and proprioception—are mediated by recep-
tors distributed throughout the body.
Vision
Smell
Taste 
Pain
Touch
Hearing
Thermal senses
Balance
Proprioception
energy into electrical signals (Figure 17–1). All sensory 
information is then transmitted to the central nervous 
system by trains of action potentials that represent par-
ticular aspects of the stimulus. This information flows 
centrally to regions of the brain involved in the pro-
cessing of individual senses, multisensory integration, 
and cognition.
The sensory pathways have both serial and 
parallel components, consisting of fiber tracts with 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    387
thousands or millions of axons linked by synapses 
that both transmit and transform information. Rela-
tively simple forms of neural coding of stimuli by 
receptors are modulated by complex mechanisms in 
the brain to form the basis of cognition. Sensory path-
ways are also controlled by higher centers in the brain 
that modify and regulate incoming sensory signals by 
feeding information back to earlier stages of process-
ing. Thus, perception is the product not simply of 
“raw” physical sensory information but also cogni-
tion and experience.
Both scientists and philosophers have examined 
the extent to which the sensations we experience 
accurately reflect the stimuli that produce them, and 
how they are altered by our inherently subjective and 
imprecise knowledge of the world. In prior centuries, 
the interest of European philosophers in sensation 
and perception was related to the question of human 
nature itself. Two schools of thought eventually domi-
nated: empiricism, represented by John Locke, George 
Berkeley, and David Hume, and idealism, represented 
by René Descartes, Immanuel Kant, and Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich Hegel.
Locke, the preeminent empiricist, advanced the 
idea that the mind at birth is a blank slate, or tabula rasa, 
void of any ideas. Knowledge, he asserted, is obtained 
only through sensory experience—what we see, hear, 
feel, taste, and smell. Berkeley extended this topic 
by questioning whether there was any sensory real-
ity beyond the experiences and knowledge acquired 
through the senses. He famously asked: Does a falling 
tree make a sound if no one is near enough to hear it?
Idealists argued that the human mind possesses 
certain innate abilities, including logical reasoning 
itself. Kant classified the five senses as categories of 
human understanding. He argued that perceptions 
were not direct records of the world around us but 
rather were products of the brain and thus depended 
on the architecture of the nervous system. Kant referred 
to these brain properties as a priori knowledge.
Thus, in Kant’s view, the mind was not the passive 
receiver of sense impressions envisaged by the empiri-
cists. Rather, it had evolved to conform to certain 
universal conditions such as space, time, and causal-
ity. These conditions were independent of any physi-
cal stimuli detected by the body. For Kant and other 
idealists, this meant that knowledge is based not only 
on sensory stimulation alone but also on our ability to 
organize and interpret sensory experience. If sensory 
experience is inherently subjective and personal, they 
said, it may not be subject to empirical analysis. As the 
empirical investigation of perception matured, both 
schools proved partially correct.
Psychophysics Relates Sensations to the 
Physical Properties of Stimuli
The modern study of sensation and perception began 
in the 19th century with the emergence of experimen-
tal psychology as a scientific discipline. The first sci-
entific psychologists—Ernst Weber, Gustav Fechner, 
Hermann Helmholtz, and Wilhelm Wundt—focused 
their experimental study of mental processes on sensa-
tion, which they believed was the key to understand-
ing the mind. Their findings gave rise to the fields of 
psychophysics and sensory physiology.
Psychophysics describes the relationship between 
the physical characteristics of a stimulus and attributes 
of the sensory experience. Sensory physiology examines 
the neural consequences of a stimulus—how the stim-
ulus is transduced by sensory receptors and processed 
in the brain. Some of the most exciting advances in our 
understanding of perception have come from merging 
these two approaches in both human and animal stud-
ies. For example, functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing (fMRI) and positron emission tomography (PET) 
have been used in controlled experiments to identify 
regions of the human brain involved in the perception 
of pain or the identification of specific types of objects 
or particular persons and places.
Psychophysics Quantifies the Perception of 
Stimulus Properties
Early scientific studies of the mind focused not on the 
perception of complex qualities such as color or taste 
but on phenomena that could be isolated and meas-
ured precisely: the size, shape, amplitude, velocity, 
and timing of stimuli. Weber and Fechner developed 
simple experimental paradigms to study how and 
under what conditions humans are able to distinguish 
between two stimuli of different amplitudes. They 
quantified the intensity of sensations in the form of 
mathematical laws that allowed them to predict the 
relationship between the magnitude of a stimulus and 
its detectability, including the ability to discriminate 
between different stimuli.
In 1953, Stanley S. Stevens demonstrated that the 
subjective experience of the intensity (I) of a stimulus 
(S) is best described by a power function. Stevens’s law 
states that,
I = K(S – S0)n,
where the sensory threshold (S0) is the lowest stimu-
lus strength a subject can detect, and K is a constant. 
For some sensations, such as the sense of pressure on 


===== Page 9 =====
388    Part IV / Perception
Figure 17–2  The psychometric function. The psychometric 
function plots the percentage of stimuli detected by a human 
observer as a function of the stimulus magnitude. Threshold is 
defined as the stimulus intensity detected on 50% of the trials, 
which in this example would be about 5.5 (arbitrary units). Psy-
chometric functions are also used to measure the just notice-
able difference (JND) between stimuli that differ in intensity, 
frequency, or other parametric properties.
the hand, the relationship between the stimulus mag-
nitude and its perceived intensity is linear, that is, a 
power function with a unity exponent (n = 1).
All sensory systems have a threshold, and thresh-
olds have two essential functions. First, by asking if a 
sensation is large enough to have a high enough prob-
ability of being of interest or relevance, they reduce 
unwanted responses to noise. Second, the specific 
nonlinearity introduced by thresholds aids encoding 
and processing, even if the rest of the primary sen-
sory response scales linearly with the stimulus. Sen-
sory thresholds are a feature, not a bug. Thresholds 
are normally determined statistically by presenting a 
subject with a series of stimuli of random amplitude. 
The percentage of times the subject reports detecting 
the stimulus is plotted as a function of stimulus ampli-
tude, forming a relation called the psychometric function 
(Figure 17–2). By convention, threshold is defined as 
the stimulus amplitude detected in half of the trials.
The measurement of sensory thresholds is a use-
ful technique for diagnosing sensory function in indi-
vidual modalities. An elevated threshold may signal 
an abnormality in sensory receptors (such as loss of 
hair cells in the inner ear caused by aging or exposure 
to very loud noise), deficits in nerve conduction prop-
erties (as in multiple sclerosis), or a lesion in sensory-
processing areas of the brain. Sensory thresholds may 
also be altered by emotional or psychological factors 
related to the conditions in which stimulus detection 
1
0
50
25
75
100
3
5
4
7
9
2
6
Stimulus intensity (arbitrary units)
Stimulus detection (%)
8
10
is measured. Thresholds can also be determined by 
the method of limits, in which the subject reports the 
intensity at which a progressively decreasing stimu-
lus is no longer detectable or an increasing stimulus 
becomes detectable. This technique is widely used in 
audiology to measure hearing thresholds.
Subjects can also provide nonverbal responses in 
sensory detection or discrimination tasks using levers, 
buttons, or other devices that allow accurate measure-
ment of decision times. Experimental animals can be 
trained to respond to controlled sensory stimuli using 
such devices, allowing neuroscientists to investigate 
the underlying neural mechanisms by combining elec-
trophysiological and behavioral studies in the same 
experiment. Methods for quantifying responses to 
stimuli are summarized in Box 17–1. 
Stimuli Are Represented in the Nervous 
System by the Firing Patterns of Neurons
Psychophysical methods provide objective techniques 
for analyzing sensations evoked by stimuli. These quan-
titative measures have been combined with neurophysi-
ological techniques to study the neural mechanisms that 
transform sensory neural signals into percepts. The goal 
of sensory neuroscience is to follow the flow of sensory 
information from receptors toward the cognitive centers 
of the brain, to understand the processing mechanisms 
that occur at successive synapses, and to decipher how 
this shapes our internal representation of the external 
world. The neural coding of sensory information is bet-
ter understood at the early stages of processing than at 
later stages in the brain.
This approach to the neural coding problem was 
pioneered in the 1960s by Vernon Mountcastle, who 
showed that single-cell recordings of spike trains from 
peripheral and central sensory neurons provide a sta-
tistical description of the neural activity evoked by a 
physical stimulus. He then investigated which quan-
titative aspects of neural responses might correspond 
to the psychophysical measurements of sensory tasks 
and, just as important, which do not.
The study of neural coding of information is fun-
damental to understanding how the brain works. A 
neural code describes the relationship between the 
activity in a specified neural population and its func-
tional consequences for perception or action. Sen-
sory systems are ideal for the study of neural coding 
because both the physical properties of the stimulus 
input and the neural or behavioral output of these sys-
tems can be precisely defined and quantified in a con-
trolled setting.


