===== Page 1 =====
684    Part IV / Perception
Figure 29–2  The olfactory epithelium.
A. The olfactory epithelium contains sensory neurons inter-
spersed with supporting cells as well as a basal layer of stem 
cells. A single dendrite extends from the apical end of each 
neuron; sensory cilia sprout from the end of the dendrite into 
the mucus lining the nasal cavity. An axon extends from the 
basal end of each neuron to the olfactory bulb.
B. A scanning electron micrograph of the olfactory epithelium 
shows the dense mat of sensory cilia at the epithelial surface. Sup-
porting cells (S) are columnar cells that extend the full depth of the 
epithelium and have apical microvilli. Interspersed among the sup-
porting cells is an olfactory sensory neuron (O) with its dendrite and 
cilia, and a basal stem cell (B). (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Morrison and Costanzo 1990. Copyright © 1990 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
To olfactory bulb
Basal 
cells
Supporting
cell
Mucus
Cilia
A
B
Dendrite
Olfactory
sensory 
neuron
Axon
B
O
S
thin cilia that protrude into the mucus that coats the 
nasal cavity (Figure 29–2). The cilia contain the odor-
ant receptors as well as the transduction machinery 
needed to amplify sensory signals from the receptors 
and transform them into electrical signals in the neu-
ron’s axon, which projects from the basal pole of the 
neuron to the brain. The axons of olfactory sensory 
neurons pass through the cribriform plate, a perfo-
rated region in the skull above the nasal cavity, and 
then terminate in the olfactory bulb (see Figure 29–1).
Mammals Share a Large Family of  
Odorant Receptors
Odorant receptors are proteins encoded by a mul-
tigene family that is evolutionarily conserved and 
found in all vertebrate species. Humans have approxi-
mately 350 different odorant receptors, whereas mice 
have approximately 1,000. Although odorant receptors 
belong to the G protein–coupled receptor superfamily, 
they share sequence motifs not seen in other superfam-
ily members. Significantly, the odorant receptors vary 
considerably in amino acid sequence (Figure 29–3A).
Like other G protein–coupled receptors, odorant 
receptors have seven hydrophobic regions that are 
likely to serve as transmembrane domains (Figure 
29–3A). Detailed studies of other G protein–coupled 
receptors, such as the β-adrenergic receptor, suggest 
that odorant binding occurs in a pocket in the trans-
membrane region formed by a combination of the 
transmembrane domains. The amino acid sequences 
of odorant receptors are especially variable in several 
transmembrane domains, providing a possible basis 
for variability in the odorant binding pocket that could 
account for the ability of different receptors to recog-
nize structurally diverse ligands.
A second, smaller family of chemosensory recep-
tors is also expressed in the olfactory epithelium. 
These receptors, called trace amine-associated recep-
tors (TAARs), are G protein–coupled, but their protein 
sequence is unrelated to that of odorant receptors. 
They are encoded by a small family of genes present 
in humans and mice as well as fish. Studies in mice, 
which have 14 different olfactory TAARs, indicate 
that TAARs recognize volatile amines, one of which 
is present in high concentrations in the urine of male 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    685
Figure 29–3  Odorant receptors.
A. Odorant receptors have the seven transmembrane domains 
characteristic of G protein–coupled receptors. They are related 
to one another but vary in amino acid sequence (positions of 
highest variability are shown here as black balls). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Buck and Axel 1991.)
B. Binding of an odorant causes the odorant receptor to 
interact with Gαolf, the α-subunit of a heterotrimeric G 
protein. This causes the release of a guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP)-coupled Gαolf, which stimulates adenylyl cyclase III, 
leading to an increase in cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP). The elevated cAMP in turn induces the opening of 
cyclic nucleotide–gated cation channels, causing cation  
influx and a change in membrane potential in the ciliary 
membrane.
βγ
Gαolf
A
NH2
COOH
B
Odorants
Odorant
Odorant
receptor
Adenylyl
cyclase III
Cyclic nucleotide–
gated channel
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
G protein P
P
Ca2+
Na+
cAMP
P
P
P
mice and another in the urine of some predators. It is 
possible that this small receptor family has a function 
distinct from that of the odorant receptor family, per-
haps one associated with the detection of animal cues. 
Another family of 12 receptors, called MS4Rs, is also 
found in mice, where it may be involved in the detec-
tion of pheromones and certain food odors.
The binding of an odorant to its receptor induces a 
cascade of intracellular signaling events that depolar-
ize the olfactory sensory neuron (Figure 29–3B). The 
depolarization spreads passively to the cell body and 
then the axon, where action potentials are generated 
that are actively conducted to the olfactory bulb.
Humans and other animals rapidly accommodate 
to odors, as seen for example in the weakening of 
detection of an unpleasant odor that is continuously 
present. The ability to sense an odorant rapidly recov-
ers when the odorant is temporarily removed. The 
adaptation to odorants is caused in part by modulation 
of a cyclic nucleotide–gated ion channel in olfactory 
cilia, but the mechanism by which sensitivity is speed-
ily restored is not yet understood.
Different Combinations of Receptors Encode 
Different Odorants
To be distinguished perceptually, different odorants 
must cause different signals to be transmitted from the 
nose to the brain. This is accomplished in two ways. 
First, each olfactory sensory neuron expresses only 
one odorant receptor gene and therefore one type of 
receptor. Second, each receptor recognizes multiple 
odorants, and conversely, each odorant is detected 
by multiple different receptors (Figure 29–4). Impor-
tantly, however, each odorant is detected, and thereby 
encoded, by a unique combination of receptors and 
thus causes a distinctive pattern of signals to be trans-
mitted to the brain.


===== Page 3 =====
686    Part IV / Perception
Figure 29–4  Each odorant is recognized by a unique com-
bination of receptors. A single odorant receptor can recognize 
multiple odorants, but different odorants are detected, and thus 
encoded, by different combinations of receptors. This combinato-
rial coding explains how mammals can distinguish odorants with 
similar chemical structures as having different scents. The data 
in the figure were obtained by testing mouse olfactory sensory 
neurons with different odorants and then determining the odor-
ant receptor gene expressed by each responsive neuron. The 
perceived qualities of these odorants in humans shown on the 
right illustrate how highly related odorants can have different 
scents. (Adapted, with permission, from Malnic et al. 1999.)
Odorants
Odorant receptors
Odors
Rancid, sour, goat-like
Sweet, herbal, woody
Rancid, sour, sweaty
Violet, sweet, woody
Sweet, orange, rose
Rancid, sour, repulsive
Waxy, cheese, nut-like
Fresh, rose, oily ﬂoral
O
OH
O
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
The combinatorial coding of odorants greatly 
expands the discriminatory power of the olfactory sys-
tem. If each odorant were detected by only three dif-
ferent receptors, this strategy could in theory generate 
millions of different combinatorial receptor codes—
and an equivalently vast number of different signaling 
patterns sent from the nose to the brain. Interestingly, 
even odorants with nearly identical structures are rec-
ognized by different combinations of receptors (Figure 
29–4). The fact that highly related odorants have dif-
ferent combinatorial receptor codes explains why a 
slight change in the chemical structure of an odorant 
can alter its perceived odor. In some cases, the result 
is dramatic, for example, changing the perception of a 
chemical from rose to sour.
A change in concentration of an odorant can also 
change the perceived odor. For example, a low con-
centration of thioterpineol smells like tropical fruit, 
whereas a higher concentration smells like grapefruit 
and an even higher concentration smells putrid. As 
the concentration of an odorant is increased, addi-
tional receptors with lower affinity for the odorant are 
recruited into the response and thus change the com-
binatorial receptor code, providing an explanation for 
the effects of odorant concentration on perception.
Olfactory Information Is Transformed Along 
the Pathway to the Brain
Odorants Are Encoded in the Nose by  
Dispersed Neurons
How are signals from a large array of different odor-
ant receptors organized in the nervous system to 
generate diverse odor perceptions? This question 
has been investigated in rodents. Studies in mice 
have revealed that olfactory information undergoes 
a series of transformations as it travels from the 
olfactory epithelium to the olfactory bulb and then 
to the olfactory cortex.
The olfactory epithelium has a series of spatial 
zones that express different olfactory receptors. Each 
receptor type is expressed in approximately 5,000 
neurons that are confined to one zone (Figure 29–5). 
(Recall that each neuron expresses only one odorant 
receptor gene.) Neurons with the same receptor are 
randomly scattered within a zone so neurons with dif-
ferent receptors are interspersed. All zones contain a 
variety of receptors, and a specific odorant may be rec-
ognized by receptors in different zones. Thus, despite 
a rough organization of odorant receptors into spatial 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    687
Figure 29–5  Organization of sensory inputs in the olfac-
tory epithelium. The olfactory epithelium has different spatial 
zones that express different sets of odorant receptor genes. 
Each sensory neuron expresses only one receptor gene and 
thus one type of receptor. Neurons with the same receptor are 
confined to one zone but randomly scattered within that zone, 
such that neurons with different receptors are interspersed. The 
micrographs show the distribution of neurons labeled by four 
different receptor probes in sections through the mouse nose. 
An olfactory marker protein (OMP) probe labels all neurons 
expressing odorant receptors. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Ressler, Sullivan, and Buck 1993; Sullivan et al. 1996.)
Figure 29–6  Olfactory bulb interneurons. In addition to 
excitatory mitral and tufted relay neurons, the olfactory bulb 
contains inhibitory interneurons. Within each glomerulus, the 
dendrites of GABAergic periglomerular cells receive excita-
tory input from olfactory sensory neurons and have reciprocal 
synapses with the primary dendrites of mitral and tufted relay 
neurons, suggesting a possible role in signal modification. The 
dendrites of GABAergic granule cells deeper in the bulb have 
reciprocal excitatory-inhibitory synapses with the secondary 
dendrites of the relay neurons and are thought to provide nega-
tive feedback to relay neurons that shapes the odor response. 
(Adapted from Shepherd and Greer 1998.)
Olfactory 
bulb
Olfactory
epithelium
K20
K21
L45
A16
OMP
(all 
odorant
receptors)
Olfactory epithelium
Odorant
receptor
expressed
zones, information provided by the odorant receptor 
family is highly distributed in the epithelium.
Because each odorant is detected by an ensemble 
of neurons widely dispersed across the epithelial sheet, 
receptors in one part of the epithelium will be able to 
detect a particular odorant even when those in another 
part are impaired by respiratory infection.
Sensory Inputs in the Olfactory Bulb Are Arranged 
by Receptor Type
The axons of olfactory sensory neurons project to the 
ipsilateral olfactory bulb, whose rostral end lies just 
above the olfactory epithelium. The axons of olfactory 
sensory neurons terminate on the dendrites of olfactory 
bulb neurons within bundles of neuropil called glomer-
uli that are arrayed over the bulb’s surface (Figure 29–1). 
In each glomerulus, the sensory axons make synaptic 
connections with three types of neurons: mitral and 
tufted projection (relay) neurons, which project axons to 
the olfactory cortex, and periglomerular interneurons, 
which encircle the glomerulus (Figure 29–6).
Granule
cell
Mitral
cell
Glomerulus
Peri-
glomerular
cell
Olfactory
sensory
neuron


===== Page 5 =====
688    Part IV / Perception
The axon of an olfactory sensory neuron as well as 
the primary dendrite of each mitral and tufted relay 
neuron terminate in a single glomerulus. In each glo-
merulus, the axons of several thousand sensory neu-
rons converge on the dendrites of approximately 40 to 
50 relay neurons. This convergence results in approxi-
mately a 100-fold decrease in the number of neurons 
transmitting olfactory signals.
The organization of sensory information in the 
olfactory bulb is dramatically different from that of the 
epithelium. Whereas olfactory sensory neurons with 
the same odorant receptor are randomly scattered in 
one epithelial zone, their axons typically converge in 
two glomeruli at specific locations, one on either side 
of the olfactory bulb (Figure 29–7C). Each glomerulus, 
and each mitral and tufted relay neuron connected to 
it, receives input from just one type of odorant recep-
tor. The result is a precise arrangement of sensory 
inputs from different odorant receptors, one that is 
similar between individuals.
Because each odorant is recognized by a unique 
combination of receptor types, each also activates a 
particular combination of glomeruli in the olfactory 
bulb (Figure 29–7B). At the same time, just as one odor-
ant receptor recognizes multiple odorants, a single 
glomerulus—or a given mitral or tufted cell—is acti-
vated by more than one odorant. Owing to the nearly 
stereotyped pattern of receptor inputs in the olfactory 
bulb, the patterns of glomerular activation elicited by 
individual odorants are similar in all individuals and 
are bilaterally symmetrical in the two adjacent bulbs.
This organization of sensory information in the 
olfactory bulb is likely to be advantageous in two 
respects. First, signals from thousands of sensory neu-
rons with the same odorant receptor type always con-
verge on the same few glomeruli, and relay neurons in 
the olfactory bulb may optimize the detection of odor-
ants present at low concentrations. Second, although 
olfactory sensory neurons with the same receptor 
type are dispersed and are continually replaced, the 
arrangement of inputs in the olfactory bulb remains 
unaltered. As a result, the neural code for an odorant 
in the brain is maintained over time, assuring that an 
odorant encountered previously can be recognized 
years later.
One mystery that remains unsolved is how all the 
axons of olfactory sensory neurons with the same type 
of receptor are directed to the same glomeruli. Studies 
using transgenic mice indicate that the odorant recep-
tor itself somehow determines the target of the axon, 
but how it does so is not yet understood.
Sensory information is processed and possibly 
refined in the olfactory bulb before it is forwarded 
to the olfactory cortex. Each glomerulus is encircled 
by periglomerular interneurons that receive excita-
tory input from sensory axons and form inhibitory 
dendrodendritic synapses with mitral and tufted cell 
dendrites in that glomerulus and perhaps adjacent glo-
meruli. The periglomerular interneurons may therefore 
have a role in signal modulation. In addition, granule 
cell interneurons deep in the bulb provide negative 
feedback onto mitral and tufted cells. The granule cell 
interneurons are excited by the basal dendrites of mitral 
and tufted cells and in turn inhibit those relay neurons 
and others with which they are connected. The lateral 
inhibition afforded by these connections is thought to 
dampen signals from glomeruli and relay neurons that 
respond to an odorant only weakly, thereby sharpen-
ing the contrast between important and irrelevant sen-
sory information before its transmission to the cortex.
Other potential sources of signal refinement are the 
retrograde projections to the olfactory bulb from the 
olfactory cortex, basal forebrain (horizontal limb of 
the diagonal band), and midbrain (locus ceruleus and 
raphe nuclei). These connections may modulate olfac-
tory bulb output according to the physiological or 
behavioral state of an animal. When the animal is hun-
gry, for example, some centrifugal projections might 
heighten the perception of the aroma of foods.
The Olfactory Bulb Transmits Information to the 
Olfactory Cortex
The axons of the mitral and tufted relay neurons of 
the olfactory bulb project through the lateral olfac-
tory tract to the olfactory cortex (Figure 29–8 and see  
Figure 29–1). The olfactory cortex, defined roughly as 
that portion of the cortex that receives a direct projec-
tion from the olfactory bulb, comprises multiple ana-
tomically distinct areas. The six major areas are the 
anterior olfactory nucleus, which connects the two 
olfactory bulbs through a portion of the anterior com-
missure; the anterior and posterior-lateral cortical 
nuclei of the amygdala; the olfactory tubercle; part of 
the entorhinal cortex; and the piriform cortex, the larg-
est and considered the major olfactory cortical area.
The functions of the different olfactory cortical 
areas are largely unknown. However, the piriform 
cortex is thought to be important for odor learning. 
Recent studies indicate that the posterior-lateral corti-
cal amygdala may have a role in innate attraction and 
fear behaviors, and the amygdalo-piriform transition 
area, a minor olfactory cortical area, a role in stress hor-
mone responses to predator odors detected in the nose.
In the piriform cortex, the axons of olfactory bulb 
mitral and tufted cells leave the lateral olfactory tract 


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 29–7  Odor responses in the olfactory bulb.
A. The axons of sensory neurons with the same odorant recep-
tor type usually converge in only two glomeruli, one on each 
side of the olfactory bulb. Here, a probe specific for one odor-
ant receptor gene labeled a glomerulus on the medial side (left) 
and lateral side (right) of a mouse olfactory bulb. The probe 
hybridized to receptor messenger RNAs present in sensory 
axons in these coronal sections. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Ressler, Sullivan, and Buck 1994.)
B. A single odorant often activates multiple glomeruli with 
input from different receptors. This section of a rat olfac-
tory bulb shows the uptake of radiolabeled 2-deoxglucose 
at multiple foci (red) following exposure of the animal to 
the odorant methyl benzoate. The labeled foci correspond 
to numerous glomeruli at different locations in the olfactory 
bulb. (Reproduced, with permission, from Johnson, Farahbod, 
and Leon 2005. Copyright © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
C. The olfactory bulb has a precise map of odorant receptor 
inputs because each glomerulus is dedicated to only one type 
of receptor. The maps in the two olfactory bulbs are bilaterally 
symmetrical and are nearly identical across individuals. The 
maps on the medial and lateral sides of each bulb are similar, 
but slightly displaced along the dorsal-ventral and anterior-
posterior axes.
A  Axons of neurons with the same odorant receptor 
 
converge on a few glomeruli
B  One odorant can activate 
     many glomeruli
C  The olfactory bulb has a precise map of odorant receptor inputs
Glomeruli
Neurons 
expressing
the same
odorant
receptor 
Olfactory 
bulb
Olfactory 
epithelium


===== Page 7 =====
690    Part IV / Perception
Olfactory
epithelium
Vomeronasal
organ
Lateral
olfactory tract
Anterior
olfactory
nucleus
Piriform
cortex
Olfactory
tubercle
Amygdala
Entorhinal
cortex
Contralateral
olfactory
bulb
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Thalamus
Orbitofrontal cortex
Hypothalamus
Frontal cortex
Mitral
cell
Tufted
cell
Olfactory
bulb
Olfactory
cortex
Accessory
olfactory
bulb
Mitral
cell
Figure 29–8  Afferent pathways to olfactory cortex.  The axons 
of mitral and tufted relay neurons of the olfactory bulb project 
through the lateral olfactory tract to the olfactory cortex. The olfac-
tory cortex consists of a number of distinct areas, the largest of 
which is the piriform cortex. From these areas, olfactory informa-
tion is transmitted to other brain areas directly as well as indirectly 
via the thalamus. Targets include frontal and orbitofrontal areas 
of the neocortex, which are thought to be important for odor dis-
crimination, and the amygdala and hypothalamus, which may be 
involved in emotional and physiological responses to odors. Mitral 
cells in the accessory olfactory bulb project to specific areas of the 
amygdala that transmit signals to the hypothalamus.
to form excitatory glutamatergic synapses with pyrami-
dal neurons, the projection neurons of the cortex. 
Pyramidal neuron activity appears to be modulated by 
inhibitory inputs from local GABAergic interneurons 
as well as by excitatory inputs from other pyramidal 
neurons in the same and other olfactory cortical areas 
and the contralateral piriform cortex. The piriform cor-
tex also receives centrifugal inputs from modulatory 
brain areas, suggesting that its activity may be adjusted 
according to physiological or behavioral state. Finally, 
the olfactory cortex projects to the olfactory bulb, pro-
viding yet another possible means of signal modulation.
As with the olfactory bulb relay neurons, indi-
vidual pyramidal neurons can be activated by more 
than one odorant. However, the pyramidal neurons 
activated by a particular odorant are scattered across 
the piriform cortex, an arrangement different from that 
of the olfactory bulb. Mitral cells in different parts of 
the olfactory bulb can project axons to the same sub-
region of the piriform cortex, further indicating that 
the highly organized map of odorant receptor inputs 
in the olfactory bulb is not recapitulated in the cortex.
Output From the Olfactory Cortex Reaches Higher 
Cortical and Limbic Areas
Pyramidal neurons in the olfactory cortex transmit 
information indirectly to the orbitofrontal cortex 
through the thalamus and directly to the frontal cortex. 
These pathways to higher cortical areas are thought to 
be important in odor discrimination. In fact, people 
with lesions of the orbitofrontal cortex are unable to 
discriminate odors. Interestingly, recordings in the 
orbitofrontal cortex suggest that some individual neu-
rons in that area receive multimodal input, responding, 
for example, to the smell, sight, or taste of a banana.
Many areas of the olfactory cortex also relay 
information to nonolfactory areas of the amygdala, 
which is linked to emotions, and to the hypothala-
mus, which controls basic drives, such as appetite, as 
well as a number of innate behaviors. These limbic 
areas are thought to play a role in the emotional and 
motivational aspects of smell as well as many of the 
behavioral and physiological effects of odorants. In 
animals, they may be important in the generation of 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    691
stereotyped behavioral and physiological responses to 
odors of predators or to pheromones that are detected 
in the olfactory epithelium.
Olfactory Acuity Varies in Humans
Olfactory acuity can vary as much as 1,000-fold among 
humans, even among people with no obvious abnor-
mality. The most common olfactory aberration is specific 
anosmia. An individual with a specific anosmia has 
lowered sensitivity to a specific odorant even though 
sensitivity to other odorants appears normal. Specific 
anosmias to some odorants are common, with a few 
occurring in 1% to 20% of people. For example, 12% 
of individuals tested in one study exhibited a specific 
anosmia for musk. Recent studies indicate that specific 
anosmias can be caused by mutations in particular 
odorant receptor genes.
Far rarer abnormalities of olfaction, such as general 
anosmia (complete lack of olfactory sensation) or hyposmia 
(diminished sense of smell), are often transient and can 
derive from respiratory infections. Chronic anosmia 
or hyposmia can result from damage to the olfactory 
epithelium caused by infections; from particular dis-
eases, such as Parkinson disease; or from head trauma 
that severs the olfactory nerves passing through holes 
in the cribriform plate, which then become blocked 
by scar tissue. Olfactory hallucinations of repugnant 
smells (cacosmia) can occur as a consequence of epilep-
tic seizures.
Odors Elicit Characteristic Innate Behaviors
Pheromones Are Detected in Two  
Olfactory Structures
In many animals, the olfactory system detects not 
only odors but also pheromones, chemicals that are 
released from animals and influence the behavior or 
physiology of members of the same species. Phero-
mones play important roles in a variety of mammals, 
although they have not been demonstrated in humans. 
Often contained in urine or glandular secretions, some 
pheromones modulate the levels of reproductive hor-
mones or stimulate sexual behavior or aggression. 
Pheromones are detected by two separate structures: 
the nasal olfactory epithelium, where odorants are 
detected, and the vomeronasal organ, an accessory 
olfactory organ thought to be specialized for the detec-
tion of pheromones and other animal cues.
The vomeronasal organ is present in many mam-
mals, although not in humans. It is a tubular structure 
in the nasal septum that has a duct opening into the 
nasal cavity and one inner wall lined by a sensory 
epithelium. Signals generated by sensory neurons 
in the epithelium of the vomeronasal organ follow a 
distinct pathway. They travel through the accessory 
olfactory bulb primarily to the medial amygdala and 
posterior-medial cortical amygdala and from there to 
the hypothalamus.
Sensory detection in the vomeronasal organ differs 
from that in the olfactory epithelium. The vomerona-
sal organ has two different families of chemosensory 
receptors, the V1R and V2R families. In the mouse, 
each family has more than 100 members. Variation in 
amino acid sequence between members of each recep-
tor family suggests that each family may recognize a 
variety of different ligands. Like odorant receptors, 
V1R and V2R receptors have the seven transmem-
brane domains typical of G protein–coupled receptors. 
The V2R receptor differs from both V1R and odor-
ant receptors in having a large extracellular domain 
at the N-terminal end (Figure 29–9A). By analogy with 
receptors with similar structures, ligands may bind 
V1R receptors in a membrane pocket formed by a com-
bination of transmembrane domains, whereas binding 
to V2R receptors may occur in the large extracellular 
domain. Although the V1R receptors are thought to 
recognize volatile chemicals, at least some V2Rs are 
thought to recognize proteins. These include a protein 
pheromone present in tears, mouse urinary proteins 
that stimulate aggression, and predator proteins from 
cats and rats that stimulate fear in mice.
The V1R and V2R families are expressed in differ-
ent spatial zones in the vomeronasal organ that express 
different G proteins (Figure 29–9B,C). Each V1R or V2R 
gene is expressed in a small percentage of neurons scat-
tered throughout one zone, an arrangement similar to 
that of odorant receptors in the olfactory epithelium. 
Similar to the main olfactory bulb, vomeronasal neu-
rons with the same receptor type project to the same 
glomeruli in the accessory olfactory bulb, although 
the glomeruli for each receptor type are more numer-
ous and their distribution less stereotyped than in the 
main olfactory bulb. In addition to V1R and V2R recep-
tors, the vomeronasal organ has a family of five formyl 
peptide-related receptors (FPRs). These receptors are 
related to immune system FPRs that detect bacterial 
proteins, raising speculation that they might play a 
role in detecting diseased animals of the same species.
Invertebrate Olfactory Systems Can Be Used to 
Study Odor Coding and Behavior
Because invertebrates have simple nervous systems 
and often respond to olfactory stimuli with stereotyped 


===== Page 9 =====
692    Part IV / Perception
V1R
C  Receptor and G protein distribution  
V2R
V2R
V1R
Gαi2 
expressed
Gαo 
expressed
V1R
A
B  Receptor distribution
A  Receptor structure
V2R
NH2
NH2
HOOC
HOOC
Vomeronasal 
organ
Figure 29–9  (Right) Candidate pheromone receptors in the 
vomeronasal organ.
A. The V1R and V2R families of receptors are expressed in the 
vomeronasal organ. In the mouse, each family has more than 
100 members, which vary in protein sequence. Members of 
both families have the seven transmembrane domains of G 
protein–coupled receptors, but V2R receptors also have a large 
extracellular domain at the N-terminal end that may be the site 
of ligand binding.
B. Sections through the vomeronasal organ show individual 
V1R and V2R probes hybridized to subsets of neurons in two 
distinct zones. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dulac and 
Axel 1995; Matsunami and Buck 1997.)
C. The two zones express high levels of different G proteins, 
Gααi2 and Gααo.
behaviors, they are useful for understanding the rela-
tionship between the neural representation of odor 
and behavior.
Certain features of chemosensory systems are 
highly conserved in evolution. First, all metazoan ani-
mals can detect a variety of organic molecules using 
specialized chemosensory neurons with cilia or micro-
villi that contact the external environment. Second, the 
initial events of odor detection are mediated by fami-
lies of transmembrane receptors with specific expres-
sion patterns in peripheral sensory neurons. Other 
features of the olfactory system differ between species, 
reflecting selection pressures and evolutionary histo-
ries of the animals.
The primary sensory organs of insects are the 
antennae and appendages known as maxillary palps 
near the mouth (Figure 29–10A). Whereas mammals 
have millions of olfactory neurons, insects have a much 
smaller number. There are approximately 2,600 olfac-
tory neurons in the fruit fly Drosophila and approxi-
mately 60,000 in the honeybee.
The insect odorant receptors were discovered by 
finding multigene receptor families in the Drosophila 
genome, and these genes have now been examined in 
other insect genomes as well. Remarkably, they have 
little similarity to mammalian odorant receptors save 
for the presence of many transmembrane domains. 
Indeed, insect receptors appear to have an independ-
ent evolutionary origin from mammalian receptors 
and may not even be G protein–coupled receptors—
an extreme example of the fast evolutionary change 
observed across all olfactory receptor systems. In 
Drosophila, the main odorant receptor family has only 
60 genes, rather than the hundreds characteristic of 
vertebrates. The malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae 
and the honeybee have similar numbers (85–95 genes), 
whereas leaf-cutter ants have more than 350 odorant 


