===== Page 1 =====
I
Overall Perspective
D
uring the second half of the 20th century, the central 
focus of biology was on the gene. Now in the first half of the 
21st century, the focus has shifted to neural science, and spe-
cifically to the biology of the mind. We wish to understand the pro-
cesses by which we perceive, act, learn, and remember. How does 
the brain—an organ weighing only 1.5 kg—conceive of the infinite, 
discover new knowledge, and produce the remarkable individuality 
of human thoughts, feelings, and actions? How are these extraordi-
nary mental capabilities distributed within the organ? What rules 
relate the anatomical organization and the cellular physiology of a 
region to its specific role in mentation? What do genes contribute 
to behavior, and how is gene expression in nerve cells regulated by 
developmental and learning processes? How does experience alter 
the way the brain processes subsequent events, and to what degree 
is that processing unconscious? Finally, what are the neural bases of 
neurological and psychiatric disorders? In this introductory section 
of Principles of Neural Science, we begin to address these questions. In 
so doing, we describe how neural science attempts to link the com-
putational logic of neural circuitry to the mind—how the activities 
of nerve cells within defined neural circuits mediate complex mental 
processes.
Over the past several decades, technological advances have 
opened new horizons for the scientific study of the brain. Today, it 
is possible to link the cellular dynamics of interconnected circuits of 
neurons to the internal representations of perceptual and motor acts 
in the brain and to relate these internal mechanisms to observable 
behavior. New imaging techniques permit us to visualize the human 
brain in action—to identify specific regions of the brain associated 
with particular modes of thinking and feeling and their patterns of 
interconnections.
In the first part of this book, we consider the degree to which 
mental functions can be localized to specific regions of the brain. We 
also examine the extent to which such functions can be understood 
in terms of the properties of individual nerve cells, their molecular 
constituents, and their synaptic connections. In the later parts of the 
book, we examine in detail the mechanisms underlying cognitive 


===== Page 2 =====
and affective functions of the brain: perception, action, motivation, 
emotion, learning, and memory.
The human brain is a network of more than 80 billion individual 
nerve cells interconnected in systems—neural circuits—that con-
struct our perceptions of the external world, fix our attention, guide 
our decisions, and implement our actions. A first step toward under-
standing the mind, therefore, is to learn how neurons are organized 
into signaling pathways and how they communicate by means of 
synaptic transmission. One of the chief ideas we shall develop in this 
book is that the specificity of the synaptic connections established 
during development and refined during experience underlie behav-
ior. We must also understand both the innate and environmental 
determinants of behavior in which genes encode proteins that ini-
tially govern the development of the neural circuits that can then be 
modified by experience-dependent changes in gene expression.
A new science of mind is emerging through the application of 
modern cell and molecular biological techniques, brain imaging, 
theory, and clinical observation to the study of cognition, emotion, 
and behavior. Neural science has reinforced the idea first proposed 
by Hippocrates more than two millennia ago that the proper study of 
mind begins with study of the brain. Cognitive psychology and psy-
choanalytic theory have emphasized the diversity and complexity of 
human mental experience. These disciplines can now be enriched by 
insights into brain function from neural science. The task ahead is to 
produce a study of mental processes, grounded firmly in empirical 
neural science, concerned with questions of how internal representa-
tions and states of mind are generated. 
Our goal is to provide not simply the facts but the principles of 
brain organization, function, and computation. The principles of 
neural science do not reduce the complexity of human thought to 
a set of molecules or mathematical axioms. Rather, they allow us to 
appreciate a certain beauty—a Darwinian elegance—in the complex-
ity of the brain that accounts for mind and behavior. One might ask 
whether an idea gleaned from the detailed dissection of a more basic 
neural mechanism contains insight about higher brain function. 
Does the organization of a simple reflex bear on a volitional move-
ment of the hand? Do the mechanisms that establish circuitry in the 
developing spinal cord bear on the mechanisms at play in storing a 
memory? Are the neural processes that awaken us from sleep similar 
to those that allow an unconscious process to pierce our conscious 
awareness? We hope readers will delight in the principles as they 
delve into their factual basis. No doubt, it is a work in progress.
Part Editors: Eric R. Kandel and Michael N. Shadlen


===== Page 3 =====
Part I
Chapter 1	
The Brain and Behavior
Chapter 2	
Genes and Behavior
Chapter 3	
Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior
Chapter 4 	
The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural 
Circuits Mediate Behavior
Chapter 5	
The Computational Bases of Neural Circuits That 
Mediate Behavior
Chapter 6	
Imaging and Behavior


===== Page 4 =====
1
The Brain and Behavior
simple motor behaviors such as walking and eating 
but also all the complex cognitive acts and behavior 
that we regard as quintessentially human—thinking, 
speaking, and creating works of art. As a corollary, all 
the behavioral disorders that characterize psychiat-
ric illness—disorders of affect (feeling) and cognition 
(thought)—result from disturbances of brain function.
How do the billions of individual nerve cells in 
the brain produce behavior and cognitive states, and 
how are those cells influenced by the environment, 
which includes social experience? Explaining behavior 
in terms of brain activity is the important task of neu-
ral science, and the progress of neural science in this 
respect is a major theme of this book.
Neural science must continually confront certain 
fundamental questions. What is the appropriate level 
of biological description to understand a thought pro-
cess, the movement of a limb, or the desire to make 
the movement? Why is a movement smooth or jerky or 
made unintentionally in certain neurological disease 
states? Answers to these questions might emerge from 
looking at the pattern of DNA expression in nerve cells 
and how this pattern regulates the electrical properties 
of neurons. However, we will also require knowledge 
of neural circuits comprising many neurons in specific 
brain areas and how the activity of specific circuits in 
many brain areas is coordinated.
Is there a level of biological description that is 
most apt? The short answer is, it depends. If one’s 
goal is to understand and treat certain genetic epi-
lepsy disorders, then DNA sequencing and measure-
ments of electrical properties of individual neurons 
might be sufficient to produce an effective therapy.  
Two Opposing Views Have Been Advanced on the 
Relationship Between Brain and Behavior
The Brain Has Distinct Functional Regions
The First Strong Evidence for Localization of Cognitive 
Abilities Came From Studies of Language Disorders
Mental Processes Are the Product of the Interactions Between 
Elementary Processing Units in the Brain
Highlights
T
he last frontier of the biological sciences—
the ultimate challenge—is to understand the 
biological basis of consciousness and the brain 
processes by which we feel, act, learn, and remember. 
During the past few decades, a remarkable unification 
within the biological sciences has set the stage for address-
ing this great challenge. The ability to sequence genes 
and infer the amino acid sequences of the proteins they 
encode has revealed unanticipated similarities between 
proteins in the nervous system and those encountered 
elsewhere in the body. As a result, it has become possible 
to establish a general plan for the function of cells, a plan 
that provides a common conceptual framework for all of 
cell biology, including cellular neural science.
The current challenge in the unification within 
biology is the unification of psychology—the science 
of the mind—and neural science—the science of the 
brain. Such a unified approach, in which mind and 
body are not seen as separate entities, rests on the view 
that all behavior is the result of brain function. What 
we commonly call the mind is a set of operations car-
ried out by the brain. Brain processes underlie not only 


===== Page 5 =====
8    Part I / Overall Perspective
If one is interested in learning, perception, and explo-
ration, then an analysis of systems of circuits and brain 
regions is likely to be required.
The goal of modern neural science is to integrate 
all of these specialized levels into a coherent science. 
The effort forces us to confront new questions. If men-
tal processes can be localized to discrete brain regions, 
what is the relationship between the functions of those 
regions and the anatomy and physiology of those 
regions? Is one kind of neural circuit required to pro-
cess visual information, another type to parse speech, 
and yet another to sequence movements? Or do circuits 
with different functions share common organizational 
principles? Are the requisite neural computations best 
understood as operations on information represented 
by single neurons or populations of neurons? Is infor-
mation represented in the electrical activity of individ-
ual nerve cells, or is it distributed over ensembles such 
that any one cell is no more informative than a random 
bit of computer memory? As we shall see, questions 
about levels of organization, specialization of cells, and 
localization of function recur throughout neural science.
To illustrate these points we shall examine how 
modern neural science describes language, a distinc-
tive cognitive behavior in humans. In so doing, we 
shall focus broadly on operations in the cerebral cortex, 
the part of the brain that is most highly developed in 
humans. We shall see how the cortex is organized into 
functionally distinct regions, each made up of large 
groups of neurons, and how the neural apparatus of a 
highly complex behavior can be analyzed in terms of 
the activity of specific sets of interconnected neurons 
within specific regions. In Chapter 3, we describe how 
the neural circuit for a simple reflex behavior operates 
at the cellular level, illustrating how the interplay of 
sensory signals and motor signals leads to a motor act.
Two Opposing Views Have Been Advanced on 
the Relationship Between Brain and Behavior
Our views about nerve cells, the brain, and behavior 
emerged during the 20th century from a synthesis of 
five experimental traditions: anatomy, embryology, 
physiology, pharmacology, and psychology.
The 2nd century Greek physician Galen proposed 
that nerves convey fluid secreted by the brain and spi-
nal cord to the body’s periphery. His views dominated 
Western medicine until the microscope revealed the 
true structure of the cells in nervous tissue. Even so, 
nervous tissue did not become the subject of a special 
science until the late 1800s, when the Italian Camillo 
Golgi and the Spaniard Santiago Ramón y Cajal 
produced detailed, accurate descriptions of nerve cells 
but reached two quite different conclusions of how the 
brain functions.
Golgi developed a method of staining neurons 
with silver salts that revealed their entire cell structure 
under the microscope. Based on such studies, Golgi 
concluded that nerve cells are not independent cells 
isolated from one another but instead act together in 
one continuous web of tissue or syncytium. Using 
Golgi’s technique, Ramón y Cajal observed that each 
neuron typically has a cell body and two types of pro-
cesses: branching dendrites at one end and a long, 
cable-like axon at the other. Cajal concluded that nerv-
ous tissue is not a syncytium but a network of discrete 
cells. In the course of this work, Ramón y Cajal devel-
oped some of the key concepts and much of the early 
evidence for the neuron doctrine—the principle that 
individual neurons are the elementary building blocks 
and signaling elements of the nervous system.
In the 1920s the American embryologist Ross 
Harrison showed that the dendrites and axons grow 
from the cell body and do so even when each neuron 
is isolated from others in tissue culture. Harrison also 
confirmed Ramón y Cajal’s suggestion that the tip of 
the axon gives rise to an expansion, the growth cone, 
which leads the developing axon to its target, either 
to other nerve cells or muscles. Both of these discov-
eries lent strong support to the neuron doctrine. The 
final definite evidence for the neuron doctrine came in 
the mid-1950s with the introduction of electron micros-
copy. A landmark study by Sanford Palay unam-
biguously demonstrated the existence of synapses, 
specialized regions of nerve cells that permit chemical 
or electrical signaling between them.
Physiological investigation of the nervous system 
began in the late 1700s when the Italian physician and 
physicist Luigi Galvani discovered that muscle and 
nerve cells produce electricity. Modern electrophysi-
ology grew out of work in the 19th century by three 
German physiologists—Johannes Müller, Emil du 
Bois-Reymond, and Hermann von Helmholtz—who 
succeeded in measuring the speed of conduction of 
electrical activity along the axon of the nerve cell and 
further showed that the electrical activity of one nerve 
cell affects the activity of an adjacent cell in predictable 
ways.
Pharmacology made its first impact on our under-
standing of the nervous system and behavior at the end 
of the 19th century when Claude Bernard in France, 
Paul Ehrlich in Germany, and John Langley in England 
demonstrated that drugs do not act randomly on a cell, 
but rather bind to discrete receptors typically located 
in the cell membrane. This insight led to the discovery 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    9
that nerve cells can communicate with each other by 
chemical means.
Psychological thinking about behavior dates back 
to the beginnings of Western science when the ancient 
Greek philosophers speculated about the causes of 
behavior and the relation of the mind to the brain. In 
subsequent centuries, two major views emerged. In the 
17th century, René Descartes distinguished body and 
mind. In this dualistic view, the brain mediates percep-
tion, motor acts, memory, appetites, and passions—
everything that can be found in the lower animals. But 
the mind—the higher mental functions, the conscious 
experience characteristic of human behavior—is not 
represented in the brain or any other part of the body 
but in the soul, a spiritual entity. Descartes believed 
that the soul communicated with the machinery of 
the brain by means of the pineal gland, a tiny struc-
ture in the midline of the brain. Descartes’s position 
has had little sway in modern philosophy or neu-
ral science. Indeed, the underlying premise of neural 
science is that mind is a product of the brain and its 
neural activity. By this we do not mean that the aim of 
neural science is to explain away the mind by reduction 
to biological components, but rather to elucidate the 
biology of mind.
Attempts to join biological and psychological con-
cepts in the study of behavior began as early as 1800, 
when Franz Joseph Gall, a Viennese physician and 
neuroanatomist, proposed a radically new idea of body 
and mind. He advocated that the brain is the organ of 
the mind and that all mental functions are embodied 
in the brain. He thus rejected the Cartesian idea that 
mind and body are separate entities. In addition, he 
argued that the cerebral cortex was not a unitary organ 
but contained within it many specialized organs, and 
that particular regions of the cerebral cortex control 
specific functions. Gall enumerated at least 27 distinct 
regions or organs of the cerebral cortex; later many 
more were added, each corresponding to a specific 
mental faculty (Figure 1–1). Gall assigned intellec-
tual processes, such as the ability to evaluate causal-
ity, to calculate, and to sense order, to the front of the 
brain. Instinctive characteristics such as romantic love  
(amativeness) and combativeness were assigned to the 
back of the brain. Even the most abstract of human 
behaviors—generosity, secretiveness, and religiosity—
were assigned a spot in the brain.
Although Gall’s theory of the unity of body and 
mind and his idea that certain functions were localized 
to specific brain regions proved to be correct, the domi-
nant view today is that many higher functions of mind 
are most likely highly distributed. Moreover, Gall’s 
experimental approach to localization was extremely 
Figure 1–1  An early map of functional localization in the 
brain. According to the 19th century doctrine of phrenology, 
complex traits such as combativeness, spirituality, hope, and 
conscientiousness are controlled by specialized “organs,” 
distinct areas of the cerebral cortex that expand as the traits 
develop. These enlargements of local areas of the brain were 
thought to produce characteristic bumps and ridges on the 
overlying skull, from which an individual’s character could be 
determined. This map, taken from a drawing of the early 1800s, 
shows 42 intellectual and emotional “organs.”
naive. Rather than locate functions empirically, by 
looking into the brain and correlating defects in men-
tal attributes with lesions in specific regions following 
tumor or stroke, Gall spurned all evidence derived 
from studies of brain lesions, whether discovered 
through clinical examination or produced surgically 
in experimental animals. Influenced by physiognomy, 
the popular science based on the idea that facial fea-
tures reveal character, Gall believed that the bumps 
and ridges on the skulls of people well endowed with 
specific cognitive faculties identified the centers for 
those faculties in the brain. He assumed that the size 
of an area of brain was related to the relative impor-
tance of the mental faculty represented in that area. 
Accordingly, exercise of a given mental faculty would 
cause the corresponding brain region to grow, and 
this growth in turn would cause the overlying skull to 
protrude.
Gall first had this idea as a young boy when he 
noticed that those of his classmates who excelled at 


===== Page 7 =====
10    Part I / Overall Perspective
memorizing school assignments had prominent eyes. 
He concluded that this was the result of an overdevel-
opment of regions in the front of the brain involved 
in verbal memory. He developed this idea further 
when, as a young physician, he was placed in charge 
of an asylum for the insane in Vienna. There he began 
to study patients suffering from monomania, a disor-
der characterized by an exaggerated interest in some 
key idea or a deep urge to engage in some specific 
behavior—theft, murder, eroticism, extreme religios-
ity. He reasoned that, because the patient functioned 
well in all other behaviors, the brain defect must be 
discrete and in principle could be localized by exam-
ining the skulls of these patients. Gall’s studies of 
localized brain functions led to phrenology, a discipline 
concerned with determining personality and character 
based on the detailed shape of the skull.
In the late 1820s, Gall’s ideas were subjected to 
experimental analysis by the French physiologist 
Pierre Flourens. Using experimental animals, Flourens 
destroyed some of Gall’s functional centers in the brain, 
and in turn attempted to isolate the contribution of 
these “cerebral organs” to behavior. From these experi-
ments, Flourens concluded that specific brain regions 
are not responsible for specific behaviors, but that all 
brain regions, especially the cerebral hemispheres of 
the forebrain, participate in every mental operation. 
Any part of a cerebral hemisphere, Flourens proposed, 
contributes to all the hemisphere’s functions. Injury to 
any one area of the cerebral hemisphere should there-
fore affect all higher functions equally. Thus in 1823 
Flourens wrote: “All perceptions, all volitions occupy 
the same seat in these (cerebral) organs; the faculty of 
perceiving, of conceiving, of willing merely constitutes 
therefore a faculty which is essentially one.”
The rapid acceptance of this belief, later called 
the holistic view of the brain, was based only partly 
on Flourens’s experimental work. It also represented 
a cultural reaction against the materialistic view that 
the human mind is a biological organ. It represented 
a rejection of the notion that there is no soul, that all 
mental processes can be reduced to activity within the 
brain, and that the mind can be improved by exercis-
ing it—ideas that were unacceptable to the religious 
establishment and landed aristocracy of Europe.
The holistic view was seriously challenged, how-
ever, in the mid-19th century by the French neurologist 
Paul Pierre Broca, the German neurologist Carl Wernicke, 
and the British neurologist Hughlings Jackson. For 
example, in his studies of focal epilepsy, a disease 
characterized by convulsions that begin in a particular 
part of the body, Jackson showed that different motor 
and sensory functions could be traced to specific parts 
of the cerebral cortex. The regional studies by Broca, 
Wernicke, and Jackson were extended to the cellular 
level by Charles Sherrington and by Ramón y Cajal, 
who championed the view of brain function called 
cellular connectionism. According to this view, individ-
ual neurons are the signaling units of the brain; they 
are arranged in functional groups and connect to one 
another in a precise fashion. Wernicke’s work and that 
of the French neurologist Jules Dejerine revealed that 
different behaviors are produced by different intercon-
nected brain regions.
The first important evidence for localization 
emerged from studies of how the brain produces lan-
guage. Before we consider the relevant clinical and 
anatomical studies, we shall first review the overall 
structure of the brain, including its major anatomi-
cal regions. This requires that we define some essen-
tial navigational terms used by neuroanatomists to 
describe the three-dimensional spatial relationships 
between parts of the brain and spinal cord. These terms 
are introduced in Box 1–1 and Figure 1–2.
The Brain Has Distinct Functional Regions
The central nervous system is a bilateral and largely 
symmetrical structure with two main parts, the spi-
nal cord and the brain. The brain comprises six major 
structures: the medulla oblongata, pons, cerebellum, 
midbrain, diencephalon, and cerebrum (Box 1–2 and 
Figure 1–3). Each of these in turn comprise distinct 
groups of neurons with distinctive connectivity and 
developmental origin. In the medulla, pons, midbrain, 
and diencephalon, neurons are often grouped in dis-
tinct clusters termed nuclei. The surface of the cere-
brum and cerebellum consists of a large folded sheet 
of neurons called the cerebral cortex and the cerebel-
lar cortex, respectively, where neurons are organized 
in layers with stereotyped patterns of connectivity. The 
cerebrum also contains a number of structures located 
below the cortex (subcortical), including the basal gan-
glia and amygdala (Figure 1–4).
Modern brain imaging techniques make it possible 
to see activity in these structures in living people (see 
Chapter 6). Brain imaging is commonly used to evalu-
ate the metabolic activity of discrete regions of the brain 
while people are engaged in specific tasks under con-
trolled conditions. Such studies provide evidence that 
specific types of behavior recruit the activity of particu-
lar regions of the brain more than others. Brain imaging 
vividly demonstrates that cognitive operations rely pri-
marily on the cerebral cortex, the furrowed gray matter 
covering the two cerebral hemispheres (Figure 1–5).


===== Page 8 =====
The location and orientation of components of the cen-
tral nervous system within the body are described with 
reference to three axes: the rostral-caudal, dorsal-ventral, 
and medial-lateral axes (Figure 1–2). These terms allow 
the neuroanatomist to describe spatial relations between 
parts of the brain and spinal cord. They facilitate the com-
parison of brains of individuals of the same species as they 
develop or in the case of a disease. They also facilitate the 
comparison of brains from different species of animals, 
for example, to understand the brain’s evolution.
Box 1–1  Neuroanatomical Terms of Navigation
Dorsal
A  Rostral-caudal and dorsal-ventral axes
B  Medial-lateral axis
C  Section planes
Dorsal
(superior)
Ventral
(inferior)
Ventral
(anterior)
Ventral
(anterior)
Ventral
Dorsal
(posterior)
Horizontal plane
Coronal plane
Sagittal plane
Dorsal
(posterior)
Dorsal
Lateral
Lateral
Ventral
Rostral
Rostral
Rostral
Caudal
Caudal
Caudal
Medial
1
2
1
2
Figure 1–2  The central nervous system is described 
along three major axes. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Martin 2003.)
A.  Rostral means toward the nose and caudal toward  
the tail. Dorsal means toward the back of the animal and  
ventral toward the belly. In lower mammals the orientations 
of these two axes are maintained through development into 
adult life. In humans and other higher primates, the longitudi-
nal axis is flexed in the brain stem by approximately  
110 degrees. Because of this flexure, the same positional 
terms have different meanings when referring to structures 
below and above the flexure. Below the flexure, in the spinal 
cord, rostral means toward the head, caudal means toward 
the coccyx (the lower end of the spinal column), ventral 
(anterior) means toward the belly, and dorsal (posterior) 
means toward the back. Above the flexure, rostral means 
toward the nose, caudal means toward the back of the head, 
ventral means toward the jaw, and dorsal means toward  
the top of the head. The term superior is often used synony-
mously with dorsal, and inferior means the same as ventral.
B. Medial means toward the middle of the brain and lateral 
toward the side.
C.  When brains are sectioned for analysis, slices are  
typically made in one of three cardinal planes: horizontal, 
coronal, or sagittal.


===== Page 9 =====
12    Part I / Overall Perspective
The Central Nervous System Has Seven  
Main Parts
The spinal cord, the most caudal part of the central nerv-
ous system, receives and processes sensory information 
from the skin, joints, and muscles of the limbs and trunk 
and controls movement of the limbs and the trunk. It 
is subdivided into cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral 
regions (Figure 1–3A).
The spinal cord continues rostrally as the brain 
stem, which consists of the medulla oblongata, pons, 
and midbrain. The brain stem receives sensory informa-
tion from the skin and muscles of the head and provides 
the motor control for the head’s musculature. It also con-
veys information from the spinal cord to the brain and 
from the brain to the spinal cord, and regulates levels of 
arousal and awareness through the reticular formation.
The brain stem contains several collections of cell bod-
ies, the cranial nerve nuclei. Some of these nuclei receive 
information from the skin and muscles of the head; oth-
ers control motor output to muscles of the face, neck, and 
eyes. Still others are specialized to process information 
from three of the special senses: hearing, balance, and taste.
The medulla oblongata, directly rostral to the spi-
nal cord, includes several centers responsible for vital 
autonomic functions, such as digestion, breathing, and 
the control of heart rate.
The pons, rostral to the medulla, conveys informa-
tion about movement from the cerebral hemispheres to 
the cerebellum.
The cerebellum, behind the pons, modulates the 
force and range of movement and is involved in the 
learning of motor skills. It is functionally connected to 
the three main organs of the brain stem: the medulla 
oblongata, the pons, and the midbrain.
The midbrain, rostral to the pons, controls many 
sensory and motor functions, including eye movement 
and the coordination of visual and auditory reflexes.
The diencephalon lies rostral to the midbrain and 
contains two structures. The thalamus processes most of 
the information reaching the cerebral cortex from the 
rest of the central nervous system. The hypothalamus 
regulates autonomic, endocrine, and visceral functions.
The cerebrum comprises two cerebral hemispheres, 
each consisting of a heavily wrinkled outer layer (the cer-
ebral cortex) and three deep-lying structures (components 
of the basal ganglia, the hippocampus, and amygdaloid nuclei). 
The basal ganglia, which include the caudate, putamen, 
and globus pallidus, regulate movement execution and 
motor- and habit-learning, two forms of memory that are 
referred to as implicit memory; the hippocampus is criti-
cal for storage of memory of people, places, things, and 
events, a form of memory that is referred to as explicit; 
and the amygdaloid nuclei coordinate the autonomic and 
endocrine responses of emotional states, including mem-
ory of threats, another form of implicit memory.
Each cerebral hemisphere is divided into four dis-
tinct lobes: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal 
(Figure 1–3B). These lobes are associated with distinct 
functions, although the cortical areas are all highly inter-
connected and can participate in a wide range of brain 
functions. The occipital lobe receives visual information 
and is critical for all aspects of vision. Information from 
the occipital lobe is then processed through two main 
pathways. The dorsal stream, connecting the occipital 
lobe to the parietal lobe, is concerned with the location 
and manipulation of objects in visual space. The ventral 
stream, connecting the occipital lobe to the temporal 
lobe, is concerned with object identity, including the rec-
ognition of individual faces. The temporal lobe is also 
important for processing auditory information (and 
also contains the hippocampus and amygdala buried 
beneath its surface). The frontal lobes are strongly inter-
connected with all cortical areas and are important for 
higher cognitive processing and motor planning.
About two-thirds of the cortex lies in the sulci, 
and many gyri are buried by overlying cortical lobes. 
The full extent of the cortex is made visible by separat-
ing the hemispheres to reveal the medial surface of the 
brain and by slicing the brain post mortem, for example in 
an autopsy (Figure 1–4). Much of this information can 
be visualized in the living brain through modern brain 
imaging (Figure 1–5; Chapter 6). These views also afford 
views of the white matter and subcortical gray matter.
Two important regions of cerebral cortex not visible 
on the surface include the cingulate cortex and insular 
cortex. The cingulate cortex lies dorsal to the corpus cal-
losum and is important for regulation of emotion, pain 
perception, and cognition. The insular cortex, which lies 
buried within the overlying frontal, parietal, and tem-
poral lobes, plays an important role in emotion, homeo-
stasis, and taste perception. These internal views also 
afford examination of the corpus callosum, the prominent 
axon fiber tract that connects the two hemispheres.
The various brain regions described above are often 
divided into three broader regions: the hindbrain (com-
prising the medulla oblongata, pons, and cerebellum); 
midbrain (comprising the tectum, substantia nigra, retic-
ular formation, and periaqueductal gray matter); and 
forebrain (comprising the diencephalon and cerebrum). 
Together the midbrain and hindbrain (minus the cer-
ebellum) include the same structures as the brain stem. 
The anatomical organization of the nervous system is 
described in more detail in Chapter 4.
Box 1–2  Anatomical Organization of the Central Nervous System


