===== Page 1 =====
332    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
channel, comprised of four repeats of a domain with 
six membrane-spanning segments that includes the 
S4 voltage-sensor and pore-lining P-region (see Figure 
8–10). Calcium channels also have auxiliary subunits 
(termed α2, β, γ, and δ) that modify the properties of 
the channel formed by the α1-subunit. The subcellular 
localization in neurons of different types of calcium 
channels also varies. The N- and P/Q-type Ca2+ chan-
nels are found predominantly in the presynaptic ter-
minal, whereas L-, R-, and T-type channels are found 
largely in the soma and dendrites.
Four of the types of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels—
the L-type, P/Q-type, N-type, and R-type—generally 
require fairly strong depolarization to be activated 
(voltages positive to −40 to −20 mV are required) and 
thus are sometimes loosely referred to as high-voltage-
activated Ca2+ channels (Table 15–1). In contrast, T-type 
channels open in response to small depolarizations 
around the threshold for generating an action potential 
(−60 to −40 mV) and are therefore called low-voltage-
activated Ca2+ channels. Because they are activated by 
small changes in membrane potential, the T-type chan-
nels help control excitability at the resting potential 
and are an important source of the excitatory current 
that drives the rhythmic pacemaker activity of certain 
cells in both the brain and heart.
In neurons, the rapid release of conventional trans-
mitters during fast synaptic transmission is mediated 
mainly by P/Q-type and N-type Ca2+ channels, the 
channel types most concentrated at the active zone. 
The localization of N-type Ca2+ channels at the frog 
neuromuscular junction has been visualized using a 
fluorescence-labeled snail toxin that binds selectively 
to these channels (see Figure 15–4A). The L-type chan-
nels are not found in the active zone and thus do not 
normally contribute to the fast release of conventional 
transmitters such as ACh and glutamate. However, 
Ca2+ influx through L-type channels is important for 
slower forms of release that do not occur at specialized 
active zones, such as the release of neuropeptides from 
neurons and of hormones from endocrine cells. As we 
shall see later, regulation of Ca2+ influx into presynap-
tic terminals controls the amount of transmitter release 
and hence the strength of synaptic transmission.
Mutations in voltage-gated Ca2+ channels are 
responsible for certain acquired and genetic diseases. 
Timothy syndrome, a developmental disorder charac-
terized by a severe form of autism with impaired cog-
nitive function and a range of other pathophysiological 
changes, results from a mutation in the α1-subunit of 
L-type channels that alters their voltage-dependent 
gating, thereby affecting dendritic integration. Differ-
ent point mutations in the P/Q-type channel α1-subunit 
give rise to hemiplegic migraine or epilepsy. Patients 
with Lambert-Eaton syndrome, an autoimmune disease 
associated with muscle weakness, make antibodies to 
the P/Q-type channel α1-subunit that decrease total 
Ca2+ current (Chapter 57).
Transmitter Is Released in Quantal Units
How does the influx of Ca2+  trigger transmitter release? 
Katz and his colleagues provided a key insight into 
this question by showing that transmitter is released 
in discrete amounts they called quanta. Each quantum 
of transmitter produces a postsynaptic potential of 
fixed size, called the quantal synaptic potential. The total 
postsynaptic potential is made up of a large number 
of quantal potentials. EPSPs seem smoothly graded in 
amplitude only because each quantal (or unit) poten-
tial is small relative to the total potential.
Katz and Fatt obtained the first clue as to the 
quantal nature of synaptic transmission in 1951 when 
they observed spontaneous postsynaptic potentials of 
approximately 0.5 mV at the nerve-muscle synapse of 
the frog. Like end-plate potentials evoked by nerve 
stimulation, these small depolarizing responses are 
largest at the site of nerve-muscle contact and decay 
electrotonically with distance (see Figure 12–5). Small 
spontaneous potentials have since been observed in 
mammalian muscle and in central neurons. Because 
postsynaptic potentials at vertebrate nerve-muscle 
synapses are called end-plate potentials, Fatt and Katz 
called these spontaneous potentials miniature end-plate 
potentials.
Several results convinced Fatt and Katz that the 
miniature end-plate potentials represented responses 
to the release of small amounts of ACh, the neurotrans-
mitter used at the nerve-muscle synapse. The time 
course of the miniature end-plate potentials and the 
effects of various drugs on them are indistinguish-
able from the properties of the end-plate potential. 
Like the end-plate potentials, the miniature end-plate 
potentials are enhanced and prolonged by prostig-
mine, a drug that blocks hydrolysis of ACh by ace-
tylcholinesterase. Conversely, they are abolished by 
agents that block the ACh receptor, such as curare. The 
miniature end-plate potentials represent responses to 
small packets of transmitter that are spontaneously 
released from the presynaptic nerve terminal in the 
absence of an action potential. Their frequency can be 
increased by a small depolarization of the presynap-
tic terminal. They disappear if the presynaptic motor 
nerve degenerates and reappear when a new motor 
synapse is formed.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    333
What could account for the small, fixed size of the 
miniature end-plate potential? Del Castillo and Katz 
first tested the possibility that each event represents 
a response to the opening of a single ACh receptor-
channel. However, application of very small amounts 
of ACh to the frog muscle end-plate elicited depolar-
izing postsynaptic responses that were much smaller 
than the 0.5 mV response of a miniature end-plate 
potential. This finding made it clear that the miniature 
end-plate potential represents the opening of more 
than one ACh receptor-channel. In fact, Katz and 
Miledi were later able to estimate the voltage response 
to the elementary current through a single ACh 
receptor-channel as being only approximately 0.3 μV 
(Chapter 12). Based on this estimate, a miniature end-
plate potential of 0.5 mV would represent the sum-
mation of the elementary currents of approximately 
2,000 channels. Later work showed that a miniature 
end-plate potential is the response to the synchronous 
release of approximately 5,000 molecules of ACh.
What is the relationship of the large end-plate 
potential evoked by nerve stimulation and the small, 
spontaneous miniature end-plate responses? This ques-
tion was first addressed by del Castillo and Katz in a 
study of synaptic signaling at the nerve-muscle synapse 
bathed in a solution low in Ca2+. Under this condition, 
the end-plate potential is reduced markedly, from the 
normal 70 mV to about 0.5 to 2.5 mV. Moreover, the 
amplitude of each successive end-plate potential now 
varies randomly from one stimulus to the next; often, 
no response can be detected at all (termed failures). 
However, the minimum response above zero—the unit 
end-plate potential in response to a presynaptic action 
potential—is identical in amplitude (approximately 0.5 
mV) and shape to the spontaneous miniature end-plate 
potentials. Importantly, the amplitude of each end-plate 
potential is an integral multiple of the unit potential 
(Figure 15–6).
Now del Castillo and Katz could ask: How does the 
rise of intracellular Ca2+ that accompanies each action 
potential affect the release of transmitter? They found 
that increasing the external Ca2+ concentration does not 
change the amplitude of the unit synaptic potential. 
However, the proportion of failures decreases and the 
incidence of higher-amplitude responses (composed of 
multiple quantal units) increases. These observations 
show that an increase in external Ca2+ concentration 
does not enhance the size of a quantum of transmitter 
(that is, the number of ACh molecules in each quantum) 
but rather acts to increase the average number of quanta 
that are released in response to a presynaptic action 
potential. The greater the Ca2+ influx into the terminal, 
the larger the number of transmitter quanta released.
Thus, three findings led del Castillo and Katz to 
conclude that transmitter is released in packets with a 
fixed amount of transmitter, a quantum: The amplitude 
of the end-plate potential varies in a stepwise manner 
at low levels of ACh release, the amplitude of each step 
increase is an integral multiple of the unit potential, 
and the unit potential has the same mean amplitude 
and shape as that of the spontaneous miniature end-
plate potentials. Moreover, by analyzing the statistical 
distribution of end-plate potential amplitudes, del 
Castillo and Katz and other subsequent researchers 
were able to show that a single action potential pro-
duced a transient increase in the probability that a 
given quantum of transmitter is released according to 
a random process, similar to that governing the out-
come of a coin toss (Box 15–1).
In the absence of an action potential, the rate of 
quantal release is low—only one quantum per second 
is released spontaneously at the end-plate. In contrast, 
the firing of an action potential releases approximately 
150 quanta, each approximately 0.5 mV in amplitude, 
resulting in a large end-plate potential. Thus, the influx 
of Ca2+ into the presynaptic terminal during an action 
potential dramatically increases the rate of quantal 
release by a factor of 150,000, triggering the synchro-
nous release of about 150 quanta in about 1 ms.
Transmitter Is Stored and Released by  
Synaptic Vesicles
What morphological features of the cell might account 
for the quantal release of transmitter? The physiologi-
cal observations indicating that transmitter is released 
in fixed quanta coincided with the discovery, through 
electron microscopy, of accumulations of small clear 
vesicles in the presynaptic terminal. Del Castillo and 
Katz speculated that the vesicles were organelles for 
the storage of transmitter, each vesicle stored one 
quantum of transmitter (amounting to several thou-
sand molecules), and each vesicle released its entire 
contents into the synaptic cleft in an all-or-none man-
ner at sites specialized for release.
The sites of release, the active zones, contain a 
cloud of synaptic vesicles that cluster above a fuzzy 
electron-dense material attached to the internal face of 
the presynaptic membrane (see Figure 15–4A). At all 
synapses, the vesicles are typically clear, small, and 
ovoid, with a diameter of approximately 40 nm (in dis-
tinction with the large dense-core vesicles described in 
Chapter 16). Although most synaptic vesicles do not 
contact the active zone, some are physically bound. 
These are called the docked vesicles and are thought to 


===== Page 3 =====
334    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
be the ones immediately available for release (some-
times referred to as the readily releasable pool). At the 
neuromuscular junction, the active zones are linear 
structures (see Figure 15–4), whereas in central syn-
apses, they are disc-shaped structures approximately 
0.1 μm2 in area with dense projections pointing into 
the cytoplasm. Active zones are generally found in 
precise apposition to the postsynaptic membrane 
patches that contain the neurotransmitter receptors 
(see Figure 13–2). Thus, presynaptic and postsyn-
aptic specializations are functionally and morpho-
logically attuned to each other, sometimes precisely 
aligned in structural “nanocolumns.” As we shall 
learn later, several key active zone proteins involved 
in transmitter release have now been identified and 
characterized.
Figure 15–6  Neurotransmitter is released in fixed incre-
ments. Each increment or quantum of transmitter produces 
a unit end-plate potential of fixed amplitude. The amplitude 
of the response evoked by nerve stimulation is thus equal to 
the amplitude of the unit end-plate potential multiplied by the 
number of quanta of transmitter released.
A. Intracellular recordings from a muscle fiber at the end-plate 
show the change in postsynaptic potential when eight consecu-
tive stimuli of the same size are applied to the motor nerve. To 
reduce transmitter release and to keep the end-plate potentials 
small, the tissue is bathed in a Ca2+-deficient (and magnesium-
rich) solution. The postsynaptic responses to the nerve stimu-
lus vary. Two of the eight presynaptic stimuli elicit no EPSP 
(failures), two produce unit potentials, and the others produce 
EPSPs that are approximately two to four times the amplitude 
of the unit potential. Note that the spontaneous miniature 
end-plate potentials (S), which occur at random intervals in the 
traces, are the same size as the unit potential. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Liley 1956.)
B. After many end-plate potentials are recorded, the number 
of responses with a given amplitude is plotted as a function of 
this amplitude in the histogram shown here. The distribution 
of responses falls into a number of peaks. The first peak, at 0 
mV, represents failures. The first peak of responses, at 0.4 mV, 
represents the unit potential, the smallest elicited response. 
The unit response has the same amplitude as the spontaneous 
miniature end-plate potentials (inset), indicating that the unit 
response is caused by the release of a single quantum of transmit-
ter. The other peaks in the histogram are integral multiples of the 
amplitude of the unit potential; that is, responses are composed of 
two, three, four, or more quantal events.
    The number of responses under each peak divided by the 
total number of events in the entire histogram is the probability 
that a single presynaptic action potential triggers the release 
of the number of quanta that comprise the peak. For example, 
if there are 30 events in the peak corresponding to the release 
of two quanta out of a total of 100 events recorded, the prob-
ability that a presynaptic action potential releases exactly two 
quanta is 30/100 or 0.3. This probability follows a Poisson 
distribution (red curve). This theoretical distribution is com-
posed of the sum of several Gaussian functions. The spread 
of the unit peak (standard deviation of the Gaussian function) 
reflects the fact that the amount of transmitter in a quantum, 
and hence the amplitude of the quantal postsynaptic response, 
varies randomly about a mean value. The successive Gaussian 
peaks widen progressively because the variability (or variance) 
associated with each quantal event increases linearly with the 
number of quanta per event. The distribution of amplitudes of 
the spontaneous miniature potentials (inset) is fit by a Gaussian 
curve whose width is identical to that of the Gaussian curve for 
the unit synaptic responses. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Boyd and Martin 1956.)
Response
Quadruple
Failure
Unit
Double
Unit
Failure
Double
Double
S
S
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
A
S
S
S
Stimulus
10 ms
2 mV
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Amplitude of spontaneous
miniature end-plate potentials (mV)
Number of observations
14
16
18
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Number of observations
4
6
5
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8
Amplitude of end-plate potentials (mV)
Failure
Unit
Double
Triple
B
0


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    335
The mean size of a synaptic response E evoked by an 
action potential has often been described as the product 
of the total number of releasable quanta (n), the probabil-
ity that an individual quantum of transmitter is released 
(p), and the size of the response to a quantum (a):
E = n · p · a.
These parameters are statistical terms, useful for 
describing the size and variability of the postsynaptic 
response. At some but not all central synapses, they can 
also be assigned to biological processes. We begin by 
focusing on synapses of the kind envisioned by Katz and 
colleagues, where the interpretation of the parameters 
is most straightforward. At these synapses, the presyn-
aptic terminal typically contains multiple active zones, 
and each active zone releases at most a single vesicle in 
response to an action potential (univesicular release).
We then consider another kind of synapse that 
requires a different interpretation. At these synapses, 
each active zone can release multiple vesicles in response 
to a single action potential (multivesicular release), lead-
ing to very high concentrations of transmitter in the syn-
aptic cleft that can cause the postsynaptic receptors to 
become saturated with transmitter.
Univesicular Release at Multiple Active Zones
In the simplest case, the parameter a is the response of the 
postsynaptic membrane to the release of a single vesicle’s 
contents of transmitter. It is assumed that transmitter is 
packaged in synaptic vesicles, that release of the contents 
of a vesicle is a stereotyped, all-or-none event, and that 
single release events occur in physical isolation from each 
other. Quantal size depends on the amount of transmitter 
in a vesicle and on the properties of the postsynaptic cell, 
such as the membrane resistance and capacitance (which 
can be independently estimated) and the responsiveness 
of the postsynaptic membrane to the transmitter sub-
stance. This can also be measured experimentally by the 
postsynaptic membrane’s response to the application of a 
known amount of transmitter.
The parameter n describes the maximum number of 
quantal units that can be released in response to a single 
action potential if the probability p reaches 1.0. At some 
central synapses, this maximum may be imposed by the 
number of release sites (active zones) in the terminals of 
a presynaptic neuron that contact a given postsynaptic 
neuron. Multiple studies have found that for this kind 
of connection n corresponds with the number of release 
sites determined by electron microscopy, as if those sites 
obeyed a rough rule wherein a presynaptic action poten-
tial triggers the exocytosis of at most one vesicle per 
active zone.
The parameter p represents the likelihood of vesicle 
release. This likelihood encompasses a series of events 
necessary for a particular release site to contribute a 
quantal event: (1) The active zone must be loaded with 
at least one releasable vesicle (a process referred to as 
vesicle mobilization); (2) the presynaptic action poten-
tial must evoke Ca2+ influx in sufficient quantity and 
proximity to the vesicle; and (3) the Ca2+-sensitive syn-
aptotagmin and SNARE machinery must cause the vesi-
cle to fuse and discharge its contents.
Here, we focus mainly on the determinants of p. We 
can treat quantal release at a single active zone as a ran-
dom event with only two possible outcomes in response 
to an action potential—the quantum of transmitter is or 
is not released. Because the quantal responses from dif-
ferent active zones are thought to occur independently 
of each other in some situations, this is similar to toss-
ing a set of n coins in the air and counting the number 
of heads or tails. The equivalent of individual coin flips 
(Bernoulli trials) are then totaled up in a binomial dis-
tribution, where p stands for the average probability of 
success (that is, the probability that any given quantum 
will be released) and q (equal to 1 − p) stands for the 
mean probability of failure.
Both the average probability (p) that an individual 
quantum will be released and the maximal number (n) 
Box 15–1  Synaptic Strength Depends on the Probability of Transmitter Release and  
Other Quantal Parameters
Quantal transmission has been demonstrated 
at all chemical synapses so far examined. Neverthe-
less, the efficacy of transmitter release from a single 
presynaptic cell onto a single postsynaptic cell varies 
widely in the nervous system and depends on sev-
eral factors: (1) the number of individual synapses 
between a pair of presynaptic and postsynaptic cells 
(that is, the number of presynaptic boutons that con-
tact the postsynaptic cell); (2) the number of active 
zones in an individual synaptic terminal; and (3) the 
probability that a presynaptic action potential will 
trigger release of one or more quanta of transmitter 
(continued)


===== Page 5 =====
336    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
at an active zone. As we will see later, release prob-
ability can be powerfully regulated as a function of 
neuronal activity.
In the central nervous system, most presynaptic 
boutons have only a single active zone where an action 
potential usually releases at most a single quantum 
of transmitter in an all-or-none manner. However, at 
some central synapses, such as the calyx of Held, trans-
mitter is released from a large presynaptic terminal that 
may contain many active zones and thus can release a 
large number of quanta in response to a single presyn-
aptic action potential. Central neurons also vary in 
of releasable quanta are assumed to be constant. (Any 
reduction in the store of vesicles is assumed to be quickly 
replenished after each stimulus.) The product of n and 
p yields an estimate m of the mean number of quanta 
that will be released. This mean is called the quantal 
content or quantal output.
Calculation of the probability of transmitter release 
can be illustrated with the following example. Consider 
a terminal that has a releasable store of five quanta (n = 5). 
Assuming p = 0.1, then the probability that an individual 
quantum will not be released from the terminals (q) is 
1 − p, or 0.9. We can now determine the probability that 
a stimulus will release no quanta (failure), a single quan-
tum, or any other number of quanta (up to n).
The probability that none of the five available 
quanta will be released by a given stimulus is the prod-
uct of the individual probabilities that each quantum 
will not be released: q5 = (0.9)5, or 0.59. We would thus 
expect to see 59 failures in a hundred stimuli. The prob-
abilities of observing zero, one, two, three, four, or five 
quanta are represented by the successive terms of the 
binomial expansion:
(q + p)5 = q5 (failures) + 5 q4p (1 quantum) 
+ 10 q3p2 (2 quanta) + 10 q2p3 (3 quanta)
+ 5 qp4 (4 quanta) + p5 (5 quanta).
Thus, in 100 stimuli, the binomial expansion would 
predict 33 single unit responses, 7 double responses, 1 
triple response, and 0 quadruple or quintuple responses.
Values for the quantal output m vary from approxi-
mately 100 to 300 at the vertebrate nerve-muscle synapse, 
the squid giant synapse, and Aplysia central synapses, 
to as few as 1 to 4 in the synapses of the sympathetic 
ganglion and spinal cord of vertebrates. The probabil-
ity of release p also varies, ranging from as high as 0.7 
at the neuromuscular junction in the frog and 0.9 in the 
crab down to around 0.1 at some mammalian central 
synapses. Estimates for n range from as much as 1,000 
(at the vertebrate nerve-muscle synapse) to 1 (at single 
terminals of mammalian central neurons).
This numerical example illustrates a characteristic 
feature of synapses with simple binomial features—
their substantial variability. This holds just as strongly 
whether p is high or low. For example, for p = 0.9 and 
100 stimuli, the binomial expansion predicts 0 failures, 
0 single unit responses, 1 double response, 7 triple 
responses, 33 quadruple responses, and 59 quintuple 
responses, the mirror-image of the distribution for p = 0.1. 
Even if each sequential event that supports vesicle 
release is highly likely, the aggregate strength of the 
synapse will vary widely.
Multivesicular Release with Receptor Saturation
One well-studied mechanism for achieving high synaptic 
reliability is through the release of multiple vesicles onto 
a single postsynaptic site. In the extreme, this can release 
sufficient amounts of transmitter in the synaptic cleft to 
cause the postsynaptic receptor binding sites to become 
fully occupied by transmitter (receptor saturation).
Under these conditions, the postsynaptic response 
will reach a maximal amplitude. Further release of 
transmitter, for example in response to a modulatory 
neurotransmitter, would fail to increase the postsynap-
tic response. Variability in response size would shrink 
greatly if, say, three to five vesicles worth of transmit-
ter activated the same number of receptors as a single 
vesicle. The postsynaptic response would be highly 
stereotyped (it would appear to result from release of a 
single quantum of transmitter) even though the presyn-
aptic terminal was releasing multiple vesicles. However, 
the binomial treatment could still retain some useful-
ness as a way of adding up the contributions of multiple 
synapses of this kind, so long as each synapse released 
transmitter simultaneously and independently. But in 
such a case, n, p, and a would take on biological mean-
ings different from those in which only a single vesicle 
could be released per synapse.
Box 15–1  Synaptic Strength Depends on the Probability of Transmitter Release and  
Other Quantal Parameters (continued)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    337
the number of synapses that a typical presynaptic cell 
forms with a typical postsynaptic cell. Whereas most 
central neurons form only a few synapses with any one 
postsynaptic cell, a single climbing fiber from neurons 
in the inferior olive forms up to 10,000 terminals on a 
single Purkinje neuron in the cerebellum! Finally, the 
mean probability of transmitter release from a single 
active zone also varies widely among presynaptic ter-
minals, from less than 0.1 (that is, a 10% chance that 
a presynaptic action potential will trigger release of a 
vesicle) to greater than 0.9. This wide range of prob-
abilities can even be seen among the boutons at indi-
vidual synapses between a specific type of presynaptic 
cell and a specific type of postsynaptic cell.
Thus, central neurons vary widely in the efficacy 
and reliability of synaptic transmission. Synaptic 
reliability is defined as the probability that an action 
potential in a presynaptic cell leads to some measura-
ble response in the postsynaptic cell—that is, the prob-
ability that a presynaptic action potential will release 
one or more quanta of transmitter. Efficacy refers to 
the mean amplitude of the synaptic response, which 
depends on both the reliability of synaptic transmis-
sion and on the mean size of the response when synap-
tic transmission does occur.
Most central neurons communicate at synapses 
that have a low probability of transmitter release. The 
high failure rate of release at most central synapses 
(that is, their low release probability) is not a design 
defect but serves a purpose. As we discuss later, this 
feature allows transmitter release to be regulated over 
a wide dynamic range, which is important for adapt-
ing neural signaling to different behavioral demands. 
In synaptic connections where a low probability of 
release is deleterious for function, this limitation can 
be overcome by simply having many active zones in 
one synapse, as is the case at the calyx of Held and the 
nerve-muscle synapse. Both contain hundreds of inde-
pendent active zones, so an action potential reliably 
releases 150 to 250 quanta, ensuring that a presynap-
tic signal is always followed by a postsynaptic action 
potential. Reliable transmission at the neuromuscular 
junction is essential for survival. An animal would not 
survive if its ability to move away from a predator 
was hampered by a low-probability response. Another 
strategy for increasing reliability is to use multivesicu-
lar release, the simultaneous fusion of multiple vesi-
cles at a single active zone, to ensure that postsynaptic 
receptors are consistently exposed to a saturating con-
centration of neurotransmitter (see Box 15–1).
Not all chemical signaling between neurons 
depends on the synaptic machinery described earlier. 
Some substances, such as certain lipid metabolites and 
the gas nitric oxide (Chapter 14), can diffuse across the 
lipid bilayer of the membrane. Others can be moved 
out of nerve endings by carrier proteins if their intracel-
lular concentration is sufficiently high. Plasma mem-
brane transporters for glutamate or GABA normally 
take up transmitter into a cell from the synaptic cleft 
following a presynaptic action potential (Chapter 13).  
However, in some glial cells of the retina, the direction 
of glutamate transport can be reversed under certain 
conditions, causing glutamate to leave the cell through 
the transporter into the synaptic cleft. Still other sub-
stances simply leak out of nerve terminals at a low 
rate. Surprisingly, approximately 90% of the ACh that 
leaves the presynaptic terminals at the neuromuscu-
lar junction does so through continuous leakage. This 
leakage is ineffective, however, because it is diffuse 
and not targeted to receptors at the end-plate region 
and because it is continuous and low level rather than 
synchronous and concentrated.
Synaptic Vesicles Discharge Transmitter by 
Exocytosis and Are Recycled by Endocytosis
The quantal hypothesis of del Castillo and Katz has 
been amply confirmed by direct experimental evi-
dence that synaptic vesicles do indeed package neu-
rotransmitter and that they release their contents by 
directly fusing with the presynaptic membrane, a pro-
cess termed exocytosis.
Forty years ago, Victor Whittaker discovered that 
the synaptic vesicles in the motor nerve terminals of 
the electric organ of the electric fish Torpedo contain a 
high concentration of ACh. Later, Thomas Reese and 
John Heuser and their colleagues obtained electron 
micrographs that caught vesicles in the act of exocy-
tosis. To observe the brief exocytotic event, they rap-
idly froze the nerve-muscle synapse by immersing it 
in liquid helium at precisely defined intervals after 
the presynaptic nerve was stimulated. In addition, 
they increased the number of quanta of transmitter 
discharged with each nerve impulse by applying the 
drug 4-aminopyridine, a compound that blocks cer-
tain voltage-gated K+ channels, thus increasing the 
duration of the action potential and enhancing Ca2+ 
influx. (The spike broadening produced by this phar-
macological intervention resembles spike broadening 
resulting from cumulative inactivation of K+ chan-
nels during repetitive firing; see Figure 15–15C.) In 
both cases, prolonged action potentials evoke greater 
opening of presynaptic Ca2+ channels.
These techniques provided clear images of synap-
tic vesicles at the active zone during exocytosis. Using 
a technique called freeze-fracture electron microscopy, 


===== Page 7 =====
338    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Reese and Heuser noted deformations of the presyn-
aptic membrane along the active zone immediately 
after synaptic activity, which they interpreted as 
invaginations of the cell membrane caused by fusion 
of synaptic vesicles. These deformations lay along 
one or two rows of unusually large intramembranous 
particles, visible along both margins of the presynap-
tic density. Many of these particles are now thought 
to be voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (Figure 15–7). The 
particle density (approximately 1,500 per μm2) is simi-
lar to the Ca2+ channel density that is thought to be 
present in the presynaptic plasma membrane at the 
active zone. Moreover, the proximity of the particles 
to the release site is consistent with the short time 
interval between the onset of the Ca2+ current and the 
release of transmitter.
Finally, Heuser and Reese found that these defor-
mations are transient; they occur only when vesicles 
are discharged and do not persist after transmitter 
has been released. Thin-section electron micrographs 
revealed a number of omega-shaped (Ω) structures 
with the appearance of synaptic vesicles that have just 
fused with the membrane, prior to the complete col-
lapse of the vesicle membrane into the plasma mem-
brane (Figure 15–7B). Heuser and Reese confirmed this 
idea by showing that the number of Ω-shaped struc-
tures is directly correlated with the size of the EPSP when 
they varied the concentration of 4-aminopyridine  
to alter the amount of transmitter release. These mor-
phological studies provide striking evidence that 
transmitter is released from synaptic vesicles by means 
of exocytosis.
Following exocytosis, the excess membrane added 
to the presynaptic terminal is retrieved. In images of 
presynaptic terminals made 10 to 20 seconds after 
stimulation, Heuser and Reese observed new struc-
tures at the plasma membrane, the coated pits, which 
are formed by the protein clathrin that helps mediate 
membrane retrieval through the process of endocyto-
sis (Figure 15–7C). Several seconds later, the coated pits 
are seen to pinch off from the membrane and appear as 
coated vesicles in the cytoplasm. As we will see later, 
endocytosis through coated pit formation represents 
one of several means of vesicle membrane retrieval.
Capacitance Measurements Provide Insight Into  
the Kinetics of Exocytosis and Endocytosis
In certain neurons with large presynaptic terminals, 
the increase in surface area of the plasma membrane 
during exocytosis can be detected in electrical meas-
urements as increases in membrane capacitance. As we 
saw in Chapter 9, the capacitance of the membrane is 
proportional to its surface area. Erwin Neher discov-
ered that one could use measurements of capacitance 
to monitor exocytosis in secretory cells.
In adrenal chromaffin cells (which release epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine) and in mast cells of the 
rat peritoneum (which release histamine and seroto-
nin), individual dense-core vesicles are large enough 
to permit measurement of the increase in capacitance 
associated with fusion of a single vesicle. Release of 
transmitter in these cells is accompanied by stepwise 
increases in capacitance, followed somewhat later by 
stepwise decreases, which reflect the retrieval and 
recycling of the excess membrane (Figure 15–8).
In neurons, the changes in capacitance caused by 
fusion of single, small synaptic vesicles are usually too 
small to resolve. In certain favorable synaptic prepa-
rations that release large numbers of vesicles (such as 
the giant presynaptic terminals of bipolar neurons in 
the retina), membrane depolarization triggers a tran-
sient smooth rise and fall in the total capacitance of 
the terminal as a result of the exocytosis and retrieval 
of the membrane from hundreds of individual syn-
aptic vesicles (Figure 15–8C). These results provide 
direct measurements of the rates of membrane fusion 
and retrieval.
Exocytosis Involves the Formation of a  
Temporary Fusion Pore
Morphological studies of mast cells using rapid freezing 
suggest that exocytosis depends on the formation of a 
temporary fusion pore that spans the membranes of the 
vesicle and plasma membranes. In electrophysiological 
studies of capacitance increases in mast cells, a channel-
like fusion pore was detected in the electrophysiological 
recordings prior to complete fusion of vesicles and cell 
membranes. This fusion pore starts out with a single-
channel conductance of approximately 200 pS, similar 
to that of gap-junction channels, which also bridge two 
membranes. During exocytosis, the pore rapidly dilates, 
probably from around 5 to 50 nm in diameter, and the 
conductance increases dramatically (Figure 15–9A).
The fusion pore is not just an intermediate structure 
leading to exocytosis of transmitter, as transmitter can 
be released through the pore prior to pore expansion 
and vesicle collapse. This was first shown by amper-
ometry, a method that uses an extracellular carbon-fiber 
electrode to detect certain amine neurotransmitters, 
such as serotonin, based on an electrochemical reaction 
between the transmitter and the electrode that generates 
an electrical current proportional to the local transmitter 
concentration. Firing of an action potential in serotoner-
gic cells leads to a large transient increase in electrode 


===== Page 8 =====
Figure 15–7  Synaptic vesicles release transmitter by exo-
cytosis and are retrieved by endocytosis. The images on the 
left are freeze-fracture electron micrographs at a neuromuscular 
junction. The freeze-fracture technique exposes the intramem-
branous area to view by splitting the membrane along the 
hydrophobic interior of the lipid bilayer. The views shown are 
of the cytoplasmic leaflet of the bilayer presynaptic membrane 
looking up from the synaptic cleft (see Figure 15–4A). Con-
ventional thin-section electron micrographs on the right show 
cross-section views of the presynaptic terminal, synaptic cleft, 
and postsynaptic muscle membrane. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Heuser and Reese 1981. Permission conveyed 
through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
A. Parallel rows of intramembranous particles arrayed on either 
side of an active zone are thought to be the voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels essential for transmitter release (see Figure 15–4A). 
The thin-section image at right shows the synaptic vesicles 
adjacent to the active zone.
B. Synaptic vesicles release transmitter by fusing with the 
plasma membrane (exocytosis). Here, synaptic vesicles are 
caught in the act of fusing with the plasma membrane by rapid 
freezing of the tissue within 5 ms after a depolarizing stimu-
lus. Each depression in the plasma membrane represents the 
fusion of one synaptic vesicle. In the micrograph at right, fused 
vesicles are seen as Ω-shaped structures.
C. After exocytosis, synaptic vesicle membrane is retrieved by 
endocytosis. Within approximately 10 seconds after fusion of 
the vesicles with the presynaptic membrane, coated pits form. 
After another 10 seconds, the coated pits begin to pinch off by 
endocytosis to form coated vesicles. These vesicles store the 
membrane proteins of the original synaptic vesicle and also 
molecules captured from the extracellular medium. The vesicles 
are recycled at the terminals or are transported to the cell body, 
where the membrane constituents are degraded or recycled 
(see Chapter 7).
B  Exocytosis
A  Cell membrane at synapse
C  Endocytosis   
Presynaptic membrane (thin section)
Cytoplasmic half of presynaptic membrane (freeze fracture)
Linear array of
intramembranous particles
Vesicle
fusions
Vesicle
fusions
Coated vesicles
and pits
Synaptic cleft
Coated pits
100 nm


===== Page 9 =====
340    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
30 s
During retrieval of membrane
During exocytosis
B  Membrane capacitance during and after exocytosis of mast cell vesicles
C  Retinal bipolar neuron terminal
25 fF
10 s
20 ms
Depolarize Repolarize
Capacitance (pF)
Vm
ICa
2.2
2.1
2.0
[Ca]i (µM)
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
A  Mast cell before and after exocytosis of secretory vesicles
5 µm


