===== Page 1 =====
212    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
threshold.1 Third, the action potential is conducted 
without decrement. It has a self-regenerative feature 
that keeps the amplitude constant, even when it is con-
ducted over great distances. Fourth, the action poten-
tial is followed by a refractory period. For a brief time 
after an action potential is generated, the neuron’s abil-
ity to fire a second action potential is suppressed. The 
refractory period limits the frequency at which a nerve 
can fire action potentials, and thus limits the information-
carrying capacity of the axon.
These four properties of the action potential—
initiation threshold, all-or-none amplitude, conduc-
tion without decrement, and refractory period—are 
unusual for biological processes, which typically 
respond in a graded fashion to changes in the envi-
ronment. Biologists were puzzled by these properties 
for almost 100 years after the action potential was first 
recorded in the mid-1800s. Finally, in the late 1940s 
and early 1950s, studies of the membrane properties of 
the giant axon of the squid by Alan Hodgkin, Andrew 
Huxley, and Bernard Katz provided the first quantita-
tive insight into the mechanisms underlying the action 
potential.
The Action Potential Is Generated by the Flow 
of Ions Through Voltage-Gated Channels
An important early insight into how action potentials 
are generated came from an experiment performed by 
Kenneth Cole and Howard Curtis that predated the 
studies by Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz. While record-
ing from the giant axon of the squid, they found that the 
conductance of the membrane increases dramatically 
during the action potential (Figure 10–1). This discov-
ery provided evidence that the action potential results 
from a dramatic increase in the ion permeability of the 
cell membrane. It also raised two central questions: 
Which ions are responsible for the action potential, and 
how is the permeability of the membrane regulated?
Hodgkin and Katz provided a key insight into 
this problem by demonstrating that the amplitude of 
the action potential is reduced when the external Na+ 
Figure 10–1  The action potential results from an increase in 
ion conductance of the axon membrane. This historic record-
ing from an experiment conducted in 1939 by Kenneth Cole 
and Howard Curtis shows the oscilloscope record of an action 
potential superimposed on a simultaneous record of axonal 
membrane conductance.
Action potential
Membrane conductance
1The all-or-none property describes an action potential that is gener-
ated under a specific set of conditions. The size and shape of the 
action potential can be affected by changes in membrane proper-
ties, ion concentrations, temperature, and other variables, as dis-
cussed later in the chapter. The shape can also be affected slightly 
by the current that is used to evoke it, if measured near the point of 
stimulation.
concentration is lowered, indicating that Na+ influx is 
responsible for the rising phase of the action potential. 
They proposed that depolarization of the cell above the 
threshold for an action potential causes a brief increase 
in the cell membrane’s Na+ conductance, during which 
the Na+ conductance overwhelms the K+ conductance 
that predominates in the cell at rest, thereby driving 
the membrane potential towards ENa. Their data also 
suggested that the falling phase of the action potential 
was caused by a later increase in K+ permeability.
Sodium and Potassium Currents Through  
Voltage-Gated Channels Are Recorded  
With the Voltage Clamp
This insight of Hodgkin and Katz raised a further ques-
tion. What mechanism is responsible for regulating the 
changes in the Na+ and K+ permeabilities of the mem-
brane? Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley reasoned that 
the Na+ and K+ permeabilities were regulated directly 
by the membrane voltage. To test this hypothesis, they 
systematically varied the membrane potential in the 
squid giant axon and measured the resulting changes 
in the conductance of voltage-gated Na+ and K+ chan-
nels. To do this, they made use of a new apparatus, the 
voltage clamp, developed by Kenneth Cole.
Prior to the availability of the voltage-clamp tech-
nique, attempts to measure Na+ and K+ conductance 
as a function of membrane potential had been lim-
ited by the strong interdependence of the membrane 
potential and the gating of Na+ and K+ channels. For 
example, if the membrane is depolarized sufficiently 
to open some voltage-gated Na+ channels, the influx 
of Na+ through these channels causes further depolari-
zation. The additional depolarization causes still more 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    213
Na+ channels to open and consequently induces more 
inward Na+ current:
Depolarization
Inward INa 
Open Na+
channels
This positive feedback cycle drives the membrane 
potential to the peak of the action potential, making it 
impossible to achieve a stable membrane potential.
The voltage clamp interrupts the interaction 
between the membrane potential and the opening and 
closing of voltage-gated ion channels. It does so by 
adding or withdrawing a current from the axon that is 
equal to the current through the voltage-gated mem-
brane channels. In this way, the voltage clamp pre-
vents the membrane potential from changing. Thus, 
the amount of current that must be generated by the 
voltage clamp to keep the membrane potential con-
stant provides a direct measure of the current through 
the voltage-gated channels (Box 10–1). Using the 
voltage-clamp technique, Hodgkin and Huxley were 
able to completely describe the ionic mechanisms 
underlying the action potential.
One advantage of the voltage clamp is that it read-
ily allows the ionic and capacitive components of mem-
brane current to be analyzed separately. As described 
in Chapter 9, the membrane potential Vm is propor-
tional to the charge Qm on the membrane capacitance 
Cm. When Vm is not changing, Qm is constant, and no 
capacitive current (ΔQm/Δt) flows. Capacitive current 
flows only when Vm is changing. Therefore, when the 
membrane potential changes in response to a com-
manded depolarizing step, capacitive current flows 
only at the beginning and end of the step. Because 
the capacitive current is essentially instantaneous, the 
ionic currents that subsequently flow through the volt-
age-gated channels can be analyzed separately.
Measurements of these ionic currents can be used to 
calculate the voltage and time dependence of changes 
in membrane conductance caused by the opening and 
closing of Na+ and K+ channels. This information pro-
vides insights into the properties of these two types of 
channels.
A typical voltage-clamp experiment starts with 
the membrane potential clamped at its resting value. 
When a small (10 mV) depolarizing step is applied, a 
very brief outward current instantaneously discharges 
the membrane capacitance by the amount required for 
a 10 mV depolarization. This capacitive current (Ic) is 
followed by a smaller outward current that persists 
for the duration of the voltage step. This steady ionic 
current flows through the nongated resting ion chan-
nels of the membrane, which we refer to here as leakage 
channels (see Box 9–2). The current through these chan-
nels is called the leakage current, Il, and the total con-
ductance of this population of channels is called the 
leakage conductance (gl). At the end of the step, a brief 
inward capacitive current repolarizes the membrane 
to its initial voltage and the total membrane current 
returns to zero (Figure 10–3A).
If a large depolarizing step is commanded, the 
current record is more complicated. The capacitive 
and leakage currents both increase in amplitude. In 
addition, shortly after the end of the capacitive current 
and the start of the leakage current, an inward (nega-
tive) current develops; it reaches a peak within a few 
milliseconds, declines, and gives way to an outward 
current. This outward current reaches a plateau that is 
maintained for the duration of the voltage step (Figure 
10–3B).
A simple interpretation of these results is that the 
depolarizing voltage step sequentially turns on two 
types of voltage-gated channels, each selective for a 
distinct ion species. One type of channel conducts ions 
that generate a rapidly rising inward current, while 
the other conducts ions that generate a more slowly 
rising outward current. Because these two oppositely 
directed currents partially overlap in time, the most 
difficult task in analyzing voltage-clamp experiments 
is to determine their separate time courses.
Hodgkin and Huxley achieved this separation by 
changing ions in the bathing solution. By replacing Na+ 
with a larger, impermeant cation (choline · H+), they 
eliminated the inward Na+ current. Later the task of 
separating inward and outward currents was made 
easier by the discovery of drugs or toxins that selec-
tively block the different classes of voltage-gated 
channels. Tetrodotoxin, a poison from a certain Pacific 
puffer fish, blocks the voltage-gated Na+ channel with 
a very high potency in the nanomolar range of concen-
tration. (Ingestion of only a few milligrams of tetrodo-
toxin from improperly prepared puffer fish, consumed 
as the Japanese sashimi delicacy fugu, can be fatal.) The 
cation tetraethylammonium (TEA) specifically blocks 
some voltage-gated K+ channels.
When TEA is applied to the axon to block the K+ 
channels, the total membrane current (Im) consists of Ic, 
Il, and INa. The leakage conductance gl is constant; 
it does not vary with Vm or with time. Therefore, the 
leakage current Il can be readily calculated and sub-
tracted from Im, leaving INa and Ic. Because Ic occurs only 
briefly at the beginning and end of the pulse, it is eas-
ily isolated by visual inspection, revealing the pure INa. 


===== Page 3 =====
214    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 10–2  The negative feedback mechanism of the voltage clamp.
The voltage clamp permits the experimenter to “clamp” 
the membrane potential at predetermined levels, pre-
venting changes in membrane current from influencing 
the membrane potential. By controlling the membrane 
potential, one can measure the effect of changes in mem-
brane potential on the membrane conductance of indi-
vidual ion species.
The voltage clamp is connected to a pair of elec-
trodes (one intracellular and one extracellular) used to 
measure the membrane potential and another pair of 
electrodes used to pass current across the membrane 
(Figure 10–2A). Through the use of a negative feedback 
amplifier, the voltage clamp is able to pass the correct 
amount of current across the cell membrane to rap-
idly step the membrane to a constant predetermined 
potential.
Depolarization opens voltage-gated Na+ and K+ 
channels, initiating movement of Na+ and K+ across the 
membrane. This change in membrane current ordinarily 
would change the membrane potential, but the voltage 
clamp maintains the membrane potential at the prede-
termined (commanded) level.
When Na+ channels open in response to a moder-
ate depolarizing voltage step, an inward ionic current 
Box 10–1  Voltage-Clamp Technique
axon core. The negative feedback ensures that the volt-
age output of the amplifier will drive a current across the 
resistance of the current electrode that eliminates any 
difference between Vm and the command potential. To 
accurately measure the current–voltage relationship of the 
cell membrane, the membrane potential must be uniform 
along the entire surface of the axon. This is made possible 
by the highly conductive internal current electrode, which 
short-circuits the axoplasmic resistance, reducing axial 
resistance to near zero (see Chapter 9). This low-resistance 
pathway eliminates all variations in electrical potential 
along the axon core.
A. Membrane potential (Vm) is measured by two elec-
trodes, one intracellular and one in the bath, connected to 
an amplifier. The membrane potential signal is displayed 
on an oscilloscope and also fed into the negative terminal 
of the feedback amplifier. The command potential, which 
is selected by the experimenter and can be of any desired 
amplitude and waveform, is fed into the positive terminal 
of the feedback amplifier. The feedback amplifier subtracts 
the membrane potential from the command potential and 
amplifies any difference between these two signals. The 
voltage output of the amplifier is connected to an internal 
current electrode, a thin wire that runs the length of the 
4. Measure compensatory
current
1. Measure membrane 
potential (Vm)
2. Compare Vm to desired 
(command) potential
3. When Vm and command potential differ, 
inject or withdraw current from the axon
Feedback
ampliﬁer
Command
potential
Membrane
potential
ampliﬁer
Signal
generator
Axon
+–
+–
A


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    215
B. Voltage clamp of a neuronal cell body using the whole-
cell mode of a patch-clamp amplifier. The patch pipette is 
sealed onto the cell and the membrane under the pipette 
is ruptured, providing electrical continuity between the 
inside of the cell and the pipette. An electrode in the 
pipette controls Vm, with an amplifier providing current (I ) 
through a feedback resistor (Rf) to clamp the electrode 
(and therefore the pipette solution and the inside of  
the cell) to the command voltage (Vc), which is applied to 
the other amplifier input. The voltage on the output of the 
amplifier (Vo) is proportional to current flowing through the 
electrode and through the membrane.
develops because Na+ ions are driven through these 
channels by their electrochemical driving force. This 
Na+ influx would normally depolarize the membrane by 
increasing the positive charge on the inside of the mem-
brane and reducing the positive charge on the outside.
The voltage clamp intervenes in this process by 
simultaneously withdrawing positive charges from the 
cell and depositing them in the external solution. By 
generating a current that is equal and opposite to the 
ionic current through the membrane, the voltage-clamp 
circuit automatically prevents the ionic current from 
changing the membrane potential from the commanded 
value. As a result, the net amount of charge separated by 
the membrane does not change, and therefore, no sig-
nificant change in Vm occurs.
The voltage clamp is a negative feedback system, 
a type of system in which the value of the output of the 
system (Vm in this case) is fed back as the input to the 
system and compared to a reference value (the com-
mand signal). Any difference between the command 
signal and the output signal activates a “controller” 
(the feedback amplifier in this case) that automatically 
reduces the difference. Thus, the actual membrane 
potential automatically and precisely follows the com-
mand potential.
For example, assume that an inward Na+ current 
through the voltage-gated Na+ channels ordinarily 
causes the membrane potential to become more positive 
than the command potential. The input to the feedback 
amplifier is equal to (Vcommand – Vm). The amplifier gener-
ates an output voltage equal to this error signal multi-
plied by the gain of the amplifier. Thus, both the input 
and the resulting output voltage at the feedback ampli-
fier will be negative.
This negative output voltage will make the inter-
nal current electrode negative, withdrawing net positive 
charge from the cell through the voltage-clamp circuit. 
As the current flows around the circuit, an equal amount 
of net positive charge will be deposited into the external 
solution through the other current electrode.
Today, most voltage-clamp experiments use a patch-
clamp amplifier. The patch-clamp technique uses a feed-
back amplifier to control the voltage in a saline-filled 
micropipette and measures the current flowing through 
a patch of membrane to which the pipette is sealed. This 
allows the functional properties of single ion channels to 
be analyzed (see Box 8–1 and Figure 10–9).
If the pipette is sealed onto a cell and the patch 
under the membrane is ruptured by a pulse of suction, 
the result is a “whole-cell patch clamp” recording in 
which the intracellular voltage of the cell is controlled 
by the patch-clamp amplifier and the current flowing 
through the entire cell membrane is measured (Figure 
10–2B). Whole-cell patch clamp recording allows voltage-
clamp measurements in small cell bodies of neurons and 
is widely used to study the electrophysiological proper-
ties of neurons in cell culture, in brain slice preparations, 
and, recently, in vivo.
Cell
Patch
pipette
Ampliﬁer
Rf
Vo
Vc
Iout
I
B
+–


===== Page 5 =====
216    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Similarly, IK can be measured when the Na+ channels 
are blocked by tetrodotoxin (Figure 10–3B).
By stepping the membrane through a wide range 
of potentials, Hodgkin and Huxley were able to meas-
ure the Na+ and K+ currents over the entire voltage 
extent of the action potential (Figure 10–4). They found 
that the Na+ and K+ currents vary as a graded func-
tion of the membrane potential. As the membrane 
voltage is made more positive, the outward K+ current 
becomes larger. The inward Na+ current also becomes 
larger with increases in depolarization, up to a certain 
extent. However, as the voltage becomes more and 
more positive, the Na+ current eventually declines in 
amplitude. When the membrane potential is +55 mV, 
the Na+ current is zero. Positive to +55 mV, the Na+ cur-
rent reverses direction and becomes outward.
Hodgkin and Huxley explained this behavior 
by a simple model in which the size of the Na+ and 
K+ currents is determined by two factors. The first 
is the magnitude of the Na+ or K+ conductance, gNa 
or gK, which reflects the number of Na+ or K+ chan-
nels open at any instant (Chapter 9). The second fac-
tor is the electrochemical driving force on Na+ ions 
(Vm − ENa) or K+ ions (Vm − EK). The model is thus 
expressed as:
INa = gNa × (Vm − ENa)
IK = gK × (Vm − EK).
According to this model, the amplitudes of INa and 
IK change as the voltage is made more positive because 
there is an increase in gNa and gK. The conductances 
increase because the opening of the Na+ and K+ chan-
nels is voltage-dependent. The currents also change 
in response to changes in the electrochemical driving 
forces.
Both INa and IK initially increase in amplitude as the 
membrane is made more positive because gNa and gK 
increase steeply with voltage. However, as the mem-
brane potential approaches ENa (+55 mV), INa declines 
because of the decrease in inward driving force, even 
though gNa is large. That is, the positive membrane 
voltage now opposes the influx of Na+ down its chemi-
cal concentration gradient. At +55 mV the chemical 
and electrical driving forces are in balance so there is 
no net INa, even though gNa is quite large. As the mem-
brane is made positive to ENa, the driving force on Na+ 
becomes positive. That is, the electrical driving force 
pushing Na+ out is now greater than the chemical driv-
ing force pulling Na+ in, so INa becomes outward. The 
behavior of IK is simpler; EK is quite negative (−75 mV), 
so in addition to an increase in gK, the outward driv-
ing force on K+ also becomes larger as the membrane 
(mV)
Outward
Current measured 
in presence of TTX
Current measured 
in presence of TEA
–50
Vm
Im
Im
Im
–60
0
Inward
0
0
A  Currents from small depolarization
B  Currents from large depolarization
Total current
K+ and Na+ currents
Ic
Il
Ic
Il
IK
INa
Ic
Time
1 ms
Vm
–60
0
(mV)
Figure 10–3  A voltage-clamp experiment demonstrates the 
sequential activation of voltage-gated sodium and potas-
sium channels.
A. A small depolarization (10 mV) elicits capacitive and leakage 
currents (Ic and Il, respectively), the components of the total 
membrane current (Im).
B. A larger depolarization (60 mV) results in larger capacitive 
and leakage currents, plus a time-dependent inward ionic cur-
rent followed by a time-dependent outward ionic current.
Top: Total (net) current in response to the depolarization. Middle: 
Individual Na+ and K+ currents. Depolarizing the cell in the pres-
ence of tetrodotoxin (TTX), which blocks the Na+ current, or 
in the presence of tetraethylammonium (TEA), which blocks 
the K+ current, reveals the pure K+ and Na+ currents (IK and INa, 
respectively) after subtracting Ic and Il. Bottom: Voltage step.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    217
Figure 10–4  The magnitude and polarity of the sodium and 
potassium membrane currents vary with the amplitude of 
membrane depolarization. Left: With progressive depolari-
zation, the voltage-clamped membrane K+ current increases 
monotonically, because both gK and (Vm – EK), the driving force 
for K+, increase with increasing depolarization. The voltage dur-
ing the depolarization is indicated at left. The direction and mag-
nitude of the chemical (EK) and electrical driving force on K+, as 
well as the net driving force, are given by arrows at the right 
of each trace. (Up arrows = outward force; down arrows = 
inward force.) Right: At first, the Na+ current becomes increas-
ingly inward with greater depolarization due to the increase 
in gNa. However, as the membrane potential approaches ENa 
(+55 mV), the magnitude of the inward Na+ current begins to 
decrease due to the decrease in inward driving force (Vm – ENa). 
Eventually, INa goes to zero when the membrane potential 
reaches ENa. At depolarizations positive to ENa, the sign of  
(Vm – ENa) reverses and INa becomes outward.
–50
–30
–10
+10
+35
ENa +55
+75
Vm
Net Na+
driving
force
Chemical
driving
force
Electrical
driving
force
Chemical
driving
force
Electrical
driving
force
Net K+
driving
force
Na+ currents
K+ currents
is made more positive, thereby increasing the outward 
K+ current.
Voltage-Gated Sodium and Potassium Conductances 
Are Calculated From Their Currents
From the two preceding equations, Hodgkin and Huxley 
were able to calculate gNa and gK by dividing measured 
Na+ and K+ currents by the known Na+ and K+ electro-
chemical driving forces. Their results provided direct 
insight into how membrane voltage controls channel 
opening because the values of gNa and gK reflect the num-
ber of open Na+ and K+ channels (Box 10–2).
Measurements of gNa and gK at various levels of 
membrane potential reveal two functional similarities 
and two differences between the Na+ and K+ channels. 
Both types of channels open in response to depolariza-
tion. Also, as the size of the depolarization increases, 
the extent and rate of opening increase for both types 
of channels. The Na+ and K+ channels differ, however, 
in the rate at which they open and in their responses 
to prolonged depolarization. At all levels of depolari-
zation, the Na+ channels open more rapidly than K+ 
channels (Figure 10–6). When the depolarization is 
maintained for some time, the Na+ channels begin to 
close, leading to a decrease of inward current. The pro-
cess by which Na+ channels close during a prolonged 
depolarization is termed inactivation.
Thus, depolarization causes Na+ channels to switch 
between three different states—resting, activated, or 
inactivated—which represent three different confor-
mations of the Na+ channel protein (see Figure 8–6). 


===== Page 7 =====
218    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 10–5  Equivalent circuit of a voltage-clamped 
neuron. The voltage-gated conductance pathways (gK  
and gNa) are represented by the symbol for a variable  
conductance—a conductor (resistor) with an arrow 
through it. The conductance is variable because of its 
dependence on time and voltage. These conductances are 
in series with batteries representing the chemical gradi-
ents for Na+ and K+. In addition, there are parallel pathways 
for leakage current (gl and El) and capacitive current (Cm). 
Arrows indicate current flow during a depolarizing step 
that has activated gK and gNa.
Membrane conductances can be calculated from voltage-
clamp currents using equations derived from an equiva-
lent circuit (Figure 10–5) that includes the membrane 
capacitance (Cm); the leakage conductance (gl), repre-
senting the conductance of all of the resting (nongated) 
K+, Na+, and Cl− channels (Chapter 9); and gNa and gK, the 
conductances of the voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels.
In the equivalent circuit, the ionic battery of the 
leakage channels, El, is equal to the resting membrane 
potential, and gNa and gK are in series with their appro-
priate ionic batteries.
The current through each class of voltage-gated 
channel can be calculated from a modified version of 
Ohm’s law that takes into account the electrical driving 
force (Vm) and chemical driving forces (ENa or EK) on Na+ 
and K+ (Chapter 9):
IK = gK × (Vm − EK)
INa = gNa × (Vm − ENa).
Rearranging and solving for g gives two equations 
that can be used to compute the conductances of the 
active Na+ and K+ channel populations:
g
I
V
E
(
)
K
K
m
K
=
−
g
I
V
E
(
) .
Na
Na
m
Na
=
−
In these equations, the independent variable Vm is 
set by the experimenter. The dependent variables IK and 
INa can be calculated from the records of voltage-clamp 
experiments (see Figure 10–4). The parameters EK and 
ENa can be determined empirically by finding the values 
of Vm at which IK and INa reverse their polarities, that is, 
their reversal potentials.
Box 10–2  Calculation of Membrane Conductances From Voltage-Clamp Data
gNa
gI
gK
Im
IK
II
INa
–
–
+ +
Cm
Vm
Extracellular side
Voltage
clamp
Cytoplasmic side
ENa
EI
+
–
–
+
EK
–
+
Im
Im
In contrast, squid axon K+ channels do not inactivate; 
they remain open as long as the membrane is depolar-
ized, at least for voltage-clamp depolarizations lasting 
up to tens of milliseconds (Figure 10–6).
In the inactivated state, the Na+ channel cannot 
be opened by further membrane depolarization. The 
inactivation can be reversed only by repolarizing the 
membrane to its negative resting potential, whereupon 
the channel switches to the resting state. This switch 
takes some time.
These variable, time-dependent effects of depo-
larization on gNa are determined by the kinetics of two 
gating mechanisms in Na+ channels. Each Na+ channel 
has an activation gate that is closed while the membrane 
is at the resting potential and opened by depolariza-
tion. An inactivation gate is open at the resting potential 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 10 / Propagated Signaling: The Action Potential    219
and closes after the channel opens in response to depo-
larization. The channel conducts Na+ only for the brief 
period during depolarization when both gates are open.
The Action Potential Can Be Reconstructed From 
the Properties of Sodium and Potassium Channels
Hodgkin and Huxley were able to fit their measure-
ments of membrane conductance to a set of empiri-
cal equations that completely describe the Na+ and K+ 
conductances as a function of membrane potential and 
time. Using these equations and measured values for 
the passive properties of the axon, they computed the 
shape and conduction velocity of the action potential. 
Remarkably, these equations also provided insights 
into the biophysical bases for voltage-gating that were 
confirmed over 50 years later when the structure of 
certain voltage-gated channels was elucidated through 
X-ray crystallography.
The calculated waveform of the action potential 
matched the waveform recorded in the unclamped 
Figure 10–6  The responses of potassium and sodium ion 
channels to prolonged depolarization. Increasing depolariza-
tions elicit graded increases in K+ and Na+ conductance (gNa 
and gK), which reflect the proportional opening of thousands 
of voltage-gated K+ and Na+ channels. The Na+ channels open 
more rapidly than the K+ channels. During a maintained depo-
larization, the Na+ channels close after opening because of the 
closure of an inactivation gate. The K+ channels remain open 
because they lack a fast inactivation process. At very positive 
Vm, the K+ and Na+ conductances approach a maximal value 
because the depolarization is sufficient to open nearly all avail-
able channels.
Vm
gK
gNa
+20 
0 
–20 
–40 
+20
0
–20
–40
–60
+20 
0 
–20   
–40 
Time
1 ms
(mV)
axon almost perfectly. This close agreement indicates 
that the mathematical model developed by Hodgkin 
and Huxley accurately describes the properties of the 
channels that are responsible for generating and prop-
agating the action potential. More than a half-century 
later, the Hodgkin-Huxley model stands as the most 
successful quantitative model in neural science if not 
in all of biology.
According to the model, an action potential 
involves the following sequence of events. Depolari-
zation of the membrane causes Na+ channels to open 
rapidly (an increase in gNa), resulting in an inward Na+ 
current. This current, by discharging the membrane 
capacitance, causes further depolarization, thereby 
opening more Na+ channels, resulting in a further 
increase in inward current. This regenerative process 
drives the membrane potential toward ENa, causing the 
rising phase of the action potential. The depolariza-
tion limits the duration of the action potential in two 
ways: (1) It gradually inactivates the voltage-gated 
Na+ channels, thus reducing gNa, and (2) it opens, with 
some delay, the voltage-gated K+ channels, thereby 
increasing gK. Consequently, the inward Na+ current is 
followed by an outward K+ current that tends to repo-
larize the membrane (Figure 10–7).
Two features of the action potential predicted by 
the Hodgkin-Huxley model are its threshold and all-
or-none behavior. A fraction of a millivolt can be the 
difference between a subthreshold stimulus and a 
stimulus that generates a full-sized action potential. 
–50
0
50
Membrane potential (mV)
Open channels per µm2 of membrane
40
20
0
Action potential
ENa
EK
Na+ conductance (Na+ channels)
K+ conductance (K+ channels)
Figure 10–7  The sequential opening of voltage-gated Na+ 
and K+ channels generates the action potential. One of 
Hodgkin and Huxley’s great achievements was to dissect the 
change in conductance during an action potential into separate 
components attributable to the opening of Na+ and K+ channels. 
The shape of the action potential and the underlying conduct-
ance changes can be calculated from the properties of the 
voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Hille 2001.)


===== Page 9 =====
220    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
This all-or-none phenomenon may seem surprising 
when one considers that Na+ conductance increases 
in a strictly graded manner as depolarization increases 
(Figure 10–6). Each increment of depolarization 
increases the number of voltage-gated Na+ channels 
that open, thereby gradually increasing Na+ current. 
How then can there be a discrete threshold for generat-
ing an action potential?
Although a small subthreshold depolarization 
increases the inward INa, it also increases two outward 
currents, IK and Il, by increasing the electrochemical 
driving forces acting on K+ and Cl−. In addition, the 
depolarization augments K+ conductance by gradu-
ally opening more voltage-gated K+ channels (Figure 
10–6). As the outward K+ and leakage currents increase 
with depolarization, they tend to repolarize the mem-
brane and thereby resist the depolarizing action of 
the Na+ influx. However, because of the high voltage 
sensitivity and more rapid kinetics of activation of the 
Na+ channels, the depolarization eventually reaches 
the point at which the increase in inward INa exceeds 
the increase in outward IK and Il. At this point, there 
is a net inward ionic current. This produces a further 
depolarization, opening even more Na+ channels, so 
that the depolarization becomes regenerative, rapidly 
driving the membrane potential Vm all the way to the 
peak of the action potential. The specific value of Vm at 
which the net ionic current (INa + IK + Il) changes from 
outward to inward, depositing a positive charge on the 
inside of the membrane capacitance, is the threshold.
Early experiments with extracellular stimulation of 
nerve fibers showed that, for a short time after an action 
potential (typically a few milliseconds), it is impossible 
to generate another action potential. This absolute refrac-
tory period is followed by a period when it is possible 
to stimulate another action potential, but only with a 
stimulus larger than what was needed for the first. This 
relative refractory period typically lasts 5 to 10 ms.
The Hodgkin-Huxley analysis provided a mecha-
nistic explanation of two factors underlying the refrac-
tory period. In the immediate aftermath of an action 
potential, it is impossible to evoke another one, even 
with a very strong stimulus, because the Na+ channels 
remain inactivated. After repolarization, Na+ channels 
recover from inactivation and reenter the resting state, 
a transition that takes several milliseconds (Figure 10–8). 
The relative refractory period corresponds to partial 
recovery from inactivation.
The relative refractory period is also influenced by 
a residual increase in K+ conductance that follows the 
action potential. It takes several milliseconds for all of 
the K+ channels that open during the action potential 
to return to their closed state. During this period, when 
the K+ conductance remains somewhat elevated, Vm is 
slightly more negative than its normal resting value, as 
Vm approaches EK (Figure 10–7, Equation 9–4). This afte-
rhyperpolarization and residual increase in gK contribute 
to the increase in depolarizing current required to drive 
Vm to threshold during the relative refractory period.
The Mechanisms of Voltage Gating Have 
Been Inferred From Electrophysiological 
Measurements
The empirical equations derived by Hodgkin and 
Huxley are quite successful in describing how the flow 
of ions through the Na+ and K+ channels generates the 
action potential. However, these equations describe 
the process of excitation in terms of changes in mem-
brane conductance and current. They tell little about 
the mechanisms that activate or inactivate channels in 
response to changes in membrane potential or about 
channel selectivity for specific ions.
We now know that the voltage-dependent con-
ductances described by Hodgkin and Huxley are 
generated by ion channels that open in a voltage- and 
time-dependent manner. Patch-clamp recordings from 
a variety of nerve and muscle cells have provided 
detailed information about the properties of the volt-
age-dependent Na+ channels that generate the action 
potential. Recordings of single voltage-gated Na+ 
channels show that, in response to a depolarizing step, 
each channel opens in an all-or-none fashion, conduct-
ing brief current pulses of constant amplitude but vari-
able duration.
Each channel opening is associated with a current 
of about 1 pA (at voltages near −30 mV), and the open 
state is rapidly terminated by inactivation. Each chan-
nel behaves stochastically, opening after a variable time 
and staying open for a variable time before inactivat-
ing. If the openings of all the channels in a cell mem-
brane in response to a step depolarization are summed 
or the openings of a single channel to multiple trials of 
the same depolarization are summed (Figure 10–9), the 
result is an averaged current with the same time course 
as the macroscopic Na+ current recorded in voltage-
clamp experiments (see Figure 10–4B).
To explain how changes in membrane poten-
tial lead to an increase in Na+ conductance, Hodg-
kin and Huxley deduced from basic thermodynamic 
considerations that a conformational change in some 
membrane component that regulates the conductance 
must move charged particles through the membrane 
electric field. As a result, membrane depolarization 
would exert a force causing the charged particles to 
move, thereby opening the channel. For a channel with 
positively charged mobile particles, the depolarization 


