===== Page 1 =====
60    Part I / Overall Perspective
A  Unipolar cell
C  Pseudo-unipolar cell
B  Bipolar cell
Invertebrate neuron
Ganglion cell of dorsal root
Bipolar cell of retina
Central 
axon
Single bifurcated 
process
Cell body
Peripheral axon
to skin and
muscle
Dendrites
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
D  Three types of multipolar cells
Basal
dendrite
Cell
body
Axon
Motor neuron of spinal cord
Pyramidal cell of hippocampus
Purkinje cell of cerebellum
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
Apical
dendrite
Axon terminals
Dendrites
Axon
Axon
terminals
Cell body
Figure 3–3  Neurons are classified as unipolar, bipolar, or 
multipolar according to the number of processes that origi-
nate from the cell body.
A. Unipolar cells have a single process emanating from the cell. 
Different segments serve as receptive surfaces or releasing 
terminals. Unipolar cells are characteristic of the invertebrate 
nervous system.
B. Bipolar cells have two types of processes that are function-
ally specialized. The dendrite receives electrical signals and the 
axon transmits signals to other cells.
C. Pseudo-unipolar cells, which are variants of bipolar cells, 
carry somatosensory information to the spinal cord. During 
development, the two processes of the embryonic bipolar cell 
fuse and emerge from the cell body as a single process that 
has two functionally distinct segments. Both segments func-
tion as axons; one extends to peripheral skin or muscle, the 
other to the central spinal cord. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Ramón y Cajal 1933.)
D. Multipolar cells have a single axon and many dendrites. 
They are the most common type of neuron in the mammalian 
nervous system. Three examples illustrate the large diversity 
of these cells. Spinal motor neurons innervate skeletal muscle 
fibers. Pyramidal cells have a roughly triangular cell body; den-
drites emerge from both the apex (the apical dendrite) and the 
base (the basal dendrites). Pyramidal cells are found in the hip-
pocampus and throughout the cerebral cortex. Purkinje cells of 
the cerebellum are characterized by a rich and extensive dendritic 
tree that accommodates an enormous number of synaptic 
inputs. (Adapted, with permission, from Ramón y Cajal 1933.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    61
neurons that do not innervate muscle directly but that 
command action indirectly. A useful characterization 
of motor and sensory neurons alike is their temporal 
fidelity to matters outside the nervous system. Their 
activity keeps up with changes in external stimuli and 
dynamical forces exerted by the body musculature. 
Sensory neurons supply the brain with data, whereas 
motor neurons convert ideation into praxis. Together 
they compose our interface with the world.
Interneurons comprise the most numerous func-
tional category and are subdivided into two classes: 
relay and local. Relay or projection interneurons 
have long axons and convey signals over consider-
able distances, from one brain region to another. Local 
interneurons have short axons because they form con-
nections with nearby neurons in local circuits. Since 
almost every neuron can be regarded as an interneu-
ron, the term is often used to distinguish between 
neurons that project to another neuron within a local 
circuit as opposed to neurons that project to a separate 
neural structure. The term is also sometimes used as 
shorthand for an inhibitory neuron, especially in stud-
ies of cortical circuits, but for clarity, the term inhibitory 
interneuron should be used when appropriate.
Each functional classification can be subdivided 
further. Sensory system interneurons can be classified 
according to the type of sensory stimuli to which they 
Figure 3–4  Sensory neurons can be subdivided into function-
ally distinct groups. For example, at least 13 types of retinal gan-
glion cells are distinguished based on the size and shape of their 
dendrites combined with the depth within the retina at which they 
receive their inputs. The inner plexiform layer contains the connec-
tions between interneurons of the retina (bipolar and amacrine 
cells) and the ganglion cells. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Dacey et al. 2003. Copyright © 2003 Elsevier.)
respond; these initial classifications can be broken 
down still further, according to location, density, and 
size as well as patterns of gene expression. Indeed, 
our view of neuronal complexity is rapidly evolving 
due to advances in mRNA sequence analysis that have 
enabled the molecular profiling of individual neurons. 
Such analyses have recently revealed a much greater 
heterogeneity of neuronal types than previously thought 
(Figure 3–4).
Glial Cells Support Nerve Cells
Glial cells greatly outnumber neurons—there are 2 
to 10 times more glia than neurons in the vertebrate 
central nervous system. Although the name for these 
cells derives from the Greek for glue, glia do not com-
monly hold nerve cells together. Rather they surround 
the cell bodies, axons, and dendrites of neurons. Glia 
differ from neurons morphologically; they do not form 
dendrites and axons.
Glia also differ functionally. Although they arise 
from the same embryonic precursor cells, they do not 
have the same membrane properties as neurons and 
thus are not electrically excitable. Hence, they are not 
directly involved in electrical signaling, which is the 
function of nerve cells. Yet they play a role in allow-
ing electrical signals to move quickly along the axons 
Dendritic
ﬁeld size 
and 
complexity
Position of
dendrites
in inner 
plexiform
layer
Ganglion
cell layer
Midget
Parasol
Large sparse
Giant sparse
Monostratiﬁed
Bistratiﬁed
Broad thorny
Narrow thorny
Small
Large


===== Page 3 =====
62    Part I / Overall Perspective
of neurons, and they appear to play an important role 
in guiding connectivity during early development and 
stabilizing new or altered connections between neu-
rons that occur through learning. Over the past decade, 
interest in the diverse functions of glia has accelerated, 
and their characterization has changed from support 
cells to functional partners of neurons (Chapter 7).
Each Nerve Cell Is Part of a Circuit That 
Mediates Specific Behaviors
Every behavior is mediated by specific sets of inter-
connected neurons, and every neuron’s behavioral 
function is determined by its connections with other 
neurons. A simple behavior, the knee-jerk reflex, will 
illustrate this. The reflex is initiated when a transient 
imbalance of the body stretches the quadriceps exten-
sor muscles of the leg. This stretching elicits sensory 
information that is conveyed to motor neurons, which 
in turn send commands to the extensor muscles to con-
tract so that balance is restored.
This reflex is used clinically to test the integrity of 
the nerves as well as the cerebrospinal control of the 
reflex amplitude (or gain). The underlying mechanism 
is important because it maintains normal tone in the 
quadriceps and prevents our knees from buckling when 
we stand or walk. The tendon of the quadriceps femoris, 
an extensor muscle that moves the lower leg, is attached 
to the tibia through the tendon of the patella (kneecap). 
Tapping this tendon just below the patella stretches the 
quadriceps femoris. This stretch initiates reflex contrac-
tion of the quadriceps muscle to produce the familiar 
knee jerk. By increasing the tension of a select group of 
muscles, the stretch reflex changes the position of the 
leg, suddenly extending it outward (Figure 3–5).
The cell bodies of the sensory neurons involved in 
the knee-jerk reflex are clustered near the spinal cord 
in the dorsal root ganglia. They are pseudo-unipolar 
cells; one branch of each cell’s axon runs to the quadri-
ceps muscle at the periphery, while the other runs cen-
trally into the spinal cord. The branch that innervates 
the quadriceps makes contact with stretch-sensitive 
receptors (muscle spindles) and is excited when the 
muscle is stretched. The branch reaching the spinal 
cord forms excitatory connections with the motor neu-
rons that innervate the quadriceps and control its con-
traction. This branch also contacts local interneurons 
that inhibit the motor neurons controlling the oppos-
ing flexor muscles (Figure 3–5). Although these local 
interneurons are not involved in producing the stretch 
reflex itself, they increase the stability of the reflex by 
coordinating the actions of opposing muscle groups. 
Figure 3–5  The knee-jerk reflex is controlled by a simple 
circuit of sensory and motor neurons. Tapping the kneecap 
with a reflex hammer pulls on the tendon of the quadriceps 
femoris, a muscle that extends the lower leg. When the muscle 
stretches in response to the pull of the tendon, information 
regarding this change in the muscle is conveyed to the central 
nervous system by sensory neurons. In the spinal cord, the 
sensory neurons form excitatory synapses with extensor motor 
neurons that contract the quadriceps, the muscle that was 
stretched. The sensory neurons act indirectly, through interneu-
rons, to inhibit flexor motor neurons that would otherwise con-
tract the opposing hamstring muscles. These actions combine 
to produce the reflex behavior. In the drawing, each extensor 
and flexor motor neuron represents a population of many cells.
Quadriceps
(extensor)
Stimulus
Hamstring
(ﬂexor)
Inhibitory
interneuron
Spinal
cord
Extensor
motor
neuron
(activated)
Flexor
motor
neuron
(inhibited)
Sensory
neuron
Muscle
spindle
Thus, the electrical signals that produce the stretch 
reflex carry four kinds of information:
1.	 Sensory information is conveyed to the central 
nervous system (the spinal cord) from muscle.
2.	 Motor commands from the central nervous sys-
tem are issued to the muscles that carry out the 
knee jerk.
3.	 Inhibitory commands are issued to motor neurons 
that innervate opposing muscles.
4.	 Information about local neuronal activity related to 
the knee jerk is sent to higher centers of the central 
nervous system, permitting the brain to coordinate 
different behaviors simultaneously or in series.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    63
Figure 3–6  Diverging and converging neuronal connections 
are a key organizational feature of the brain.
A. In the sensory systems, each receptor neuron usually 
contacts several neurons that represent the second stage of 
processing. At subsequent processing stages, the incoming 
connections diverge even more. This allows sensory informa-
tion from a single site to be distributed more widely in the spi-
nal cord and brain.
B. By contrast, motor neurons are the targets of progressively 
converging connections. With this arrangement, input from 
many presynaptic cells is required to activate the motor neuron.
Figure 3–7  Inhibitory interneurons can produce either feed-
forward or feedback inhibition.
A. Feedforward inhibition enhances the effect of the active 
pathway by suppressing the activity of pathways mediating 
opposing actions. Feedforward inhibition is common in mono-
synaptic reflex systems. For example, in the knee-jerk reflex 
circuit (Figure 3–5) afferent neurons from extensor muscles 
excite not only the extensor motor neurons but also inhibitory 
interneurons that prevent the firing of the motor cells innervat-
ing the opposing flexor muscles.
B. Feedback inhibition is a self-regulating mechanism. Here 
extensor motor neurons act on inhibitory interneurons that in 
turn act on the extensor motor neurons themselves and thus 
reduce their probability of firing. The effect is to dampen activity 
within the stimulated pathway and prevent it from exceeding a 
certain critical level.
In addition, the brain asserts context-dependent 
control of the reflex to adjust its gain. For example, 
when we run, the hamstring muscles flex the knee, 
thereby stretching the quadriceps. The brain and spi-
nal cord suppress the stretch reflex to allow the quadri-
ceps to relax. When these descending pathways are 
disrupted, as in some strokes, the reflex is exaggerated 
and the joint has stiffness.
The stretching of just one muscle, the quadriceps, 
activates several hundred sensory neurons, each of 
which makes direct contact with 45 to 50 motor neu-
rons. This pattern of connection, in which one neu-
ron activates many target cells, is called divergence  
(Figure 3–6A). It is especially common in the input 
stages of the nervous system; by distributing its signals 
to many target cells, a single neuron can exert wide and 
diverse influence. Conversely, a single motor cell in 
the knee-jerk circuit receives 200 to 450 input contacts 
from approximately 130 sensory cells. This pattern 
of connection is called convergence (Figure 3–6B). It is 
common at the output stages of the nervous system; a 
target motor cell that receives information from many 
sensory neurons is able to integrate information from 
many sources. Each sensory neuron input produces 
relatively weak excitation, so convergence also ensures 
that a motor neuron is activated only when a sufficient 
number of sensory neurons are activated together.
A  Divergence
B  Convergence
A stretch reflex such as the knee-jerk reflex is a 
simple behavior produced by two classes of neurons 
connecting at excitatory synapses. But not all impor-
tant signals in the brain are excitatory. Many neurons 
produce inhibitory signals that reduce the likelihood 
of firing. Even in the simple knee-jerk reflex, the sen-
sory neurons make both excitatory and inhibitory 
connections. Excitatory connections in the leg’s exten-
sor muscles cause these muscles to contract, whereas 
connections with inhibitory interneurons prevent the 
antagonist flexor muscles from contracting. This fea-
ture of the circuit is an example of feedforward inhibi-
tion (Figure 3–7A). In the knee-jerk reflex, feedforward 
+
+
A  Feedforward inhibition
Afferent neurons
innervating
extensor muscles
Extensor
motor neuron
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
Afferent neurons
innervating
ﬂexor muscles
Inhibitory
interneuron
Flexor motor neuron
Flexors
Extensors
Extensors
B  Feedback inhibition
Afferent neuron
innervating
extensor muscles
Extensor
motor neuron
Inhibitory
interneuron


===== Page 5 =====
64    Part I / Overall Perspective
inhibition is reciprocal, ensuring that the flexor and 
extensor pathways always inhibit each other so that 
only muscles appropriate for the movement and not 
those opposed to it are recruited.
Some circuits provide feedback inhibition. For exam-
ple, a motor neuron may have excitatory connections 
with both a muscle and an inhibitory interneuron that 
itself forms a connection with the motor neuron. When 
the inhibitory interneuron is excited by the motor neu-
ron, the interneuron is able to limit the ability of the 
motor neuron to excite the muscle (Figure 3–7B). We 
will encounter many examples of feedforward and 
feedback inhibition when we examine more complex 
behaviors in later chapters.
Signaling Is Organized in the Same Way in  
All Nerve Cells
To produce a behavior, a stretch reflex for example, 
each participating sensory and motor nerve cell must 
generate four different signals in sequence, each at a 
different site within the cell. Despite variations in cell 
size and shape, transmitter biochemistry, or behavio-
ral function, almost all neurons can be described by 
a model neuron that has four functional components 
Figure 3–8  Most neurons have four functional regions in 
which different types of signals are generated. Thus, the 
functional organization of most neurons, regardless of type, 
can be represented schematically by a model neuron. This 
model neuron is the physiological expression of Ramón y 
Cajal’s principle of dynamic polarization. The input, integrative, 
and conductive signals are all electrical and integral to the cell, 
whereas the output signal is a chemical substance ejected by 
the cell into the synaptic cleft. Not all neurons share all of these 
features; for example, some local interneurons lack a conduc-
tive component.
Region:
Integrative
Conductive
Output
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
Local
interneuron
Projection
interneuron
Neuroendocrine
cell
Muscle
Central
neuron
Central
neuron
Central
neuron
Model
neuron
Capillary
Input
that generate the four types of signals: a receptive 
component for producing graded input signals, a 
summing or integrative component that produces 
a trigger signal, a conducting long-range signaling 
component that produces all-or-none conducting sig-
nals, and a synaptic component that produces out-
put signals to the next neuron in line or to muscle or 
gland cells (Figure 3–8).
The different types of signals generated in a neu-
ron are determined in part by the electrical properties 
of the cell membrane. Every cell, including a neuron, 
maintains a certain difference in the electrical potential 
on either side of the plasma membrane when the cell 
is at rest. This is called the resting membrane potential. 
In a typical resting neuron, the voltage of the inside of 
the cell is about 65 mV more negative than the voltage 
outside the cell. Because the voltage outside the mem-
brane is defined as zero, we say the resting membrane 
potential is –65 mV. The resting potential in different 
nerve cells ranges from –40 to –80 mV; in muscle cells, 
it is greater still, about –90 mV. As described in detail 
in Chapter 9, the resting membrane potential results 
from two factors: the unequal distribution of electri-
cally charged ions, in particular the positively charged 
Na+ and K+ ions, and the selective permeability of the 
membrane.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    65
The unequal distribution of positively charged 
ions on either side of the cell membrane is maintained 
by two main mechanisms. Intracellular Na+ and K+ 
concentrations are largely controlled by a membrane 
protein that actively pumps Na+ out of the cell and K+ 
back into it. This Na+-K+ pump, about which we shall 
learn more in Chapter 9, keeps the Na+ concentration 
in the cell low (about one-tenth the concentration out-
side the cell) and the K+ concentration high (about 20 
times the concentration outside). The extracellular con-
centrations of Na+ and K+ are maintained by the kid-
neys and the astroglial cells, also known as astrocytes.
The otherwise impermeable cell membrane con-
tains proteins that form pores called ion channels. The 
channels that are active when the cell is at rest are 
highly permeable to K+ but considerably less perme-
able to Na+. The K+ ions tend to leak out of these open 
channels, down the ion’s concentration gradient. As K+ 
ions exit the cell, they leave behind a cloud of unneu-
tralized negative charge on the inner surface of the 
membrane, so that the net charge inside the membrane 
is more negative than that outside. With this state of 
affairs, the membrane potential is typically maintained 
at around –65 mV relative to outside of the neuron, and 
the neuron is said to be at rest.
The resting state is perturbed when the cell begins 
to take up Na+ (or Ca2+), which are at a higher concen-
tration outside the cell. The inward movement of these 
positively charged ions (inward current) partially neu-
tralizes the negative voltage inside the cell. We will say 
more about these events below. What happens next, 
however, holds the key to understanding what it is 
about neurons that makes signaling suitable for con-
veying information.
A cell, such as nerve and muscle, is said to be excit-
able when its membrane potential can be quickly and 
significantly altered. In many neurons, a 10-mV change 
in membrane potential (from –65 to –55 mV) makes 
the membrane much more permeable to Na+ than to 
K+. The resultant influx of Na+ further neutralizes the 
negative charge inside the cell, leading to even more 
permeability to Na+. The result is a brief and explosive 
change in membrane potential to +40 mV, the action 
potential. This potential is actively conducted down 
the cell’s axon to the axon’s terminal, where it initiates 
an elaborate chemical interaction with postsynaptic 
neurons or muscle cells. Since the action potential is 
actively propagated, its amplitude does not dimin-
ish by the time it reaches the axon terminal. An action 
potential typically lasts approximately 1 ms, after 
which the membrane returns to its resting state, with 
its normal separation of charges and higher permeabil-
ity to K+ than to Na+.
The mechanisms underlying the resting potential 
and action potential are discussed in detail in Chapters 9 
and 10. In addition to the long-distance signals rep-
resented by the action potential, nerve cells also pro-
duce local signals—receptor potentials and synaptic 
potentials—that are not actively propagated and that 
typically decay within just a few millimeters (see next 
section).
Changes in membrane potential that generate 
long-range and local signals can be either a decrease 
or an increase from the resting potential. That is, the 
resting membrane potential is the baseline from which 
all signaling occurs. A reduction in membrane poten-
tial, called depolarization, enhances a cell’s ability to 
generate an action potential and is thus excitatory. In 
contrast, an increase in membrane potential, called 
hyperpolarization, makes a cell less likely to generate an 
action potential and is therefore inhibitory.
The Input Component Produces Graded  
Local Signals
In most neurons at rest, no current flows from one part 
of the cell to another, so the resting potential is the same 
throughout. In sensory neurons, current flow is typi-
cally initiated by a physical stimulus, which activates 
specialized receptor proteins at the neuron’s recep-
tive surface. In our example of the knee-jerk reflex, 
stretching of the muscle activates specific ion channels 
that open in response to stretch of the sensory neuron 
membrane, as we shall learn in Chapter 18. The open-
ing of these channels when the cell is stretched permits 
the rapid influx of Na+ ions into the sensory cell. This 
ionic current changes the membrane potential, produc-
ing a local signal called the receptor potential.
The amplitude and duration of a receptor poten-
tial depend on the intensity of the muscle stretch: The 
larger or longer-lasting the stretch, the larger or longer-
lasting is the resulting receptor potential (Figure 3–9A). 
That is, receptor potentials are graded, unlike the all-
or-none action potential. Most receptor potentials are 
depolarizing (excitatory); hyperpolarizing (inhibitory) 
receptor potentials are found in the retina.
The receptor potential is the first representation of 
stretch to be coded in the nervous system. However, 
because this depolarization spreads passively from the 
stretch receptor, it does not travel far. The distance is 
longer if the diameter of the axon is bigger, shorter if 
the diameter is smaller. Also, the distance is shorter if 
current can pass easily through the membrane, and 
longer if the membrane is insulated by myelin. The 
receptor potential from the stretch receptor therefore 
travels only 1 to 2 mm. In fact, just 1 mm away, the 


===== Page 7 =====
66    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 3–9  Each of the neuron’s four signaling components 
produces a characteristic signal. The figure shows a sensory 
neuron activated by stretching of a muscle, which the neuron 
senses through a specialized receptor, the muscle spindle.
A. The input signal, called a receptor potential, is graded in 
amplitude and duration, proportional to the amplitude and dura-
tion of the stimulus.
B. The trigger zone sums the depolarization generated by the 
receptor potential. An action potential is generated only if  
the receptor potential exceeds a certain voltage threshold. 
Once this threshold is surpassed, any further increase in ampli-
tude of the receptor potential can only increase the frequency 
with which the action potentials are generated, because action 
potentials have a constant amplitude. The duration of the 
receptor potential determines the duration of the train of action 
potentials. Thus, the graded amplitude and duration of the 
receptor potential are translated into a frequency code in the 
action potentials generated at the trigger zone. All action poten-
tials produced are propagated faithfully along the axon.
C. Action potentials are all-or-none. Because all action potentials 
have a similar amplitude and duration, the frequency and dura-
tion of firing encodes the information carried by the signal.
D. When the action potential reaches the synaptic terminal, 
it initiates the release of a neurotransmitter, the chemical sub-
stance that serves as the output signal. The frequency of action 
potentials in the presynaptic cell determines how much neuro-
transmitter is released by the cell.
Time (s)
0
5
10
0
5
10
0
5
10
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
Spike threshold
A  Receptor potential
B  Trigger action
C  Action potential
D  Output signal
 
(transmitter release)
Stimulus (stretch)
Muscle
spindle
Myelinated
axon
Sensory neuron
cell body
Synaptic
terminal
Trigger
zone
Membrane potential (mV)
Amplitude
Duration
Spike threshold
Stretch
amplitude of the signal is only about one-third what it 
was at the site of generation. To be carried successfully 
to the spinal cord, the local signal must be amplified—
it must generate an action potential. In the knee-jerk 
reflex, if the receptor potential in the sensory neuron 
reaches the first node of Ranvier in the axon and is large 
enough, it will trigger an action potential (Figure 3–9B), 
which then propagates without failure to the axon ter-
minals in the spinal cord (Figure 3–9C). At the synapse 
between the sensory neuron and a motor neuron, the 
action potential produces a chain of events that results 
in an input signal to the motor neuron.
In the knee-jerk reflex, the action potential in the 
presynaptic terminal of the sensory neuron initiates the 
release of a chemical substance, or neurotransmitter, into 
the synaptic cleft (Figure 3–9D). After diffusing across 
the cleft, the transmitter binds to receptor proteins in the 
postsynaptic membrane of the motor neuron, thereby 
directly or indirectly opening ion channels. The ensuing 
flow of current briefly alters the membrane potential of 
the motor cell, a change called the synaptic potential.
Like the receptor potential, the synaptic poten-
tial is graded; its amplitude depends on how much 
transmitter is released. In the same cell, the synaptic 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    67
potential can be either depolarizing or hyperpolariz-
ing depending on the type of receptor molecule that 
is activated. Synaptic potentials, like receptor poten-
tials, spread passively. Thus, the change in potential 
will remain local unless the signal reaches beyond 
the axon’s initial segment where it can give rise to an 
action potential. Some dendrites are not entirely pas-
sive but contain specializations that boost the synaptic 
potential, thereby increasing its efficacy to produce an 
action potential (Chapter 13). The features of receptor 
and synaptic potentials are summarized in Table 3–1.
The Trigger Zone Makes the Decision to Generate 
an Action Potential
Sherrington first pointed out that the function of the 
nervous system is to weigh the consequences of differ-
ent types of information and then decide on appropri-
ate responses. This integrative function of the nervous 
system is clearly seen in events at the trigger zone of 
the neuron, the initial segment of the axon.
Action potentials are generated by a sudden influx 
of Na+ through channels in the cell membrane that 
open and close in response to changes in membrane 
potential. When an input signal (a receptor potential or 
synaptic potential) depolarizes an area of membrane, 
the local change in membrane potential opens local 
Na+ channels that allow Na+ to flow down its concen-
tration gradient, from outside the cell where the Na+ 
concentration is high to inside where it is low.
Because the initial segment of the axon has the 
highest density of voltage-sensitive Na+ channels and 
therefore the lowest threshold for generating an action 
potential, an input signal spreading passively along 
the cell membrane is more likely to give rise to an 
action potential at the initial segment of the axon than 
at other sites in the cell. This part of the axon is there-
fore known as the trigger zone. It is here that the activity 
of all receptor (or synaptic) potentials is summed and 
Table 3–1  Comparison of Local (Passive) and Propagated Signals
Signal type
Amplitude (mV) Duration
Summation
Effect of signal
Type of propagation
Local (passive) signals
 
 
 
 
 
  Receptor potentials
Small (0.1–10)
Brief (5–100 ms)
Graded
Hyperpolarizing  
or depolarizing
Passive
  Synaptic potentials
Small (0.1–10)
Brief to long  
(5 ms–20 min)
Graded
Hyperpolarizing  
or depolarizing
Passive
Propagated (active) signals
 
 
 
 
 
  Action potentials
Large (70–110)
Brief (1–10 ms)
All-or-none
Depolarizing
Active
where, if the sum of the input signals reaches thresh-
old, the neuron generates an action potential.
The Conductive Component Propagates an All-or-
None Action Potential
The action potential is all-or-none: Stimuli below the 
threshold do not produce a signal, but stimuli above 
the threshold all produce signals of the same amplitude. 
Regardless of variation in intensity or duration of 
stimuli, the amplitude and duration of each action 
potential are pretty much the same, and this holds for 
each regenerated action potential at a node of Ranvier 
along a myelinated axon. In addition, unlike receptor 
and synaptic potentials, which spread passively and 
decrease in amplitude, the action potential, as we have 
seen, does not decay as it travels along the axon to its 
target—a distance that can be as great as 1 m—because 
it is periodically regenerated. This conducted signal can 
travel at rates as fast as 100 m/s. Indeed, the remark-
able feature of action potentials is that they are highly 
stereotyped, varying only subtly (but in some cases 
importantly) from one nerve cell to another. This fea-
ture was demonstrated in the 1920s by Edgar Adrian, 
one of the first to study the nervous system at the cellu-
lar level. Adrian found that all action potentials have a 
similar shape or waveform (see Figure 3–2). The action 
potentials carried into the nervous system by a sensory 
axon often are indistinguishable from those carried out 
of the nervous system to the muscles by a motor axon.
Only two features of the conducting signal convey 
information: the number of action potentials and the 
time intervals between them (Figure 3–9C). As Adrian 
put it in 1928, summarizing his work on sensory fibers: 
“all impulses are very much alike, whether the message 
is destined to arouse the sensation of light, of touch, or 
of pain; if they are crowded together the sensation is 
intense, if they are separated by long intervals the sensa-
tion is correspondingly feeble.” Thus, what determines 


===== Page 9 =====
68    Part I / Overall Perspective
the intensity of sensation or speed of movement is the 
frequency of the action potentials. Likewise, the dura-
tion of a sensation or movement is determined by the 
period over which action potentials are generated.
In addition to the frequency of the action potentials, 
the pattern of action potentials also conveys important 
information. For example, some neurons are spon-
taneously active in the absence of stimulation. Some 
spontaneously active nerve cells (beating neurons) fire 
action potentials regularly; others (bursting neurons) 
fire in brief bursts of action potentials. These diverse 
cells respond differently to the same excitatory synaptic 
input. An excitatory synaptic potential may initiate one 
or more action potentials in a cell that is not spontane-
ously active, whereas that same input to spontaneously 
active cells will simply increase the existing rate of firing.
An even more dramatic difference is seen when 
the input signal is inhibitory. Inhibitory inputs have 
little information value in a silent cell. By contrast, in 
spontaneously active cells, inhibition can have a pow-
erful sculpting role. By establishing periods of silence 
in otherwise ongoing activity, inhibition can produce a 
complex pattern of alternating firing and silence where 
none existed. Such subtle differences in firing patterns 
may have important functional consequences for the 
information transfer between neurons. Mathemati-
cal modelers of neuronal networks have attempted 
to delineate neural codes in which information is also 
carried by the fine-grained pattern of firing—the exact 
timing of each action potential.
If signals are stereotyped and reflect only the most 
elementary properties of the stimulus, how can they 
carry the rich variety of information needed for complex 
behavior? How is a message that carries visual informa-
tion about a bee distinguished from one that carries pain 
information about the bee’s sting, and how are these 
sensory signals distinguished from motor signals for 
voluntary movement? The answer is simple and yet is 
one of the most important organizational principles of 
the nervous system: Interconnected neurons form ana-
tomically and functionally distinct pathways—labeled 
lines—and it is these pathways of connected neurons, 
these labeled lines, not individual neurons, that convey 
information. The neural pathways activated by receptor 
cells in the retina that respond to light are completely 
distinct from the pathways activated by sensory cells in 
the skin that respond to touch.
The Output Component Releases Neurotransmitter
When an action potential reaches a neuron’s terminal, 
it stimulates the release of chemical substances from 
the cell. These substances, called neurotransmitters, can be 
small organic molecules, such as l-glutamate and ace-
tylcholine, or peptides like substance P or LHRH (lute-
inizing hormone–releasing hormone).
Neurotransmitter molecules are held in subcellu-
lar organelles called synaptic vesicles, which accumulate 
in the terminals of the axon at specialized release sites 
called active zones. To eject their transmitter substance 
into the synaptic cleft, the vesicles move up to and fuse 
with the neuron’s plasma membrane, then burst open 
to release the transmitter into the synaptic cleft (the 
extracellular space between the pre- and postsynaptic 
cell) by a process known as exocytosis. The molecular 
machinery of neurotransmitter release is described in 
Chapters 14 and 15.
The released neurotransmitter molecules are 
the neuron’s output signal. The output signal is 
thus graded according to the amount of transmit-
ter released, which is determined by the number and 
frequency of the action potentials that reach the pre-
synaptic terminals (Figure 3–9C,D). After release, the 
transmitter molecules diffuse across the synaptic cleft 
and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. This 
binding causes the postsynaptic cell to generate a syn-
aptic potential. Whether the synaptic potential has an 
excitatory or inhibitory effect depends on the type of 
receptor in the postsynaptic cell, not on the particular 
chemical neurotransmitter. The same transmitter sub-
stance can have different effects at different receptors.
The Transformation of the Neural Signal From 
Sensory to Motor Is Illustrated by the  
Stretch-Reflex Pathway
As we have seen, the properties of a signal are trans-
formed as the signal moves from one component of a 
neuron to another or between neurons. In the stretch 
reflex, when a muscle is stretched, the amplitude and 
duration of the stimulus are reflected in the amplitude 
and duration of the receptor potential generated in the 
sensory neuron (Figure 3–10A). If the receptor poten-
tial exceeds the threshold for an action potential in 
that cell, the graded signal is transformed at the trig-
ger zone into an action potential. Although individual 
action potentials are all-or-none signals, the more the 
receptor potential exceeds threshold, the greater the 
depolarization and consequently the greater the fre-
quency of action potentials in the axon. The duration 
of the input signal also determines the duration of the 
train of action potentials.
The information encoded by the frequency and 
duration of firing is faithfully conveyed along the 
axon to its terminals, where the firing of action poten-
tials determines the amount of transmitter released. 


