===== Page 1 =====
852    Part V / Movement
and across movement-related cortical areas, with 
stronger correlations to causal movement kinetics in 
M1 and to higher-order motor parameters in premotor 
and parietal cortex. However, these experimental find-
ings have not yet led to a single unifying hypothesis 
about how cortical motor circuits control voluntary 
movements. Part of this uncertainty may result from 
inadequacies in experimental task design.
Representational motor-control models have inter-
preted these complex results as evidence of the trans-
formations between different levels of representation 
of intended movements performed by neural popula-
tions distributed across different cortical motor areas. 
In contrast, nonrepresentational motor-control models 
such as optimal feedback control argue that these same 
results can only be interpreted as evidence of when 
and where neural correlates of different motor output 
parameters emerge in the dynamical activity distrib-
uted across cortical motor areas but do not shed much 
insight into the underlying neural computations. This 
illustrates the experimental challenges still confronting 
researchers as they try to reverse engineer the cortical 
motor circuitry to reveal its internal computational 
organization.
Sensory Feedback Is Transmitted Rapidly to the 
Primary Motor Cortex and Other Cortical Regions
Postcentral and posterior parietal cortex provide much of 
the sensory information related to the position and motion 
of the body and the location of spatial goals that is impor-
tant in voluntary motor control, although the cerebellum 
is likely another important source (Chapter 37).
The type of afferent information transmitted to 
M1 differs between the proximal and distal portions 
of the limb. Afferent input from cutaneous and muscle 
sensory neurons is equally prevalent for hand-related 
neurons, reflecting the importance for both sources of 
sensory feedback when grasping and manipulating 
objects with the hand. Muscle afferents provide the 
major source of feedback from the proximal limb. Infor-
mation from muscles is more prevalent in the rostral 
M1, whereas cutaneous input is more common in the 
caudal M1. Muscle afferent feedback to M1 is surpris-
ingly rapid as it takes as little as 20 ms for M1 neurons 
to respond following a mechanical disturbance to the 
limb. Analogous to reaching, neural activity is broadly 
tuned to the direction of the mechanical disturbance.
Sensory feedback supports our ability to make 
rapid goal-directed corrections for motor errors that 
arise during movement planning and execution or are 
caused by unexpected disturbances of the limb. When 
a perturbing mechanical load is applied to the limb, the 
motor system generates a multipeaked compensatory 
electromyographic response, beginning with a short-
latency stretch response (20–40 ms after the perturba-
tion), followed by a long-latency response (50–100 ms) 
and then a so-called “voluntary” response (≥100 ms). 
The short latency of the initial response indicates that 
it is generated at the spinal level. The response is rela-
tively small and stereotyped, and its intensity scales 
with the magnitude of the applied load. In contrast, 
motor corrections beginning in the long-latency epoch 
(50–100 ms) are modulated by a broad range of factors 
necessary to attain a behavioral goal, including the 
physics of the limb and environment, the presence of 
obstacles in the environment, the urgency of the goal, 
and properties of the target, including alternate goals. 
These context-dependent features suggest the long-
latency feedback epoch is an adaptive process in which 
the control policy (ie, feedback gains) is adjusted based 
on the behavioral goal, as predicted by the optimal 
feedback control model.
The ability of the motor system to rapidly gener-
ate these goal-directed long-latency motor responses is 
supported by a transcortical feedback pathway. Neural 
activity across frontoparietal circuits responds rapidly 
to mechanical disturbances to a limb, and the pattern 
of activity across the cortex depends on the behavio-
ral context. Perturbation-related activity is observed in 
all cortical regions beginning at approximately 20 ms 
after the disturbance even if the monkey is distracted 
by watching a movie and does not have to respond to 
the disturbance (Figure 34–23A,B). If the monkey is 
actively maintaining its hand at a spatial goal, there 
is an immediate increase in the neural response in 
parietal area PE following the disturbance, followed 
shortly thereafter by changes in activity in other corti-
cal regions (Figure 34–23A,B). If the disturbance is a 
cue that instructs the monkey to move to another spa-
tial target, then M1 activity reflects the need for a more 
vigorous response if the disturbance knocks the hand 
away from the target compared to knocking the hand 
into the target (Figure 34–23C). In contrast, perturba-
tion-related activity in PE remains similar regardless 
of target location.
The Primary Motor Cortex Is Dynamic and 
Adaptable
One of the most remarkable properties of the brain 
is the adaptability of its circuitry to changes in the 
environment—the capacity to learn from experience 
and to store the acquired knowledge as memories. 
When human subjects practice a motor skill, perfor-
mance improves.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    853
Figure 34–23  Changes in behavioral goals alter rapid 
sensory feedback to parietal and frontal motor cortices.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Omrani et al. 2016. Part 
A photo is from the film American Pie and is reproduced, with 
permission, from Universal Studios. © 1999, Universal Pictures, 
All Rights Reserved.)
A. In the experiment described here, the responses of cortical 
regions to mechanical loads randomly applied to the arm are 
compared. In the left panel, motor corrections return the hand 
to the spatial goal following the disturbance (green hand trajec-
tory). In the middle panel, the monkey watches a movie and 
does not have to respond to the disturbance, leading to the hand 
remaining to the right following the disturbance (red hand tra-
jectory). In the right panel, the monkey places its hand at a cen-
tral start target, and one of two other targets is also presented. 
The disturbance applied to the limb is a cue for the monkey to 
move to this second target with its position being either in the 
direction of the disturbance (cyan “in target” trajectory) or away 
from the disturbance (blue “out target” trajectory).
B. Left: Response of a neuron in PE and in M1 when a 
mechanical load was applied to the limb and the monkey had to 
counter the load and return the hand to a spatial target (green) 
or was not required to respond to the disturbance (red). Right: 
Population signals in each cortical region in response to pertur-
bations. Note how all cortical areas show an increase in activity 
approximately 20 ms after the applied load. Arrows denote 
when activity was different when the monkey had to respond 
to the disturbance (green curve) as compared to not being 
required to respond to the disturbance (red curve). Note that 
PE is the first to show a difference in activity between the two 
conditions. Other cortical areas show changes at 40 ms or later. 
A2 is a subregion of S-I. (For B and C: Vertical scale bars, 20/
spikes/s); Activity between 60–250 ms (thick horizontal line) 
compressed for visualization purposes.)
C. Left: Responses of single neurons in PE and M1 when a 
mechanical load was a cue and instructed the monkey to move 
to another target. The disturbance either pushed the hand 
toward the target (cyan) or away from it (blue). Right: Popula-
tion signals based on perturbation-related activity in each corti-
cal region for the “in target” and “out target” conditions. The 
initial responses are similar for both “in target” and “out target” 
disturbances across all cortical areas, and arrows denote when 
there is a difference in activity between conditions. M1 is the 
first to display an increase in activity for the “out target” distur-
bance just prior to changes in muscle activity moving the hand 
to the spatial target.
A  Behavioral goals
B  Neuronal responses to countering
the load and no response required
C  Neuronal responses to changing targets
2 cm
Counter the load
No response required
Change targets
In target
Out target
Center
target
0
100
200
0
50
100
Neural activity (sp/s)
Time (ms)
0
40
–40
250
80
Time (ms)
M1
M1
PMd
S-1
A2
PE
0
50
100
PE
Load
on
Load
on
0
100
200
0
50
100
150
Neural activity (sp/s)
Time (ms)
0
–40
250
60
Time (ms)
M1
M1
PMd
S-1
A2
PE
0
50
100
PE
Perturbation
Load
on


===== Page 3 =====
854    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–24  Learning a motor skill changes the organization 
of the M1 motor map. (Reproduced, with permission, from Nudo 
et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 Society for Neuroscience.)
A. Motor maps for the hand in a monkey before and after 
training on retrieval of treats from a small well. Before train-
ing, areas of the motor map that generate index finger 
and wrist movements occupy less than half of a monkey’s 
motor map. After training, the area from which the trained 
movements can be evoked by intracortical microstimulation 
expands substantially. The area of the map from which one 
could elicit individuated movements such as finger extension 
and flexion has expanded considerably, while the areas con-
trolling wrist abduction, which this monkey used less in the 
new skill, became less prominent. (Abbreviations: M, medial; 
R, rostral.)
B. The areas of the motor output map parallel the level of 
performance (number of successful pellet retrievals) during 
acquisition of the motor skill and extinction (due to lack of 
practice). Two areas were tested: a “dual response” area (left 
plot), from which any combination of finger and wrist motions 
could be evoked, and an area from which the specific combina-
tion of finger flexion and wrist extension could be evoked (right 
plot). Both areas increased as the monkey’s skill improved with 
practice and decreased as the monkey’s skill was extinguished 
through lack of practice. These data are from a different mon-
key than the one in part A but trained for same task.
Motor experience can also modify the motor map. 
In monkeys trained to use precise movements of the 
thumb, index finger, and wrist to extract treats from 
a small well, the area of the motor map in which 
intracortical microstimulation (ICMS) could evoke 
R
M
A
B  
0
0
5
10
15
20
0
10
20
30             
Number of retrievals
Number of retrievals
Dual response area (%)
Finger ﬂex + wrist ext area (%)
Baseline
Training I
Training II
Extinction
Reacquisition
Baseline
Training I
Training II
Extinction
Reacquisition
Number of retrievals
Dual response area
Pre-training
Post-training
Number of retrievals
Finger ﬂex + wrist ext area
Finger extension
Finger ﬂexion
Wrist abduction
Other distal ﬂexion      
% total
30
20
10
0
Finger
ext
Finger 
ﬂex
Wrist 
abd
Pre
Pre
Pre
Post
Post
Post
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
movements at these joints was larger than before train-
ing (Figure 34–24). If a monkey did not practice the task 
for a lengthy period, its skill level decreased, as did 
the cortical area from which the trained movements 
could be elicited by ICMS. Similar modifications of the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    855
cortical representation of practiced actions in humans 
have been demonstrated by functional imaging and 
transcranial magnetic stimulation.
At least some of the processes contributing to these 
changes to the motor map are local to M1 itself. One of 
the mechanisms contributing to the cortical reorganiza-
tion underlying improved reach-to-grasp performance 
in rodents involves changes in synaptic strength simi-
lar to long-term potentiation and depression within 
the local horizontal connections linking different parts 
of the arm motor map. It has been shown that spike-
triggered ICMS could cause specific alterations to the 
M1 motor output map even without specific training. 
For instance, one study first identified two different 
cortical sites (A and B) that caused contractions of dif-
ferent muscles (muscle A and muscle B, respectively) 
when electrically stimulated. They then recorded the 
activity of a neuron at site A; whenever that neuron 
fired, they stimulated site B. Within a day or two of this 
ICMS conditioning at site B, electrical stimulation of 
site A was able to cause simultaneous contractions of 
both muscles A and B. The change likely resulted from 
a spike-timing dependent increase in synaptic strength 
that was limited to the horizontal cortical projection 
from site A to site B. Electromyographic responses elic-
ited by ICMS at a third site that did not receive similar 
conditioning did not change, confirming that the effect 
was not generalized.
Motor adaptation to visual or mechanical distur-
bances has been studied extensively in human sub-
jects (Chapter 30). Neural-recording studies have 
demonstrated that these alterations lead to changes 
in the activity of M1 neurons in monkeys as the ani-
mals adapt to the perturbations. For instance, when 
monkeys make reaching movements in a predictable 
external force field that pushes on the arm in a direc-
tion perpendicular to the direction of movement, their 
initially curved reach trajectories get straighter. As this 
adaptation evolves, large increases gradually arise in 
the activity of M1 cells whose preferred directional 
tuning is opposite to the applied force field. The mag-
nitude of such adaptation-dependent changes in activ-
ity diminishes progressively as the angle between the 
force direction and cell preferred direction increases, 
following a cosine-like function. This shows that the 
adaptive changes were specific to the neurons that 
would make the greatest contribution to compensate 
for the external force field.
Another example of selective changes in M1 activ-
ity during motor learning comes from a visuomo-
tor learning study in which visual feedback from a 
computer monitor is rotated 90° clockwise such that 
movements of a monkey’s arm to the right result in 
downward movement of the cursor. Initially, the monkeys 
make arm movements in the original direction aimed 
at the visual target location, with corrections made 
online after movement onset. However, with practice, 
the monkeys begin to move in a new direction rotated 
counterclockwise to the visual target so that the cursor 
moves directly to the target. When training occurs for 
only one direction, learning generalizes poorly to other 
directions, suggesting that the adaptive changes occur 
only in neurons that evoke the adapted movement. 
The tuning curves of neurons with preferred directions 
near the learned direction were altered during train-
ing, whereas neurons with other preferred directions 
were not affected by the training. This confirmed that 
the adaptation was local, consistent with the findings 
of the force-field adaptation study, and explained why 
adaptation to the visuomotor rotation in one direction 
generalized poorly to other directions.
Motor-error signals in the precentral cortex also 
play an important role in trial-by-trial motor adapta-
tion based on feedback learning. In one study with 
monkeys, an adjustable prism was used to displace 
the apparent location of the reach target in the envi-
ronment. Visual feedback of the target and arm were 
blocked during the reaching movements, leading to 
systematic errors in touching the target. The monkeys 
were allowed to see visual feedback of the position 
of the hand relative to the target for a brief period of 
time at the end of movement (Figure 34–25). Activity 
in M1 and PMd during that brief period of visual feed-
back after movement reflected the direction of reach 
end-point errors and could be involved in adapting 
reaching movements to correct these errors. To test 
that hypothesis, ICMS was then used in M1 and PMd 
to simulate those error responses and showed that 
the monkeys began to make adaptive changes in their 
reaching movements to compensate for the simulated 
errors even though no reaching error was actually 
made.
Some motor skills are relatively easy to learn, 
such as compensation for a visuomotor rotation. Oth-
ers, however, are very difficult to learn. Recent stud-
ies examined this discrepancy by first measuring the 
activity of a population of M1 neurons as the monkey 
moved a cursor on a computer screen using a brain–
machine interface and a neural activity decoder. This 
population-level mapping between M1 activity and 
cursor motion was then altered by changing the asso-
ciation between the directional tuning of each neuron 
and cursor motion in the decoder. When the altered 
decoder mapping retained the normal co-modulation 
structure of neural activity, as would be the case for 
instance if the mapping between the activity of all 


===== Page 5 =====
856    Part V / Movement
1  During movement
111
124
108
116
35
42
6
28
2  After movement, target visible
B  Activity of an M1 neuron
Target appears
–500
0
500
–40
40
0
s/s
50
25
20
0
–20
–40
–20
0
20
40
Horizontal error (mm)
Vertical error (mm)
–40
–20
0
20
40
Horizontal error (mm)
1000
Reach
Touch
A  Experiment
Start trial
Target appears
Reach
Touch
Shutter close
Figure 34–25  (right) Error signals in the primary motor 
cortex drive adaptation.  After a movement is complete, 
M1 activity reflects the error between the spatial target and 
final hand position. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Inoue, Uchimura, and Kitazawa 2016. Copyright © 2016  
Elsevier Inc.)
A. Monkeys made reaching movements to spatial targets 
on a touch screen. On each trial, adjustable prism goggles 
shifted the viewed position of the spatial target by a variable 
amount during the movement, while a shutter blocked vision 
of the monkey’s hand and the target. Feedback of the final 
hand position was only provided for 300 ms after contact 
with the touch screen at the end of movement.
B. Top: Discharge response of a typical M1 neuron. Raster 
plots and spike-timing histograms are aligned with the initial 
screen contact (touch).
1. Distribution of reach endpoint errors (black dots) where 
the origin represents the center of the target. Diameters 
of green circles denote the firing rate of the neuron during 
each movement (green bar in B); the firing rates were unre-
lated to the subsequent endpoint error. The numbers in each 
quadrant indicate the summed spike activity during move-
ments that ended in the corresponding quadrant; they are all 
nearly equal.
2. Same as in part B except purple circles denote firing rate 
100 to 200 ms after movement while the monkey can see its 
hand while touching the screen (purple bar in part B). The 
circles and spike counts show that the firing rate is greatest 
for endpoint errors down and to the left relative to the posi-
tion of the target (0,0), revealing that that the neural activity 
during this postmovement period is strongly modulated by 
visual feedback of reach endpoint error.
neurons and cursor motions was rotated clockwise 
by 45°, the monkeys showed significant adaptation 
to the perturbation within a few hundred trials dur-
ing a single recording session. In contrast, when the 
perturbation required the monkeys to learn a more 
complex “unnatural” remapping, for instance, ran-
dom clockwise and counterclockwise rotations of the 
apparent directional tuning of neurons by different 
amounts, the monkeys showed little ability to recover 
proficient cursor control over several hundred trials 
in a single recording session. Importantly, another 
study found that monkeys could eventually master an 
“unnatural” change in an M1 neural activity decoder 
mapping if they could practice with the same altered 
decoder over several days, indicating that they could 
learn a new neural co-modulation structure if allowed 
enough experience with it. These studies reinforce 
how neural circuits in these cortical motor regions are 
critical for motor skill learning.
The studies just described used brain–machine 
interfaces and neural decoders to explore how single 
neurons and neural populations contribute to motor 
skill learning. This technology promises to be an 
increasingly important research tool for developing 
new insights into the neural mechanisms of voluntary 
motor control and motor skill learning (Chapter 39).
Highlights
  1.  Voluntary motor behavior implements an individ-
ual’s intentional choice or decision to move within, 
and to interact physically with objects in, the envi-
ronment. A hallmark of human motor action is the 
breadth of skills we possess and, when highly prac-
ticed, the ease and automaticity of these actions.
  2.  Voluntary motor control has long been separated 
into two stages—planning and execution—that 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    857
can be dissociated in time. Neural recording 
studies have found correlates of these two stages 
differentially distributed across many movement-
related cortical areas.
  3.  The overall computational problem that the 
motor system must resolve to control voluntary 
movement is to convert sensory information 
about the current state of the world and the body 
into plans for action and ultimately into patterns 
of muscle activity that generate the causal forces 
required to execute the desired movement(s), 
while avoiding or correcting for errors.
  4.  Representational models of voluntary motor con-
trol such as the sensorimotor coordinate transfor-
mation hypothesis assume that the motor system 
directly plans and controls specific features or 
parameters of intended movements. Single 
neurons and neural populations express those 
parameters in their activity and perform defin-
able computations to effect the transformations 
between the controlled movement parameters in 
corresponding coordinate frameworks.
  5.  Dynamical systems models of voluntary motor 
control, in contrast, assume that motor circuits 
find empirical solutions for the computations 
underlying the planning and execution of move-
ments by evolutionary and individual adaptive 
processes. One recent theory, optimal feedback 
control, proposes that planning and execution 
of voluntary movements involve three func-
tional processes, namely, state estimation, task 
selection, and a control policy. Single neurons 
and neural populations contribute to voluntary 
motor control by participating in the computa-
tions underlying these three processes.
  6.  Distributed frontoparietal circuits in cerebral cor-
tex play a pivotal role in voluntary control. There 
are substantial reciprocal axonal interconnections 
between frontal and parietal cortical regions, par-
tially segregated based on body part (eg, hand, 
arm, eye). Frontal motor and parietal cortical 
regions both directly influence spinal process-
ing through the corticospinal tract and indirectly 
through brain stem descending pathways.
  7.  Posterior parietal cortex plays a prominent role in 
identifying potential goals and objects in the envi-
ronment, state estimation of the body, and sensory 
guidance of motor actions. Important sources of 
sensory signals are transmitted from visual cor-
tex through the dorsal visual pathway and from 
primary somatosensory cortex. Behavioral goals 
and objects are represented in many parietal sub-
regions, but how they are represented (relative 
to the orientation of the eye, head, or arm) varies 
across subregions. The presence of multiple rep-
resentations provides a rich basis for defining the 
movement-relevant properties and the locations 
of objects in the world and relative to the body 
that can be used to select and guide movement.
  8.  Premotor and prefrontal cortices play a promi-
nent role in task selection and motor planning. 
The dorsal and ventral premotor regions are often 
implicated when external sensory information 
plays a dominant role in selecting motor actions. 
In contrast, more medial premotor regions, such 
as the supplementary and cingulate motor areas, 
may play a more dominant role when internal 
desires are more critical in selecting and initiat-
ing a motor action. However, this dichotomy is 
not absolute, and multiple premotor and pre-
frontal cortical areas all contribute to the control 
of voluntary behavior in a broad range of con-
texts and conditions.
  9.  Primary motor cortex in primates has a represen-
tation of the entire body along its mediolateral 
axis, with larger cortical territories associated 
with the hand and face relative to other body 
parts. This cortical region also provides a large 
component of the corticospinal tract and has pro-
jections to both interneurons and alpha motor 
neurons in the spinal cord.
10.  Neural activity that reflects the causal forces 
and the spatiotemporal features of muscle activ-
ity necessary to move the limb is particularly 
prominent in the primary motor cortex and can 
be rapidly altered to correct movement errors 
or to compensate for displacements of the limb 
away from the desired movement if the limb is 
perturbed. However, neural activity in primary 
motor cortex can also show more complex prop-
erties, reflecting changes based on the behavioral 
context, performance goals and constraints, and 
features such as movement kinematics. These 
properties of primary motor cortex activity may 
reflect the formation of a task-specific control 
policy within the motor system.
11.  Although parietal, premotor, and primary motor 
cortical regions play prominent roles in state esti-
mation, motor planning, and motor execution, 
respectively, they are not uniquely responsible 
for any one aspect; they are instead distributed 
to some degree across most or all of these cortical 
regions.
12.  The cortical motor system is adaptive and can 
undergo changes in its functional architecture 
to adapt to long-term changes in the physical 


===== Page 7 =====
858    Part V / Movement
properties of the world and the body, as well as 
acquire, retain, and recall new motor skills.
13.  New technologies such as large-scale multi-
neuron 
recording 
and 
imaging 
methods, 
enhanced multi-neuron activity decoding algo-
rithms, and optogenetic control of the activity of 
specific neural populations will lead to deeper 
insights into the functional architecture of corti-
cal motor circuits.
 Stephen H. Scott 
  John F. Kalaska 
Selected Reading
Battaglia-Mayer A, Babicola L, Satta E. 2016. Parieto-frontal 
gradients and domains underlying eye and hand opera-
tions in the action space. Neuroscience 334:76–92.
Cisek P, Kalaska JF. 2010. Neural mechanisms for interacting 
with a world full of action choices. Annu Rev Neurosci 
33:269–298.
Dum RP, Strick PL. 2002. Motor areas in the frontal lobe of 
the primate. Physiol Behav 77:677–682.
Hikosaka O, Isoda M. 2010. Switching from automatic to 
controlled behaviour: cortico-basal ganglia mechanism. 
Trends Cogn Sci 14:154–161.
Lemon RN. 2008 Descending pathways in motor control. 
Ann Rev Neurosci 31:195–218.
Passingham RE, Bengtsson SL, Lau HC. 2010. Medial frontal 
cortex: from self-generated action to reflection on one’s 
own performance. Trends Cogn Sci 14:16–21.
Scott SH. 2004. Optimal feedback control and the neural basis 
of volitional motor control. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:532–546.
References
Batista AP, Buneo CA, Snyder LH, Andersen RA. 1999. Reach 
plans in eye-centered coordinates. Science 285:257–260.
Cheney PD, Fetz EE, Palmer SS. 1985. Patterns of facilita-
tion and suppression of antagonist forelimb muscles from 
motor cortex sites in the awake monkey. J Neurophysiol 
53:805–820.
Cherian A, Krucoff MO, Miller LE. 2011. Motor cortical pre-
diction of EMG: evidence that a kinetic brain-machine 
interface may be robust across altered movement dynam-
ics. J Neurophysiol 106:564–575.
Churchland MM, Shenoy KV. 2006. Temporal complexity 
and heterogeneity of single-neuron activity in premotor 
and motor cortex. J Neurophysiol 97:4235–4257.
Cisek P, Crammond DJ, Kalaska JF. 2003. Neural activity in 
primary motor and dorsal premotor cortex in reaching tasks 
with the contralateral versus ipsilateral arm. J Neurophysiol 
89:922–942.
Cisek P, Kalaska JF. 2004. Neural correlates of mental 
rehearsal in dorsal premotor cortex. Nature 431:993–996.
Crammond DJ, Kalaska JF. 2000. Prior information in motor 
and premotor cortex: activity in the delay period and effect 
on pre-movement activity. J Neurophysiol 84:986–1005.
Duhamel JR, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1998. Ventral intrapa-
rietal area of the macaque: congruent visual and somatic 
response properties. J Neurophysiol 79:126–136.
Evarts EV. 1968. Relation of pyramidal tract activity to force 
exerted during voluntary movement. J Neurophysiol 
31:14–27.
Evarts E, Tanji J. 1976. Reflex and intended responses in motor 
cortex pyramidal tract neurons of monkey. J Neurophysiol 
39:1069–1080.
Fetz EE, Cheney PD. 1980. Postspike facilitation of forelimb 
muscle activity by primate corticomotoneuronal cells.  
J Neurophysiol 44:751–772.
Ganguly K, Carmena JM. 2009. Emergence of a stable cortical 
map for neuroprosthetic control. PLoS Biol. 7:e1000153.
Georgopoulos AP, Caminiti R, Kalaska JF, Massey JT. 1983. 
Spatial coding of movement: a hypothesis concerning the 
coding of movement direction by motor cortical popula-
tions. Exp Brain Res 49(Suppl 7):327–336.
Georgopoulos AP, Kalaska, JF, Caminiti R, Massey JT. 1982. 
On the relations between the direction of two-dimensional 
arm movements and cell discharge in primate motor cortex. 
J Neurosci 2:1527–1537.
Georgopoulos AP, Kettner RE, Schwartz AB. 1988. Primate 
motor cortex and free arm movements to visual tar-
gets in three-dimensional space. II. Coding of the direc-
tion of movement by a neuronal population. J Neurosci 
8:2928–2937.
Goodale MA, Milner AD. 1992. Separate visual pathways for 
perception and action. Trends Neurosci 15:20–25.
Griffin DM, Hudson HM, Belhaj-Saïf A, McKiernan BJ, 
Cheney PD. 2008. Do corticomotoneuronal cells predict 
target muscle EMG activity? J Neurophysiol 99:1169–1186.
Heming EA, Lillicrap TP, Omrani M, Herter TM, Pruszynski 
JA, Scott SH. 2016. Primary motor cortex neurons classi-
fied in a postural task predict muscle activation patterns 
in a reaching task. J Neurophysiol 115:2021–2032.
Hepp-Reymond MC, Kirkpatrick-Tanner M, Gabernet L, 
Qi Hx, Weber B. 1999. Context-dependent force cod-
ing in motor and premotor cortical areas. Exp Brain Res 
128:123–133.
Humphrey DR, Tanji J. 1991. What features of voluntary 
motor control are encoded in the neuronal discharge of 
different cortical areas? In: DR Humphrey, H-J Freund 
(eds). Motor Control: Concepts and Issues, pp 413–443. 
New York: Wiley.
Hwang EJ, Bailey PM, Andersen RA. 2013. Volitional control 
of neural activity relies on the natural motor repertoire. 
Curr Biol 23:353–361.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    859
Inoue M, Uchimura M, Kitazawa S. 2016. Error signals in 
motor cortices drive adaptation in reaching. Neuron 
90:1114–1126.
Kalaska JF, Cohen DA, Hyde ML, Prud’Homme M. 1989. A 
comparison of movement direction-related versus load 
direction-related activity in primate motor cortex, using 
a two-dimensional reaching task. J Neurosci 9:2080–2102.
Kaufman MT, Churchland MM, Ryu SI, Shenoy KV. 2014. 
Cortical activity in the null space: permitting preparation 
without movement. Nat Neurosci 17:440–448.
Klaes C, Westendorff S, Chakrabarti S, Gail A. 2011. Choos-
ing goals, not rules: deciding among rule-based action 
plans. Neuron 70:536–548.
Kurtzer I, Herter TM, Scott SH. 2005. Random change in cor-
tical load representation suggests distinct control of pos-
ture and movement. Nat Neurosci 8:498–504.
Maravita A, Iriki A. 2004. Tools for the body (schema). Trends 
Cogn Sci 8:79–86.
Moritz CT, Perlmutter SI, Fetz EE. 2008. Direct control of par-
alysed muscles by cortical neurons. Nature 456:639–642.
Muir RB, Lemon RN. 1983. Corticospinal neurons with a spe-
cial role in precision grip. Brain Res 261:312–316.
Murata A, Wen W, Asama H. 2016. The body and objects 
represented in the ventral stream of the parieto-premotor 
network. Neurosci Res 104:4–15.
Nachev P, Kennard C, Husain M. 2008. Functional role of the 
supplementary and pre-supplementary motor areas. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 9:856–869.
Nudo RJ, Milliken GW, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM. 1996. 
Use-dependent alterations of movement representa-
tions in primary motor cortex of adult squirrel monkeys. 
J Neurosci 16:785–807.
Omrani M, Murnaghan CD, Pruszynski JA, Scott SH. 2016. 
Distributed task-specific processing of somatosensory 
feedback for voluntary motor control. eLife 5:e13141.
Park MC, Belhaj-Saïf A, Gordon M, Cheney PD. 2001. 
Consistent features in the forelimb representation of 
primary motor cortex in rhesus macaques. J Neurosci 
21:2784–2792.
Paz R, Vaadia E. 2004. Learning-induced improvement in 
encoding and decoding of specific movement directions 
by neurons in the primary motor cortex. PLoS Biol 2:E45.
Pruszynski JA, Kurtzer I, Nashed JY, Omrani M, Brouwer B, 
Scott SH. 2011. Primary motor cortex underlies multi-
joint integration for fast feedback control. Nature 478: 
387–390.
Rathelot JA, Strick PL. 2006. Muscle representation in the 
macaque motor cortex: an anatomical perspective. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:8257–8262.
Rizzolatti G, Camarda R, Fogassi L, Gentilucci M, Luppino 
G, Matelli M. 1988. Functional organization of inferior 
area 6 in the macaque monkey. II. Area F5 and the control 
of distal movement. Exp Brain Res 71:491–507.
Rizzolatti G, Fadiga L, Gallese V, Fogassi L. 1996. Premotor 
cortex and the recognition of motor actions. Cogn Brain 
Res 3:131–141.
Romo R, Hernández A, Zainos A. 2004. Neuronal correlates 
of a perceptual decision in ventral premotor cortex. Neuron 
41:165–173.
Rozzi S, Calzavara R, Belmalih A, et al. 2006. Cortical con-
nections of the inferior parietal cortical convexity of the 
macaque monkey. Cereb Cortex 16:1389–1417.
Sadtler PT, Quick KM, Golub MD, et al. 2014. Neural con-
straints on learning. Nature 512:423–426.
Schaffelhofer S, Scherberger H. 2016. Object vision to hand 
action in macaque parietal, premotor, and motor cortices. 
eLife 5:e15278.
Schwartz AB. 1994. Direct cortical representation of drawing. 
Science 265:540–542.
Scott SH, Cluff T, Lowrey CR, Takei T. 2015. Feedback con-
trol during voluntary motor actions. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
33:85–94.
Scott SH, Gribble P, Graham K, Cabel DW. 2001. Dissociation 
between hand motion and population vectors from neural 
activity in motor cortex. Nature 413:161–165.
Sergio LE, Hamel-Pâquet C, Kalaska JF. 2005. Motor cortex 
neural correlates of output kinematics and kinetics during 
isometric-force and arm-reaching tasks. J Neurophysiol 
94:2353–2378.
Sergio LE, Kalaska JF. 2003. Systematic changes in motor 
cortex cell activity with arm posture during directional 
isometric force generation. J Neurophysiol 89:212–228.
Shenoy KV, Sahani M, Churchland M. 2013. Cortical control 
of arm movements: a dynamical systems perspective. 
Annu Rev Neurosci 36:337–359.
Shima K, Tanji J. 1998. Role of cingulate motor area cells in 
voluntary movement selection based on reward. Science 
282:1335–1338.
Shinoda Y, Yokota J, Futami T. 1981. Divergent projections of 
individual corticospinal axons to motoneurons of multiple 
muscles in the monkey. Neurosci Lett 23:7–12.
Sommer MA, Wurtz RH. 2008. Brain circuits for the internal 
monitoring of movements. Ann Rev Neurosci 31:317–338.
Strick PL. 1983. The influence of motor preparation on the 
response of cerebellar neurons to limb displacements.  
J Neurosci 3:2007–2020.
Tanji J. 2001. Sequential organization of multiple movements: 
involvement of cortical motor areas. Ann Rev Neurosci 
24:631–651.
Thach WT. 1978. Correlation of neural discharge with pattern 
and force of muscular activity, joint position, and direc-
tion of intended next arm movement in motor cortex and 
cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 41:654–676.
Wallis JD, Miller EK. 2003. From rule to response: neuronal pro-
cesses in the premotor and prefrontal cortex. J Neurophysiol 
90:1790–1806.


===== Page 9 =====
35
The Control of Gaze
I
n preceding chapters, we learned about the motor 
systems that control the movements of the body in 
space. In this and the next chapter, we consider the 
motor systems that control our gaze, balance, and posture 
as we move through the world around us. In examining 
these motor systems, we will focus on three biological 
challenges that these systems resolve: How do we visu-
ally explore our environment quickly and efficiently? 
How do we compensate for planned and unplanned 
movements of the head? How do we stay upright?
In this chapter, we describe the oculomotor sys-
tem and how it uses visual information to guide eye 
movements. It is one of the simplest motor systems, 
requiring the coordination of only the 12 evolutionar-
ily old muscles that move the two eyes. In humans 
and other primates, the primary objective of the ocu-
lomotor system is to control the position of the fovea, 
the central point in the retina that has the highest den-
sity of photoreceptors and thus the sharpest vision. 
The fovea is less than 1 mm in diameter and covers 
less than 1% of the visual field. When we want to 
examine an object, we must move its image onto the 
fovea (Chapter 22).
The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles
Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit
To a good approximation, the eye is a sphere that sits 
in a socket, the orbit. Eye movements are simply rota-
tions of the eye in the orbit. The eye’s orientation can 
be defined by three axes of rotation—horizontal, ver-
tical, and torsional—that intersect at the center of the 
eyeball, and eye movements are described as rotations 
The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles
Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit
The Six Extraocular Muscles Form Three Agonist–
Antagonist Pairs
Movements of the Two Eyes Are Coordinated
The Extraocular Muscles Are Controlled by  
Three Cranial Nerves
Six Neuronal Control Systems Keep the Eyes on Target
An Active Fixation System Holds the Fovea on a 
Stationary Target
The Saccadic System Points the Fovea Toward  
Objects of Interest
The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in the Brain Stem
Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the Pontine 
Reticular Formation
Vertical Saccades Are Generated in the Mesencephalic 
Reticular Formation
Brain Stem Lesions Result in Characteristic Deficits in 
Eye Movements
Saccades Are Controlled by the Cerebral Cortex Through the 
Superior Colliculus
The Superior Colliculus Integrates Visual and Motor 
Information into Oculomotor Signals for the Brain Stem
The Rostral Superior Colliculus Facilitates Visual Fixation
The Basal Ganglia and Two Regions of Cerebral Cortex 
Control the Superior Colliculus
The Control of Saccades Can Be Modified by Experience
Some Rapid Gaze Shifts Require Coordinated Head and 
Eye Movements
The Smooth-Pursuit System Keeps Moving Targets on the Fovea
The Vergence System Aligns the Eyes to Look at Targets at 
Different Depths
Highlights


