===== Page 1 =====
292    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
He regarded this decision making as the brain’s most 
fundamental operation (see Chapter 56).
Synaptic Inputs Are Integrated at the Axon  
Initial Segment
In most neurons, the decision to initiate an action 
potential output is made at one site: the axon initial 
segment. Here, the cell membrane has a lower thresh-
old for action potential generation than at the cell 
body or dendrites because it has a higher density of 
voltage-dependent Na+ channels (Figure 13–13). With 
each increment of membrane depolarization, more Na+ 
channels open, providing a higher density of inward 
current (per unit area of membrane) at the axon initial 
segment than elsewhere in the cell.
At the initial segment, the depolarization incre-
ment required to reach the threshold for an action 
potential (−55 mV) is only 10 mV from the resting 
level of −65 mV. In contrast, the membrane of the cell 
body must be depolarized by 30 mV before reaching its 
threshold (−35 mV). Therefore, synaptic excitation first 
Figure 13–13  A synaptic potential 
arising in a dendrite can generate an 
action potential at the axon initial seg-
ment.  (Adapted, with permission, from 
Eckert et al. 1988.)
A. An excitatory synaptic potential origi-
nating in the dendrites decreases with 
distance as it propagates passively to the 
soma. Nevertheless, an action potential 
can be initiated at the trigger zone (the 
axon initial segment) because the density 
of the Na+ channels in this region is high 
and thus the threshold for an action poten-
tial is low.
B. Comparison of the threshold for initia-
tion of the action potential at different 
sites in the neuron (corresponding to 
drawing A). An action potential is gener-
ated when the amplitude of the synaptic 
potential exceeds the threshold. The 
dashed line shows the decay of the syn-
aptic potential if no action potential is gen-
erated at the axon initial segment.
A
B
Dendrites
Cell body
Trigger
zone
Myelin
sheath
Threshold
Action potential
Resting membrane potential
Distance from synapse
Synapse
–35
–45
–55
–65
Potential (mV)
Peak synaptic potential
discharges the region of membrane at the initial seg-
ment, also called the trigger zone. The action potential 
generated at this site then depolarizes the membrane 
of the cell body to threshold and at the same time is 
propagated along the axon .
Because neuronal integration involves the sum-
mation of synaptic potentials that spread to the trigger 
zone, it is critically affected by two passive membrane 
properties of the neuron (Chapter 9). First, the mem-
brane time constant helps determine the time course of 
the synaptic potential in response to the EPSC, thereby 
controlling temporal summation, the process by which 
consecutive synaptic potentials are added together in 
the postsynaptic cell. Neurons with a large membrane 
time constant have a greater capacity for temporal 
summation than do neurons with a shorter time con-
stant (Figure 13–14A). As a result, the longer the time 
constant, the greater is the likelihood that two consecu-
tive inputs will summate to bring the cell membrane to 
its threshold for an action potential.
Second, the length constant of the cell determines 
the degree to which the EPSP decreases as it spreads 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     293
Figure 13–14  Central neurons are able to integrate a variety 
of synaptic inputs through temporal and spatial summation 
of synaptic potentials.
A. Temporal summation. The time constant of a postsynaptic 
cell (see Figure 9–10) affects the amplitude of the depolarization 
caused by consecutive EPSPs produced by a single presynaptic 
neuron (cell A). Here the synaptic current generated by the 
presynaptic neuron is nearly the same for both EPSPs. In a cell 
with a long time constant, the first EPSP does not fully decay 
by the time the second EPSP is triggered. In that instance, the 
depolarizing effects of both potentials are additive, bringing 
the membrane potential above the threshold and triggering an 
action potential. In a cell with a short time constant, the first 
EPSP decays to the resting potential before the second EPSP 
is triggered, and in that instance, the second EPSP alone does 
not cause enough depolarization to trigger an action potential.
B. Spatial summation. The length constant of a postsyn-
aptic cell (see Figure 9–11B) affects the amplitudes of two 
excitatory postsynaptic potentials produced by two presynap-
tic neurons (cells A and B). For illustrative purposes, both syn-
apses are the same distance (500 μm) from the postsynaptic 
cell’s trigger zone, and the current produced by each synaptic 
contact is the same. If the distance between the site of syn-
aptic input and the trigger zone in the postsynaptic cell is only 
one length constant (that is, the postsynaptic cell has a long 
length constant of 500 μm), the synaptic potentials produced 
by each of the two presynaptic neurons will decrease to 37% 
of their original amplitude by the time they reach the trigger 
zone. Summation of the two potentials results in enough 
depolarization to exceed threshold, triggering an action poten-
tial. If the distance between the synapse and the trigger zone 
is equal to two length constants (ie, the postsynaptic cell has 
a short length constant of  
250 μm), each synaptic potential will be less than 15% of its 
initial amplitude, and summation will not be sufficient to trig-
ger an action potential.
Recording
Recording
A  Temporal summation
Axon
B  Spatial summation
Axon
A
Synaptic
current
A
A B
Synaptic
potential
Long time
constant
(100 ms)
Short time
constant
(20 ms)
Vm
Vm
Long length
constant
(500 µm)
Short length
constant
(250 µm)
Vm
Vm
2 × 10–10 A
2 mV
2 mV
25 ms
A
A
B
Threshold
Threshold
passively from a synapse along the length of the den-
drite to the cell body and axon initial segment (the trig-
ger zone). In cells with a longer length constant, signals 
spread to the trigger zone with minimal decrement; in 
cells with a short length constant, the signals decay 
rapidly with distance. Because the depolarization pro-
duced by one synapse is almost never sufficient to trig-
ger an action potential at the trigger zone, the inputs 
from many presynaptic neurons acting at different sites 
on the postsynaptic neuron must be added together. 
This process is called spatial summation. Neurons with 
a large length constant are more likely to be brought to 
threshold by inputs arising from different sites than are 
neurons with a short length constant (Figure 13–14B).
Subclasses of GABAergic Neurons Target  
Distinct Regions of Their Postsynaptic Target 
Neurons to Produce Inhibitory Actions With 
Different Functions
In contrast to the relatively few types of glutamatergic 
pyramidal neurons, the mammalian central nervous 


===== Page 3 =====
294    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
system has a large variety of GABAergic inhibitory 
interneurons that differ in developmental origin, 
molecular composition, morphology, and connectivity 
(Figure 13–15). Up to 20 different subtypes of GABAe-
rgic neurons have been identified in one subregion of 
the hippocampus alone. The different types of GABAer-
gic interneurons form extensive synaptic connections 
Figure 13–15  Different GABAergic inhibitory neurons target 
different regions of a postsynaptic cell. A diverse array of 
interneurons can be distinguished by their morphology, expres-
sion of different molecular markers, and their preferred site 
of targeting of postsynaptic neurons. Basket cells send their 
axons to form synapses on the cell body and proximal dendrites 
of postsynaptic neurons. The dendrites of the basket cells are 
shown as  short lines radiating from the soma. Axo-axonic cells, 
also called chandelier cells, send their axons to form clusters of 
synapses along the axon initial segment of their targets. Both 
basket cells and chandelier cells express the calcium-binding 
protein parvalbumin. Dendrite-targeting cells, also called Mar-
tinotti cells, send their axons to form synapses on the distal 
dendrites of pyramidal cells. These cells also release the neu-
ropeptide somatostatin. Other classes of GABAergic neurons 
selectively form synapses onto other inhibitory interneurons. 
These interneuron-targeting inhibitory neurons often release 
neuropeptide Y in addition to GABA.
Pyramidal
Interneuron
targeting
Martinotti
Basket
Chandelier
I
II
III
IV
V 
VI
with their neighboring excitatory and inhibitory neu-
rons. Thus, even though only 20% of all neurons are 
inhibitory, the overall levels of inhibition and excitation 
tend to be nearly balanced in most brain regions. This 
results in the tuning of neural circuits to respond to only 
the most salient excitatory information. While the diver-
sity of interneurons is challenging to understand, it is 
clear that different types of interneurons selectively tar-
get different regions of their postsynaptic neurons.
This selective targeting is important because the 
location of inhibitory inputs in relation to excitatory 
synapses is critical in determining the effectiveness of 
inhibition (Figure 13–16). Inhibition of action potential 
output in response to excitatory input is more effec-
tive when inhibition is initiated at the cell body or 
near the axon trigger zone. The depolarization pro-
duced by an excitatory current from a dendrite must 
pass along the cell body membrane as it moves toward 
the axon. Inhibitory actions at the cell body or axon 
initial segment open Cl− channels, thus increasing Cl− 
conductance and reducing (by shunting) much of the 
depolarization produced by the spreading excitatory 
current. In addition, the size of the hyperpolarization 
at the cell body in response to an IPSP is largest when 
the inhibitory input targets the cell body, not a den-
drite, owing to the attenuation of the dendritic IPSP by 
the cable properties of the dendrite.
Two classes of inhibitory neurons, basket cells and 
chandelier cells, exert strong control over neuronal 
output by specifically targeting the soma and axon ini-
tial segment, respectively (Figure 13–15). Basket cells 
often express the calcium-binding protein parvalbu-
min and are the most common type of inhibitory neu-
ron in the brain. Chandelier cells, which also express 
parvalbumin, have axonal arbors with a branch-
ing pattern and clustering of synaptic terminals that 
resemble the numerous candles of a chandelier. Under 
some circumstances, the chandelier cells may paradox-
ically enhance neuronal firing because the Cl− reversal 
potential in some axons can be positive to the thresh-
old for action potential firing.
A third class of interneurons, the Martinotti cells, 
specifically targets distal dendrites and spines. These 
common interneurons release the neuropeptide soma-
tostatin in addition to GABA. Inhibitory actions at a 
remote part of a dendrite act to decrease the local 
depolarization produced by a nearby excitatory input, 
with less of an effect on EPSPs generated on other den-
dritic branches. Somatostatin-positive interneurons 
activate slowly in response to an excitatory input and 
generate IPSPs that increase in size with repetitive acti-
vation (synaptic facilitation). In contrast, parvalbumin- 
expressing interneurons fire rapidly and generate 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     295
IPSPs that decrease in size with repetitive activation 
(synaptic depression). These properties allow the 
somatostatin and parvalbumin interneurons to control 
the spread through neural circuits of later and earlier 
phases of neural signals, respectively.
A fourth major type of inhibitory interneuron 
expresses the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal pep-
tide (VIP). These interneurons selectively target other 
interneurons and thus serve to decrease the level of 
inhibition in a neural circuit, thereby enhancing over-
all excitation, a process termed disinhibition.
Dendrites Are Electrically Excitable Structures That 
Can Amplify Synaptic Input
Propagation of signals in dendrites was originally 
thought to be purely passive. However, intracellular 
recordings from the cell body of neurons in the 1950s 
and from dendrites beginning in the 1970s demon-
strated that dendrites could produce action potentials. 
Indeed, we now know that the dendrites of most neu-
rons contain voltage-gated Na+, K+, and Ca2+ chan-
nels in addition to ligand-gated channels and resting 
channels. In fact, the rich diversity of dendritic con-
ductances suggests that central neurons rely on a 
sophisticated repertory of electrophysiological proper-
ties to integrate synaptic inputs.
One function of the voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ 
channels in dendrites is to amplify the EPSP. In some 
neurons, there is a sufficient density of voltage-gated 
channels in the dendritic membrane to serve as a local 
trigger zone. This can produce nonlinear electrical 
responses that enhance the depolarization generated 
by excitatory inputs that arrive at remote parts of the 
dendrite. When a cell has several dendritic trigger 
zones, each one sums the local excitation and inhibi-
tion produced by nearby synaptic inputs; if the net 
input is above threshold, a dendritic action potential 
may be generated, usually by voltage-gated Na+ or Ca2+ 
channels (Figure 13–17A). Nevertheless, the number of 
voltage-gated Na+ or Ca2+ channels in the dendrites is 
usually not sufficient to support all-or-none regenera-
tive propagation of an action potential to the cell body. 
Rather, action potentials generated in the dendrites 
are usually local events that spread electrotonically to 
the cell body and axon initial segment, producing a 
Figure 13–16  The effect of an inhibitory cur-
rent in the postsynaptic neuron depends on the 
distance the current travels from the synapse to 
the cell’s trigger zone. In this hypothetical experi-
ment, the inputs from inhibitory axosomatic and 
axodendritic synapses are compared by recording 
from both the cell body (V1) and a dendrite (V2) 
of the postsynaptic cell. Stimulating cell B (the 
axosomatic synapse) produces a large IPSP in the 
cell body. The IPSP decays as it propagates up the 
dendrite, producing only a small hyperpolarization 
at the site of dendritic recording. Stimulating cell 
A activates an axodendritic synapse, producing a 
large local IPSP in the dendrite but only a small 
IPSP in the cell body, because the synaptic poten-
tial decays as it propagates down the dendrite. 
Thus, the axosomatic IPSP is more effective than 
the axodendritic IPSP in inhibiting action potential 
firing in the postsynaptic cell, whereas the axo-
dendritic IPSP is more effective in preventing local 
dendritic depolarization.
Axodendritic
V2 Recording
V1 Recording
Axosomatic
Trigger
zone
Cell A
active
–65 mV
–65 mV
–65 mV
–65 mV
Cell B
active
A
B


===== Page 5 =====
296    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 13–17  Active properties of dendrites can amplify 
synaptic inputs and support propagation of  electrical sig-
nals to and from the axon initial segment. The figure illus-
trates an experiment in which several electrodes are used to 
record membrane voltage and pass stimulating current in the 
axon, cell body, and at several locations along the dendritic 
tree. The recording electrodes and corresponding voltage 
traces are matched by color. Stimulating current pulses are 
also indicated (I stim). (Panels A and B adapted from Stuart  
et al. 2016.)
A. An action potential initiated in the axon initial segment can 
propagate to the dendrites. Such backpropagation depends 
on activation of voltage-gated Na+ channels in the dendrites. 
Unlike the nondecrementing action potential that is continu-
ally regenerated along an axon, the amplitude of a back-
propagating action potential decreases as it travels along a 
dendrite due to  its relatively low density of voltage-gated Na+ 
channels.
B. A strong depolarizing EPSP at a dendrite can generate a den-
dritic action potential that travels to the cell body. Such action 
potentials are often generated by dendritic voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels and have a high threshold. They propagate relatively 
slowly and attenuate with distance, often failing to reach the 
cell body. The solid blue line shows a suprathreshold response 
generated in the dendrite in response to a large depolarizing 
current pulse, and the dotted blue line shows a subthreshold 
response to a weaker current stimulus. The solid and dot-
ted orange lines show the corresponding voltage responses 
recorded in the cell body.
C.  Near simultaneous injection of a subthreshold stimulating 
current resembling a weak EPSC into the dendrite and a strong 
brief suprathreshold stimulating current into the cell body (which 
by itself evokes a single somatic action potential) triggers a long-
lasting plateau potential in the dendrite and the firing of a burst of 
action potentials in the cell body. (Adapted, with permission from 
Larkum et al. 1999. Copyright © 1999 Springer Nature.)
I stim
I stim
Subthreshold
Suprathreshold
Subthreshold
Suprathreshold
100 µm
20 mV
1 ms
e
tir
d
n
e
d
 la
t
si
D
e
tir
d
n
e
d
 la
t
si
D
Plateau
Cell 
body
Axon
(forward-
propagating)
Dendrite 
(back-propagating)
A  Back-propagating 
     action potential
B  Action potential
    propagating from dendrite
C  Action potential burst with
    dendritic and somatic stimuli
20 mV
50 mV
10 ms
10 ms
Cell body
I stim
Cell body
I stim
subthreshold somatic depolarization that is integrated 
with other input signals in the cell.
Dendritic 
voltage-gated 
channels 
also 
per-
mit action potentials generated at the axon initial 
segment to propagate backward into the dendritic tree  
(Figure 13–17B). These backpropagating action poten-
tials are largely generated by dendritic voltage-gated 
Na+ channels. Although the precise role of these action 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     297
potentials is unclear, they may provide a temporally 
precise mechanism for enhancing current through 
NMDA receptor-channels by providing the depolari-
zation necessary to remove the Mg2+ block, thereby 
contributing to the induction of synaptic plasticity 
(Figure 13–10).
NMDA receptors are able to mediate another type 
of nonlinear integration in dendrites as a result of their 
voltage dependence. Moderate synaptic stimuli are 
able to activate a sufficient number of AMPA recep-
tors to produce an intermediate level of depolarization 
that is able to lead to expulsion of Mg2+ from a frac-
tion of NMDA receptors. As these receptors begin to 
conduct cations into the postsynaptic dendrite, they 
produce a further depolarization that leads to even 
greater unblocking of Mg2+, increasing further the size 
of the NMDA receptor EPSC, resulting in even greater 
depolarization. In some instances, this leads to a local 
regenerative depolarization, referred to as an NMDA 
spike. Such NMDA spikes are purely local events—
they cannot propagate actively in the absence of synap-
tic stimulation because they require glutamate release. 
NMDA spikes have been implicated in different forms 
of synaptic plasticity and in the enhancement of den-
dritic integration of synaptic inputs.
Under what conditions do active conductances 
influence dendritic integration? There is now evi-
dence that dendrites may switch between passive 
and active integration depending on the precise tim-
ing and strength of synaptic inputs. One interesting 
example of such a switch is the way some cortical 
neurons respond to inputs arriving at their distal and 
proximal dendrites. In many neurons, inputs from 
relatively nearby neurons arrive at more proximal 
regions of the dendrites, closer to the cell body. Inputs 
from more distant brain areas arrive at the distal tips 
of dendrites. Although excitatory synaptic inputs to 
the distal dendrites usually produce only a very small 
depolarizing response at the soma, due to electronic 
decay along the dendritic cable, these inputs can 
significantly enhance spike firing when paired with 
excitatory inputs to more proximal regions of the 
dendrites. Thus, a single strong EPSP at a proximal 
site (or a single brief somatic current pulse) normally 
produces a single action potential at the axon initial 
segment, which can then backpropagate into the den-
drites. However, when a distal stimulus is paired with 
a proximal stimulus, the backpropagating spike sum-
mates with the distal EPSP to trigger a long-lasting type 
of dendritic spike called a plateau potential, which 
depends on activation of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels 
and NMDA receptors. When the plateau potential 
arrives at the cell body, it can trigger a brief burst of 
three or more spikes at rates as high as 100 Hz (Figure 
13–17C). These spike bursts are thought to provide 
a very potent means of inducing long-term synaptic 
plasticity and releasing transmitter as the burst prop-
agates to the presynaptic terminal.
A more localized form of synaptic integration 
occurs in dendritic spines. Even though some excita-
tory inputs occur on dendritic shafts, close to 95% of all 
excitatory inputs in the brain terminate on spines, sur-
prisingly avoiding dendritic shafts (see Figure 13–2). 
Although the function of spines is not completely 
understood, their thin necks provide a barrier to dif-
fusion of various signaling molecules from the spine 
head to the dendritic shaft. As a result, a relatively 
small Ca2+ current through the NMDA receptors can 
lead to a relatively large increase in [Ca2+] that is local-
ized to the head of the individual spine that is synap-
tically activated (Figure 13–18A). Moreover, because 
action potentials can backpropagate from the cell body 
to the dendrites, spines also serve as sites at which 
information about presynaptic and postsynaptic activ-
ity is integrated.
Indeed, when a backpropagating action potential 
is paired with presynaptic stimulation, the spine Ca2+ 
signal is greater than the linear sum of the individual 
Ca2+ signals from synaptic stimulation alone or action 
potential stimulation alone. This “supralinearity” 
is specific to the activated spine and occurs because 
depolarization during the action potential causes 
Mg2+ to be expelled from the NMDA receptor-channel, 
allowing it to conduct Ca2+ into the spine. The resultant 
Ca2+ accumulation thus provides, at an individual syn-
apse, a biochemical detector of the near simultaneity of 
the input (EPSP) and output (backpropagating action 
potential), which is thought to be a key requirement of 
memory storage (Chapter 54).
Because the thin spine neck restricts, at least 
partly, the rise in Ca2+ and, thus, long-term plastic-
ity to the spine that receives the synaptic input, 
spines also ensure that activity-dependent changes 
in synaptic function, and thus memory storage, are 
restricted to the synapses that are activated. The abil-
ity of spines to implement such synapse-specific local 
learning rules may be of fundamental importance 
for the ability of neural networks to store meaning-
ful information (Chapter 54). Finally, in some spines, 
local synaptic potentials are filtered as they propagate 
through the spine neck and enter the dendrite, such 
that the size of the EPSP at the cell body is reduced. 
The regulation of this electrical filtering could pro-
vide another means of controlling the efficacy with 
which a given synaptic conductance is able to excite 
the cell body.


===== Page 7 =====
298    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 13–18  Dendritic spines compartmentalize calcium influx through 
NMDA receptors.
A. This fluorescence image of a hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neuron filled 
with a calcium-sensitive dye shows the outline of a dendritic shaft with sev-
eral spines. When the dye binds Ca2+, its fluorescence intensity increases. 
The traces plot fluorescence intensity over the time following the extracellu-
lar stimulation of the presynaptic axon. Spine 1 shows a large, rapid increase 
in fluorescence (ΔF) in response to synaptic stimulation (red trace), reflect-
ing Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptors. In contrast, there is little change 
in the fluorescence intensity in the neighboring dendrite shaft (gray trace), 
showing that Ca2+ accumulation is restricted to the head of the spine. Spines  
2 and 3 show little increase in fluorescence in response to synaptic stimula-
tion because their presynaptic axons were not activated. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Lang et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 National Academy of 
Sciences.)
B. Calcium accumulation is greatest in spines when synaptic stimulation 
is paired with postsynaptic action potentials. The Ca2+ signal generated 
when an EPSP and a backpropagating action potential are evoked at the 
same time is greater than the expected sum of the individual Ca2+ signals 
when either an EPSP or a backpropagating action potential (AP) alone is 
evoked. (Adapted, with permission, from Yuste and Denk 1995.)
1
2
3
B
EPSP + AP 
(measured)
EPSP + AP 
(calculated)
EPSP alone
AP alone
∆F, 30% 
100 ms
∆F, 20% 
50 ms
Spines 2 and 3
Spine 1
A
Highlights
  1.  A typical central neuron integrates a large num-
ber of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs. 
The amino acid transmitter glutamate is respon-
sible for most excitatory synaptic actions in the 
central nervous system, with the inhibitory 
amino acids GABA and glycine mediating inhibi-
tory synaptic actions.
  2.  Glutamate activates families of ionotropic and 
metabotropic receptors. The three major classes 
of 
ionotropic 
glutamate 
receptors—AMPA, 
NMDA, and kainate—are named for the chemi-
cal agonists that activate them.
  3.  The ionotropic glutamate receptors are tetramers 
composed of subunits encoded by homologous 
genes. Each subunit has a large extracellular 
amino terminus, with three membrane-spanning 
segments and a large cytoplasmic tail. A pore-
forming loop dips into and out of the membrane 
between the first and second transmembrane 
segments.
  4.  Binding of glutamate to all three ionotropic recep-
tors opens a nonselective cation channel equally 
permeable to Na+ and K+. The NMDA receptor-
channel also has a high permeability to Ca2+.
  5.  The NMDA receptor acts as a coincidence detec-
tor. It is normally blocked by extracellular Mg2+ 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     299
lodged in its pore; it only conducts when gluta-
mate is released and the postsynaptic membrane 
is sufficiently depolarized to expel the Mg2+ ion 
by electrostatic repulsion.
  6.  Calcium influx through the NMDA receptor dur-
ing strong synaptic activation can trigger intra-
cellular signaling cascades, leading to long-term 
synaptic plasticity, which can potentiate synap-
tic transmission for a period of hours to days, 
providing a potential mechanism for memory 
storage.
  7.  Inhibitory synaptic actions in the brain are medi-
ated by the binding of GABA to both ionotropic 
(GABAA) and metabotropic (GABAB) receptors. 
The GABAA receptors are pentamers, whose 
subunits are homologous to those of the nicotinic 
ACh receptors. Glycine ionotropic receptors are 
structurally similar to GABAA receptors and are 
largely confined to inhibitory synapses in the spi-
nal cord.
  8.  Binding of GABA or glycine to its receptor acti-
vates a Cl− selective channel. In most cells, the Cl− 
equilibrium potential is slightly negative to the 
resting potential. As a result, inhibitory synaptic 
actions hyperpolarize the cell membrane away 
from threshold for firing an action potential.
  9.  The decision as to whether a neuron fires an 
action potential depends on spatial and temporal 
summation of the various excitatory and inhibi-
tory inputs and is determined by the size of the 
resulting depolarization at the axon initial seg-
ment, the region of the neuron with the lowest 
threshold.
10.  Dendrites also have voltage-gated channels, ena-
bling them to fire local action potentials in some 
circumstances. This can amplify the size of the 
local EPSP to produce a larger depolarization at 
the cell body.
 Rafael Yuste  
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 
Selected Reading
Arundine M, Tymianski M. 2004. Molecular mechanisms of 
glutamate-dependent neurodegeneration in ischemia and 
traumatic brain injury. Cell Mol Life Sci 61:657–668.
Basu J, Siegelbaum SA. 2015. The corticohippocampal circuit, 
synaptic plasticity, and memory. Cold Spring Harb Per-
spect Biol 7:11.
Colquhoun D, Sakmann B. 1998. From muscle endplate to 
brain synapses: a short history of synapses and agonist-
activated ion channels. Neuron 20:381–387.
Granger AJ, Gray JA, Lu W, Nicoll RA. 2011. Genetic analy-
sis of neuronal ionotropic glutamate receptor subunits.  
J Physiol 589:4095–4101.
Herring BE, Nicoll RA. 2016. Long-term potentiation: from 
CaMKII to AMPA receptor trafficking. Annu Rev Physiol 
78:351–365.
Karnani M, Agetsuma M, Yuste R. 2014. A blanket of inhibi-
tion: functional inferences from dense inhibitory connec-
tivity. Curr Opin Neurobiol 26:96–102.
Martenson JS, Tomita S. 2015. Synaptic localization of neuro-
transmitter receptors: comparing mechanisms for AMPA 
and GABAA receptors. Curr Opin Pharmacol 20:102–108.
Mayer ML. 2016. Structural biology of glutamate receptor 
ion channel complexes. Curr Opin Struct Biol 41:119–127.
Olsen RW, Sieghart W. 2009. GABAA receptors: subtypes pro-
vide diversity of function and pharmacology. Neurophar-
macology 56:141–148.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD. 1991. The Fine Structure of the 
Nervous System. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Sheng M, Hoogenraad CC. 2007. The postsynaptic architec-
ture of excitatory synapses: a more quantitative view. Ann 
Rev Biochem 76:823–847.
Stuart GJ, Spruston N. 2015. Dendritic integration: 60 years 
of progress. Nat Neurosci 18:1713–1721.
Valbuena S, Lerma J. 2016. Non-canonical signaling, the hid-
den life of ligand-gated ion channels. Neuron 92:316–329.
References
Araya R, Vogels T, Yuste R. 2014. Activity-dependent den-
dritic spine neck changes are correlated with synaptic 
strength. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:E2895–E2904.
Armstrong N, Sun Y, Chen GQ, Gouaux E. 1998. Structure of 
a glutamate-receptor ligand-binding core in complex with 
kainate. Nature 395:913–917.
Bormann J, Hamill O, Sakmann B. 1987. Mechanism of 
anion permeation through channels gated by glycine and 
γ-aminobutyric acid in mouse cultured spinal neurones.  
J Physiol 385:243–286.
Cash S, Yuste R. 1999. Linear summation of excitatory inputs 
by CA1 pyramidal neurons. Neuron 22:383–394.
Coombs JS, Eccles JC, Fatt P. 1955. The specific ionic conduct-
ances and the ionic movements across the motoneuronal 
membrane that produce the inhibitory post-synaptic 
potential. J Physiol 130:326–373.
Eccles JC. 1964. The Physiology of Synapses. New York: Academic.
Eckert R, Randall D, Augustine G. 1988. Propagation and 
transmission of signals. In: Animal Physiology: Mechanisms 
and Adaptations, 3rd ed., pp. 134–176. New York: Freeman.
Finkel AS, Redman SJ. 1983. The synaptic current evoked in 
cat spinal motoneurones by impulses in single group Ia 
axons. J Physiol 342:615–632.


===== Page 9 =====
300    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Gray EG. 1963. Electron microscopy of presynaptic organelles 
of the spinal cord. J Anat 97:101–106.
Grenningloh G, Rienitz A, Schmitt B, et al. 1987. The 
strychnine-binding subunit of the glycine receptor shows 
homology with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Nature 
328:215–220.
Hamill OP, Bormann J, Sakmann B. 1983. Activation of 
multiple-conductance state chloride channels in spinal 
neurones by glycine and GABA. Nature 305:805–808.
Hestrin S, Nicoll RA, Perkel DJ, Sah P. 1990. Analysis of 
excitatory synaptic action in pyramidal cells using whole-
cell recording from rat hippocampal slices. J Physiol 
422:203–225.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1977. Structure of the synapse. In: ER 
Kandel (ed), Handbook of Physiology: A Critical, Comprehen-
sive Presentation of Physiological Knowledge and Concepts, 
Sect. 1 The Nervous System. Vol. 1, Cellular Biology of Neurons, 
Part 1, pp. 261–294. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological 
Society.
Hollmann M, O’Shea-Greenfield A, Rogers SW, Heinemann 
S. 1989. Cloning by functional expression of a member of 
the glutamate receptor family. Nature 342:643–648.
Jia H, Rochefort NL, Chen X, Konnerth A. 2010. Dendritic 
organization of sensory input to cortical neurons in vivo. 
Nature 464:1307–1312.
Kayser MS, Dalmau J. 2016. Anti-NMDA receptor enceph-
alitis, autoimmunity, and psychosis. Schizophr Res 
176:36–40.
Lang C, Barco A, Zablow L, Kandel ER, Siegelbaum SA, 
Zakharenko SS. 2004. Transient expansion of synapti-
cally connected dendritic spines upon induction of hip-
pocampal long-term potentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
101:16665–16670.
Larkum ME, Zhu JJ, Sakmann B. 1999. A new cellular mecha-
nism for coupling inputs arriving at different cortical lay-
ers. Nature 398:338–341.
Llinas R. 1988. The intrinsic electrophysiological properties 
of mammalian neurons: insights into central nervous sys-
tem function. Science 242:1654–1664.
Llinas R, Sugimori M. 1980. Electrophysiological properties 
of in vitro Purkinje cell dendrites in mammalian cerebel-
lar slices. J Physiol 305:197–213.
Markram H, Lubke J, Frotscher M, Sakmann B. 1997. Reg-
ulation of synaptic efficacy by coincidence of postsynap-
tic APs and EPSPs. Science 275:213–215.
Morgan SL, Teyler TJ. 2001. Electrical stimuli patterned after 
the theta-rhythm induce multiple forms of LTP. J Neuro-
physiol 86:1289–1296.
Palay SL. 1958. The morphology of synapses in the central 
nervous system. Exp Cell Res Suppl 5:275–293.
Pfeffer CK, Xue M, He M, Huang ZJ, Scanziani M. 2013. 
Inhibition of inhibition in visual cortex: the logic of con-
nections between molecularly distinct interneurons. Nat 
Neurosci 16:1068–1076.
Pritchett DB, Sontheimer H, Shivers BD, et al. 1989. Impor-
tance of a novel GABAA receptor subunit for benzodiaz-
epine pharmacology. Nature 338:582–585.
Redman S. 1979. Junctional mechanisms at group Ia syn-
apses. Prog Neurobiol 12:33–83.
Sakmann B. 1992. Elementary steps in synaptic transmission 
revealed by currents through single ion channels. Neuron 
8:613–629.
Schiller J, Schiller Y. 2001. NMDA receptor-mediated den-
dritic spikes and coincident signal amplification. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 11:343–348.
Sheng M, Hoogenraad C. 2007. The postsynaptic architecture 
of excitatory synapses: a more quantitative view. Ann Rev 
Biochem 76:823–847.
Sherrington CS. 1897. The central nervous system. In: M 
Foster (ed). A Text Book of Physiology, 7th ed. London: 
Macmillan.
Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi MP, Gouaux E. 2009. X-ray structure, 
symmetry and mechanism of an AMPA-subtype gluta-
mate receptor. Nature 462:745–756.
Sommer B, Köhler M, Sprengel R, Seeburg PH. 1991. RNA 
editing in brain controls a determinant of ion flow in 
glutamate-gated channels. Cell 67:11–19.
Stuart G, Spruston N, Häuser M (eds). 2016. Dendrites, 3rd 
ed. Oxford, England, and New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Yuste R. 2010. Dendritic Spines. Cambridge, MA and London, 
England: MIT Press.
Yuste R, Denk W. 1995. Dendritic spines as basic functional 
units of neuronal integration. Nature 375:682–684.


