===== Page 1 =====
500    Part IV / Perception
Figure 21–4  A visual scene is analyzed at three levels.  Simple 
attributes of the visual environment are analyzed (low-level  
processing), and these low-level features are then used to 
parse the visual scene (intermediate-level processing): Local 
visual features are assembled into surfaces, objects are segre-
gated from background (surface segmentation), local orientation  
is integrated into global contours (contour integration), and 
surface shape is identified from shading and kinematic cues. 
Finally, surfaces and contours are used to identify the object 
(high-level processing). (M.C. Escher’s “Day and Night”.  
© 2020 The M.C. Escher Company—The Netherlands. All rights 
reserved. www.mcescher.com)
Surface depth
Surface segmentation
Object identiﬁcation
Shape discrimination
Object motion/
Shape from kinematic cues
Contrast
Disparity
Surface properties
Movement direction
Color
Contour integration
Orientation
Low-level 
processing
Intermediate-level 
processing
High-level 
processing


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    501
underlying nerve damage or occlusion (ranging from 
optic nerve degeneration, such as due to multiple scle-
rosis, to tumors, strokes, or physical trauma).
Beyond the optic chiasm, the axons from nasal and 
temporal hemiretinas carrying input from one hemi-
field join in the optic tract, which extends to the lateral 
geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. The LGN in 
primates consists of six primary layers: four parvocel-
lular (Latin Parvus, small) and two magnocellular, each 
paired with a thin but dense intercalated or koniocel-
lular (Greek konio, dust) layer (see Figure 21–14). The 
term “koniocellular” refers to the substantially smaller 
cell bodies in these layers relative to those of magno-
cellular or parvocellular layers. The parallel channels 
established in the retinas remain anatomically segre-
gated through the LGN. Parvocellular layers get input 
from the midget retinal ganglion cells, which are the 
most numerous in the primate retina (~70%) and carry 
red-green opponent information (Chapter 22). Mag-
nocellular layers get achromatic contrast information 
from the parasol ganglion cells (~10%). Koniocellular 
layers get input from the small and large bistratified 
ganglion cells, carrying blue-yellow information, that 
together make up the third most populous set of retinal 
projections to the LGN (~8%). Koniocellular layers also 
get inputs from a number of other numerically much 
smaller classes of retinal ganglion cells.
Each geniculate layer receives input from either 
the ipsilateral or the contralateral eye (see Figure 
21–12) but is aligned so as to come from a matching 
region of the contralateral hemifield. Thus, they form 
a set of concordant maps stacked atop one another. 
The thalamic neurons then relay retinal information to 
the primary visual cortex. But the LGN is not simply a 
relay; the retinal information it receives can be strongly 
modulated by attention and arousal through inhibi-
tory connections to this brain region and by feedback 
from the visual cortex.
The primary visual pathway is also called the 
geniculostriate pathway (Figure 21–6A) because it 
passes through the LGN on its way to the primary visual 
cortex (V1), also known as the striate cortex because 
of the myelin-rich stripe that runs through its middle 
layers. A second pathway extends from the retina to  
the pretectal area of the midbrain, where neurons medi-
ate the pupillary reflexes that control the amount of light 
entering the eyes (Figure 21–6B). A third pathway from 
the retina runs to the superior colliculus and is important 
in controlling eye movements. This pathway continues 
to the pontine formation in the brain stem and then to 
the extraocular motor nuclei (Figure 21–6C).
Each LGN projects to the primary visual cortex 
through a pathway known as the optic radiation. These 
afferent fibers form a complete neural map of the con-
tralateral visual field in the primary visual cortex. Beyond 
the striate cortex lie the extrastriate areas, a set of higher-
order visual areas that are also organized as neural maps 
of the visual field. The preservation of the spatial arrange-
ment of inputs from the retina is called retinotopy, and a 
neural map of the visual field is described as retinotopic 
or having a retinotopic frame of reference.
The primary visual cortex constitutes the first 
level of cortical processing of visual information. From 
there, information is transmitted over two major path-
ways. A ventral pathway into the temporal lobe carries 
information about what the stimulus is, and a dorsal 
Priming image for Figure 21–3


===== Page 3 =====
502    Part IV / Perception
Figure 21–5  Representation of the visual field along the vis-
ual pathway. Each eye sees most of the visual field, with the 
exception of a portion of the peripheral visual field known as 
the monocular crescent. The axons of retinal neurons (ganglion 
cells) carry information from each visual hemifield along the 
optic nerve up to the optic chiasm, where fibers from the nasal 
hemiretina cross to the opposite hemisphere. Fibers from the 
temporal hemiretina stay on the same side, joining the fibers 
from the nasal hemiretina of the contralateral eye to form the 
optic tract. The optic tract carries information from the opposite 
visual hemifield originating in both eyes and projects into the 
lateral geniculate nucleus. Cells in this nucleus send their axons 
along the optic radiation to the primary visual cortex.
     Lesions along the visual pathway produce specific visual 
field deficits, as shown on the right:
1. A lesion of an optic nerve causes a total loss of vision in one 
eye.
2. A lesion of the optic chiasm causes a loss of vision in the 
temporal half of each visual hemifield (bitemporal hemianopsia).
3. A lesion of the optic tract causes a loss of vision in the oppo-
site half of the visual hemifield (contralateral hemianopsia).
4. A lesion of the optic radiation fibers that curve into the tem-
poral lobe (Meyer’s loop) causes loss of vision in the upper 
quadrant of the contralateral visual hemifield in both eyes 
(upper contralateral quadrantic anopsia).
5, 6. Partial lesions of the visual cortex lead to deficits in por-
tions of the contralateral visual hemifield. For example, a lesion 
in the upper bank of the calcarine sulcus (5) causes a partial 
deficit in the inferior quadrant, while a lesion in the lower bank 
(6) causes a partial deficit in the superior quadrant. The central 
area of the visual field tends to be unaffected by cortical lesions 
because of the extent of the representation of the fovea and 
the duplicate representation of the vertical meridian in the 
hemispheres.
Left
2
4
5
6
3
1
Optic nerve
Defects in visual ﬁeld of
Left eye
1
Right eye
Optic chiasm
Optic
tract
Optic
radiation
Lateral
geniculate
body
Right
2
3
4
5
6
5+6
Left visual ﬁeld
Right visual ﬁeld
Binocular zone
Monocular 
crescent
Monocular 
crescent
pathway into the parietal lobe carries information 
about where the stimulus is, information that is critical 
for guiding movement.
A major fiber bundle called the corpus callosum 
connects the two hemispheres, transmitting informa-
tion across the midline. The primary visual cortex in 
each hemisphere represents slightly more than half the 
visual field, with the two hemifield representations 
overlapping at the vertical meridian. One of the func-
tions of the corpus callosum is to unify the perception 
of objects spanning the vertical meridian by linking the 
cortical areas that represent opposite hemifields.
Form, Color, Motion, and Depth Are Processed 
in Discrete Areas of the Cerebral Cortex
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the cerebral 
cortex was differentiated into discrete regions by the 
anatomist Korbinian Brodmann and others using 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    503
Dorsal
pathway
A  Visual processing
Parietal
cortex
Inferotemporal 
cortex
Lateral 
geniculate
nucleus
Pulvinar
Thalamic nuclei:
SC
Ventral
pathway
Primary 
visual 
cortex
Pretectum
B  Pupillary reﬂex and accommodation
Accommodation
Pupillary 
reﬂex
Ciliary 
ganglion
 C  Eye movement (horizontal)
PPRF
Caudate 
nucleus
Posterior 
parietal 
cortex 
Primary 
visual 
cortex
Substantia 
nigra
LGN
FEF
Abducens
nerve
SC
Abducens 
nucleus 
Accessory 
oculomotor 
nucleus
Figure 21–6  Pathways for visual processing, pupillary reflex 
and accommodation, and control of eye position.
A. Visual processing. The eye sends information first to tha-
lamic nuclei, including the lateral geniculate nucleus and pulvi-
nar, and from there to cortical areas. Cortical projections go 
forward from the primary visual cortex to areas in the parietal 
lobe (the dorsal pathway, which is concerned with visually 
guided movement) and areas in the temporal lobe (the ventral 
pathway, which is concerned with object recognition). The pulvi-
nar also serves as a relay between cortical areas to supplement 
their direct connections. (Abbreviation: SC, superior colliculus).
B. Pupillary reflex and accommodation. Light signals are relayed 
through the midbrain pretectum, to preganglionic parasympa-
thetic neurons in the accessory oculomotor (Edinger-Westphal) 
nucleus, and out through the parasympathetic outflow of the 
oculomotor nerve to the ciliary ganglion. Postganglionic neu-
rons innervate the smooth muscle of the pupillary sphincter, as 
well as the muscles controlling the lens.
C. Eye movement. Information from the retina is sent to the 
superior colliculus (SC) directly along the optic nerve and indi-
rectly through the geniculostriate pathway to cortical areas 
(primary visual cortex, posterior parietal cortex, and frontal eye 
fields) that project back to the superior colliculus. The colliculus 
projects to the pons (PPRF), which then sends control signals 
to oculomotor nuclei, including the abducens nucleus, which 
controls lateral movement of the eyes. (Abbreviations: FEF, 
frontal eye field; LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; PPRF, para-
median pontine reticular formation.)
anatomical criteria. The criteria included the size, 
shape, and packing density of neurons in the cortical 
layers and the thickness and density of myelin. The 
functionally distinct cortical areas we have considered 
heretofore correspond only loosely to Brodmann’s 
classification. The primary visual cortex (V1) is identi-
cal to Brodmann’s area 17. In the extrastriate cortex, 
the secondary visual area (V2) corresponds to area 18. 
Beyond that, however, area 19 contains several func-
tionally distinct areas that generally cannot be defined 
by anatomical criteria.
The number of functionally discrete areas of 
visual cortex varies between species. Macaque 
monkeys have more than 30 areas. Although not 
all visual areas in humans have yet been identified, 
the number is likely to be at least as great as in the 
macaque. If one includes oculomotor areas and pre-
frontal areas contributing to visual memory, almost 
half of the cerebral cortex is involved with vision. 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has 
made it possible to establish homologies between 
the visual areas of the macaque and human brains 
(Figure 21–7). Based on pathway tracing studies in 
monkeys, we now appreciate that these areas are 
organized in functional streams (Figure 21–7B).
The visual areas of cortex can be differentiated by 
the functional properties of their neurons. Studies of 


===== Page 5 =====
504    Part IV / Perception
A  Cortical visual areas in humans
Inﬂated
Occipital lobe (ﬂattened)
V1
V2
V3
V3A
V3B
hV4
V5/MT
V6
IPSO
IPS1
IPS2
VO1
LO1
LO2
pLOC
FFA
EBA
PPA
Normal
Medial view
Caudal view
Lateral view
Ventral view
B  Visual pathways in the macaque monkey  
Feedforward 
Feedback 
PMd
PMv
PF
FEF
AIP
MT/
MST
MD
PL
LGN
TEO
IT
SC
VIP
V1
V3
V2
V4
Dorsal
pathway
Ventral
pathway
MIP
LIP


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    505
Figure 21–7  Visual pathways in the cerebral cortex.
A. Functional magnetic resonance imaging shows areas of 
the human cerebral cortex involved in visual processing. The 
top row shows areas on the gyri and sulci of a normal view 
of a brain; the middle row shows “inflated” views of the 
brain following a computational process that simulates inflat-
ing the brain like a balloon so as to stretch out the “wrinkles” 
of gyri and sulci into a smooth surface while minimizing local 
distortions. Light and dark gray regions identify gyri and sulci, 
respectively; the bottom row shows a two-dimensional repre-
sentation of the occipital lobe (left) and a representation with 
less distortion by making a cut along the calcarine fissure. 
Different approaches are required for demarcating different 
functional areas. Retinotopic areas, by definition, contain con-
tinuous maps of visual space and are identified using stimuli 
such as rotating spirals or expanding circles that sweep through 
visual space. Maps in adjacent cortical areas run in opposite 
directions on the cortical surface and meet along boundaries 
of local mirror reversals. These mirror reversals can be used 
to identify area boundaries and thus demarcate each area. 
These retinotopic areas, including early visual areas V1, V2, 
and V3, and areas V3A, V3B, V6, hV4, VO1, LO1, LO2, and V5/
MT, share boundaries in pairs; these boundaries converge (at 
the representation of the fovea) at the occipital pole. A differ-
ent approach, identifying loci of attention, is used to map areas 
IPS1 and IPS2. Yet further sets of approaches or responsive-
ness to specific attributes or classes of objects (such as faces) 
are used for less strictly retinotopic areas. Functional specificity 
has been demonstrated for a number of visual areas: VO1 is 
implicated in color processing, the lateral occipital complex 
(LO2, pLOC) codes object shape, fusiform face area (FFA) 
codes faces, the parahippocampal place area (PPA) responds 
more strongly to places than to objects, the extrastriate body 
area (EBA) responds more strongly to body parts than objects, 
and V5/MT is involved in motion processing. Areas in the intra-
parietal sulcus (IPS1 and IPS2) are involved in control of spatial 
attention and saccadic eye movements. (Images courtesy of V. 
Piech, reproduced with permission.)
B. In the macaque monkey, V1 is located on the surface of 
the occipital lobe and sends axons in two pathways. A dorsal 
pathway courses through a number of areas in the parietal 
lobe and into the frontal lobe and mediates attentional control 
and visually guided movements. A ventral pathway projects 
through V4 into areas of the inferior temporal cortex and medi-
ates object recognition. In addition to feedforward pathways 
extending from primary visual cortex into the temporal, pari-
etal, and frontal lobes (blue arrows), reciprocal or feedback 
pathways run in the opposite direction (red arrows). Feed-
forward and feedback can operate directly, between cortical 
areas, or indirectly, via the thalamus, in particular the pulvinar, 
which acts as a relay between cortical areas. The subcortical 
pathways involved include thalamic nuclei—the lateral genicu-
late nucleus (LGN), pulvinar nucleus (PL), and mediodorsal 
nucleus (MD)—and the superior colliculus (SC). (Abbreviations: 
AIP, anterior intraparietal area; FEF, frontal eye field; IT, infe-
rior temporal cortex; LIP, lateral intraparietal area; MIP, medial 
intraparietal area; MT, middle temporal area; PF, prefrontal 
cortex; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor 
cortex; TEO, posterior division of area IT; V1, primary visual 
cortex, Brodmann’s area 17; V2, secondary visual area,  
Brodmann’s area 18; V3, V4, third and fourth visual areas; VIP, 
ventral intraparietal area.)
such functional properties have revealed that the vis-
ual areas are organized in two hierarchical pathways, 
a ventral pathway involved in object recognition and 
a dorsal pathway dedicated to the use of visual infor-
mation for guiding movements. The ventral or object-
recognition pathway extends from the primary visual 
cortex to the temporal lobe; it is described in detail in 
Chapter 24. The dorsal or movement-guidance path-
way connects the primary visual cortex with the pari-
etal lobe and then with the frontal lobes.
The pathways are interconnected so that informa-
tion is shared. For example, movement information 
in the dorsal pathway can contribute to object rec-
ognition through kinematic cues. Information about 
movements in space derived from areas in the dorsal 
pathway is therefore important for the perception of 
object shape and is fed into the ventral pathway.
All connections between cortical areas are  
reciprocal—each area sends information back to the 
areas from which it receives input. These feedback 
connections provide information about cognitive func-
tions, including spatial attention, stimulus expecta-
tion, and emotional content, to earlier levels of visual 
processing. The pulvinar in the thalamus serves as a 
relay between cortical areas (see Figure 21–7B).
The dorsal pathway courses through the parietal 
cortex, a region that uses visual information to direct the 
movement of the eyes and limbs, that is, for visuomotor 
integration. The lateral intraparietal area, named for its 
location in the intraparietal sulcus, is involved in repre-
senting points in space that are the targets of eye move-
ments or reaching. Patients with lesions of parietal areas 
fail to attend to objects on one side of the body, a syndrome 
called unilateral neglect (see Figure 59–1 in Chapter 59).
The ventral pathway extends into the temporal 
lobe. The inferior temporal cortex stores information 
about the shapes and identities of objects; one portion 
represents faces, for damage to that region results in 
the inability to recognize faces (prosopagnosia).
The dorsal and ventral pathways each comprise a 
hierarchical series of areas that can be delineated by 
several criteria. First, at many relays, the array of inputs 
forms a map of the visual hemifield. The boundaries of 
these maps can be used to demarcate the boundaries of 
visual areas. This is particularly useful at early levels 
of the pathway where the receptive fields of neurons 


===== Page 7 =====
506    Part IV / Perception
are small and visuotopic maps are precisely organ-
ized (see the next section for the definition of receptive 
field). At higher levels, however, the receptive fields 
become larger, the maps less precise, and visuotopic 
organization is therefore a less reliable basis to deline-
ate the boundaries of an area.
Another means to differentiate one area from 
another, as shown by experiments in monkeys, 
depends upon the distinctive functional properties 
exhibited by the neurons in each area. The clearest 
example of this is an area in the dorsal pathway, the 
middle temporal area (MT or V5), which contains neu-
rons with a strong selectivity for the direction of move-
ment across their receptive fields. Consistent with the 
idea that the middle temporal area is involved in the 
analysis of motion, lesions of this area produce deficits 
in the ability to track moving objects.
A classical view of the organization of visual corti-
cal areas is a hierarchical one, where the areas at the 
bottom of the hierarchy, such as V1 and V2, represent 
the visual primitives of orientation, direction of move-
ment, depth, and color. In this view, the top of the 
ventral pathway’s hierarchy would represent whole 
objects, with the areas in between representing inter-
mediate level vision. This idea of “complexification” 
along the hierarchy suggests a mapping between the 
levels of visual perception and stages in the sequence 
of cortical areas. But more recent findings indicate a 
more complex story, where even the primary visual 
cortex plays a role in intermediate-level vision, and 
neurons in the higher areas may process informa-
tion on components of objects. Moreover, as shown in 
Figure 21–7, one also has to take into account the fact 
that there is a powerful reverse flow of information, 
or feedback, from the “higher” to the “lower” cortical 
areas. As will be described in Chapter 23, this reverse 
direction of information contains higher order “top-
down” cognitive influences including attention, object 
expectation, perceptual task, perceptual learning, and 
efference copy. Top-down influences may play a role in 
scene segmentation, object relationships, and percep-
tion of object details, as well as object recognition itself.
The Receptive Fields of Neurons at Successive 
Relays in the Visual Pathway Provide Clues to 
How the Brain Analyzes Visual Form
In 1906, Charles Sherrington coined the term receptive 
field in his analysis of the scratch withdrawal reflex: 
“The whole collection of points of skin surface from 
which the scratch-reflex can be elicited is termed the 
receptive field of that reflex.” When it became possible 
to record from single neurons in the eye, H. Keffer 
Hartline applied the concept of the receptive field in 
his study of the retina of the horseshoe crab, Limulus: 
“The region of the retina which must be illuminated 
in order to obtain a response in any given fiber . . . is 
termed the receptive field of that fiber.” In the visual 
system, a neuron’s receptive field represents a small 
window on the visual field (Figure 21–8).
But responses to only one spot of light yielded a 
limited understanding of a cell’s receptive field. Using 
two small spots of light, both Hartline and Stephen 
Kuffler, who studied the mammalian retina, found an 
inhibitory surround or lateral inhibitory region in the 
receptive field. In 1953, Kuffler observed that “not only 
the areas from which responses can actually be set up 
by retinal illumination may be included in a definition 
of the receptive field but also all areas which show a 
functional connection, by an inhibitory or excitatory 
effect on a ganglion cell.” Kuffler thus demonstrated 
that the receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells have 
functionally distinct subareas. These receptive fields 
have a center-surround organization and fall into one 
of two categories: on-center and off-center. Later work 
demonstrated that neurons in the LGN have similar 
receptive fields.
The on-center cells fire when a spot of light is turned 
on within a circular central region. Off-center cells fire 
when a spot of light in the center of their receptive field 
is turned off. The surrounding annular region has the 
opposite sign. For on-center cells, a light stimulus any-
where in the annulus surrounding the center produces 
a response when the light is turned off, a response 
termed on-center, off-surround. The center and surround 
areas are mutually inhibitory (Figure 21–9). When both 
center and surround are illuminated with diffuse light, 
there is little or no response. Conversely, a light–dark 
boundary across the receptive field produces a brisk 
response. Because these neurons are most sensitive to 
borders and contours—to differences in illumination 
as opposed to uniform surfaces—they encode informa-
tion about contrast in the visual field.
The size on the retina of a receptive field varies 
both according to the field’s eccentricity—its posi-
tion relative to the fovea, the central part of the retina 
where visual acuity is highest—and the position of 
neurons along the visual pathway. Receptive fields 
with the same eccentricity are relatively small at early 
levels in visual processing and become progressively 
larger at later levels. The size of the receptive field 
is expressed in terms of degrees of visual angle; the 
entire visual field covers nearly 180° (Figure 21–10A). 
In early relays of visual processing, the receptive 
fields near the fovea are the smallest. The receptive 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    507
Retinal
ganglion cell 
Photoreceptors contributing to 
ganglion cell receptive ﬁeld 
Center-surround structure of  
ganglion cell receptive ﬁeld 
Horizontal, bipolar 
and amacrine cells 
On area
(center)
Off area
(surround)
Receptive ﬁeld 
near the fovea
Receptive ﬁeld
in the periphery 
A  Receptive ﬁelds on the retina
B  Receptive ﬁeld of a retinal ganglion cell
Light
Figure 21–8  Receptive fields of retinal ganglion cells in rela-
tion to photoreceptors.
A. The number of photoreceptors contributing to the receptive 
field of a retinal ganglion cell varies depending on the loca-
tion of the receptive field on the retina. A cell near the fovea 
receives input from fewer receptors covering a smaller area, 
whereas a cell farther from the fovea receives input from many 
more receptors covering a larger area (see Figure 21–10).
B. Light passes through nerve cell layers to reach the photore-
ceptors at the back of the retina. Signals from the photorecep-
tors are then transmitted by neurons in the outer and inner 
nuclear layers to a retinal ganglion cell.
fields for retinal ganglion cells that monitor portions 
of the fovea subtend approximately 0.1°, whereas 
those in the visual periphery can be a couple of orders 
of magnitude larger.
The amount of cortex dedicated to a degree of 
visual space changes with eccentricity. More area of 
cortex is dedicated to the central part of the visual 
field, where the receptive fields are smallest and 
the visual system has the greatest spatial resolution 
(Figure 21–10C).
Receptive-field properties change from relay to 
relay along a visual pathway. By determining these 
properties, one can assay the function of each relay 
nucleus and how visual information is progressively 
analyzed by the brain. For example, the change in 
receptive-field structure that occurs between the LGN 
and cerebral cortex reveals an important mechanism 
in the brain’s analysis of visual form. The key prop-
erty of the form pathway is selectivity for the orienta-
tion of contours in the visual field. This is an emergent 
property of signal processing in primary visual cortex; 
it is not a property of the cortical input but is generated 
within the cortex itself.
Whereas retinal ganglion cells and neurons in 
the LGN have concentric center-surround receptive 
fields, those in the cortex, although equally sensitive 
to contrast, also analyze contours. David Hubel and 
Torsten Wiesel discovered this characteristic in 1958 


===== Page 9 =====
508    Part IV / Perception
Stimulus
Response
On area
(center)
Off area
(surround)
Lateral geniculate
nucleus neuron
Retinal 
ganglion 
cell
Figure 21–9  Receptive fields of neurons at early relays of  
visual pathways. A circular symmetric receptive field with 
mutually antagonistic center and surround is characteristic of reti-
nal ganglion cells and neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus 
of the thalamus. The center can respond to the turning on or 
turning off of a spot of light (yellow) depending on whether the 
receptived field belongs to an “on-center” or “off-center” class, 
respectively. The surround has the opposite response. Outside 
the surround, there is no response to light, thus defining the 
receptive field boundary. The response is weak when light covers 
both the center and surround, so these neurons respond  
optimally to contrast (a light–dark boundary) in the visual field.
while studying what visual stimuli provoked activ-
ity in neurons in the primary visual cortex. While 
showing an anesthetized animal slides containing 
a variety of images, they recorded extracellularly 
from individual neurons in the visual cortex. As 
they switched from one slide to another, they found 
a neuron that produced a brisk train of action poten-
tials. The cell was responding not to the image on 
the slide but to the edge of the slide as it was moved 
into position.
The Visual Cortex Is Organized Into Columns 
of Specialized Neurons
The dominant feature of the functional organization of 
the primary visual cortex is the visuotopic organiza-
tion of its cells: the visual field is systematically repre-
sented across the surface of the cortex (Figure 21–11A).
In addition, cells in the primary visual cortex with 
similar functional properties are located close together 
in columns that extend from the surface of the cortex to 
the white matter. The columns are concerned with the 
functional properties that are analyzed in any given 
cortical area and thus reflect the functional role of that 
area in vision. The properties that are developed in the 
primary visual cortex include orientation specificity 
and the integration of inputs from the two eyes, which 
is measured as the relative strength of input from each 
eye, or ocular dominance.
Ocular-dominance columns reflect the segrega-
tion of thalamocortical inputs arriving from different 
layers of the LGN. Alternating layers of this nucleus 
receive input from retinal ganglion cells located in 
either the ipsilateral or contralateral retina (Figure 
21–12). This segregation is maintained in the inputs 
from the LGN to the primary visual cortex, produc-
ing the alternating left-eye and right-eye ocular domi-
nance bands (Figure 21–11B).
Cells with similar orientation preferences are also 
grouped into columns. Across the cortical surface, there 
is a regular clockwise and counterclockwise cycling of 
orientation preference, with the full 180° cycle repeat-
ing every 750 μm (Figure 21–11C). Likewise, the left- 
and right-eye dominance columns alternate with a 
periodicity of 750 to 1,000 μm. One full cycle of orienta-
tion columns, or a full pair of left- and right-eye domi-
nance columns, is called a hypercolumn. The orientation 
and ocular dominance columns at each point on the 
cortical surface are locally roughly orthogonal to each 
other. Thus, a cortical patch one hypercolumn in extent 
contains all possible combinations of orientation pref-
erence and left- and right-eye dominance.


