===== Page 1 =====
1076    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 43–6  Dopamine- and glutamate-activated intracel-
lular signaling pathways implicated in drug addiction.  
NMDA-type glutamate receptors permit Ca2+ entry, which 
binds calmodulin. The Ca2+/calmodulin complex activates two 
types of Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases, CaMKII 
in the cytoplasm and CaMKIV in the cell nucleus. Certain 
dopamine receptors activate a stimulatory G protein that in 
turn activates adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP). The cAMP-dependent protein kinase 
A (PKA) catalytic subunit can enter the nucleus. Once acti-
vated in the nucleus, both PKA and CaMKIV phosphorylate 
and thus activate cAMP response element binding protein 
(CREB). CREB recruits CREB-binding protein (CBP) and many 
other chromatin regulatory proteins and thereby activates the 
RNA polymerase II–dependent transcription of many genes, 
giving rise to proteins that can alter cellular function. Arc and 
Homer are localized in synaptic regions; mitogen-activated 
protein (MAP) kinases are protein kinases that control numer-
ous cellular processes; Fos and ∆FosB are transcription fac-
tors; and dynorphin is a type of endogenous opioid peptide. 
These proteins are thought to contribute both to homeostatic 
responses to excessive dopamine stimulation and to the mor-
phological and functional changes in synapses associated with 
memory formation. (Abbreviations: ATP, adenosine triphos-
phate; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; POL 2, RNA polymerase 
2; TBP, TATA binding protein.)
P
P
POL2
TBP
CBP
cAMP
ATP
CREB-1
CRE
Ca2+
Ca2+/
calmodulin
Enhancement
of active synaptic
connections 
Multiple
substrates
Homeostatic
adaptations
Adenylyl
cyclase 
TATA
G
PKA
CaMKIV
D1 dopamine
receptor
Nucleus
Glutamate
Dopamine
Dynorphin, Arc, Homer,
MAP kinases, c-Fos,
∆FosB, + many others
CaMKII
NMDA-glutamate
receptor
CaMKIV


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1077
immature, thin dendritic spines, whereas during later 
withdrawal, LTP-like responses occur coincidently 
with increased numbers of mature, mushroom-shaped 
spines. These findings suggest that repeated drug use 
weakens certain glutamatergic synapses with nucleus 
accumbens neurons via the induction of so-called silent 
synapses (Chapter 54), with a subset of these synapses 
strengthening during prolonged withdrawal.
These advances now define several ongoing lines 
of investigation. We need to understand which par-
ticular glutamatergic connections are affected and 
how those changes contribute to behavioral features 
of addiction. We need to define the molecular basis of 
this time-dependent synaptic plasticity, which is medi-
ated in part through transcriptional mechanisms and 
altered expression levels of a host of proteins, includ-
ing glutamate receptors, postsynaptic density proteins, 
proteins that regulate the actin cytoskeleton, and so on 
(Figure 43–6). In addition, we need to examine drug-
induced glutamatergic synaptic plasticity at the sev-
eral other reward-related brain regions that become 
corrupted in an addicted state, beyond the ventral 
tegmental area and nucleus accumbens. Finally, we 
need to understand how repeated exposure to drugs 
of abuse also corrupts inhibitory GABAergic synaptic 
transmission throughout this circuitry.
Whole-Cell Plasticity
As with synaptic plasticity, most examples of drug-
induced whole-cell plasticity involve the ventral teg-
mental area and nucleus accumbens. For example, 
repeated cocaine exposure increases the intrinsic excit-
ability of nucleus accumbens neurons, which contrib-
utes to reward tolerance. This adaptation is due in 
part to a decrease in expression of specific types of K+ 
channels mediated by CREB, thus linking molecular-
transcriptional adaptations to altered neural activ-
ity and an addiction-related behavioral abnormality. 
Repeated opiate exposure also increases the intrinsic 
excitability of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral 
tegmental area, but in a manner that impedes dopamin-
ergic transmission to the nucleus accumbens. As with 
repeated cocaine exposure, this adaptation too is medi-
ated by suppression of certain K+ channels and contrib-
utes to reward tolerance.
Circuit Plasticity
Advanced tools are making it possible for the first time 
to track the activity of specific nerve cell types in the 
brain in awake, active animals and to experimentally 
manipulate the activity of those cells and study the 
behavioral consequences (Chapter 5). This is enabling 
scientists to define the precise ensembles of neurons 
within a given brain region that are affected by drug 
exposure over the life cycle of addiction—from initial 
drug exposure to compulsive drug consumption to 
withdrawal and relapse—and to provide causal evi-
dence for the involvement of those neurons and the 
microcircuits within which they function. This work 
is beginning to define the distinct roles that various 
glutamatergic projections to the nucleus accumbens—
from the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala, 
and thalamus—play in controlling different cell types 
in the nucleus accumbens and the broader reward 
circuitry and in producing distinct addiction-related 
behavioral abnormalities.
While we have focused exclusively in this chapter 
on the effects of acute and chronic actions of drugs 
of abuse on the neural control of behavior, we real-
ize that this is an oversimplification. As discussed in 
Chapter 7, neuronal function is intricately controlled 
by a host of nonneural cells in the brain, including 
astroglia, microglia, oligodendrocytes, and endothelial 
cells. There is growing evidence that each of these cell 
types is affected both directly and indirectly by drugs 
of abuse and that these nonneuronal actions also affect 
the long-term behavioral consequences of drug expo-
sure. Integrating such actions with the neuronal effects 
of drugs of abuse will be required to achieve a compre-
hensive understanding of addiction.
Natural Addictions Share Biological Mechanisms 
With Drug Addictions
As previously indicated, the brain’s reward circuitry 
evolved to motivate individuals to pursue natural 
rewards such as food, sex, and social interactions. 
Just as drug-addicted individuals display compulsive 
consumption of drugs of abuse, some people exhibit 
compulsive consumption of nondrug rewards (eg, 
compulsive overeating, shopping, gambling, video 
gaming, and sex), with behavioral consequences very 
similar to those observed in drug addiction. An inter-
esting question for the field is whether these so-called 
“natural addictions” are mediated by some of the same 
molecular, cellular, and circuit adaptations that under-
lie drug addiction.
It is possible that these normal pleasurable behav-
iors excessively activate reward mechanisms in certain 
individuals who are particularly susceptible due to 
genetic or nongenetic factors. As with drugs, such acti-
vation may result in profound alterations in motiva-
tion that promote the repetition of initially rewarding 
behavior, despite the impact of negative consequences 


===== Page 3 =====
1078    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
associated with the resulting compulsive behavior. It 
is far more difficult to study the neurobiological basis 
of natural addictions because of limitations in animal 
models (imagine a mouse model of compulsive shop-
ping!), although progress is being made in developing 
such paradigms. In any event, brain imaging studies 
in humans support the notion that addictions to both 
drugs and behavioral rewards are associated with 
similar dysregulation of the brain’s reward circuitry 
(Figure 43–3).
Highlights
  1.  Motivational states drive behaviors that either 
seek rewards or defend against or avoid aver-
sive stimuli. Motivational states themselves are 
determined by a variety of internal and external 
variables. Internal variables include both physi-
ological states and cognitive states. External 
variables include stimuli that possess innately 
rewarding or aversive properties, although the 
motivational significance of these properties may 
be modified by internal variables.
  2.  Rewards are desirable objects, stimuli, or actions. 
Rewards tend to elicit motivational states that 
drive approach behaviors. Rewards can meet 
regulatory needs on a short timescale, but can 
also result from complex sequences of behavior 
that achieve a long-term goal.
  3.  Key components of reward-related circuitry in 
the brain include dopaminergic neurons and 
brain areas targeted by dopaminergic neurons, 
such as the nucleus accumbens, ventral palli-
dum, amygdala, hippocampus, and parts of the 
prefrontal cortex. However, dopamine itself does 
not account for hedonic experiences.
  4.  Many dopaminergic neurons exhibit physiologi-
cal response properties that suggest they commu-
nicate a prediction-error signal, with enhanced 
activity occurring when something better than 
expected occurs. This type of signal could play 
a critical role in different forms of reinforcement 
learning, learning that links stimuli or actions to 
rewards. However, recent studies have revealed 
more response heterogeneity in dopaminergic 
neurons than previously appreciated, including 
responses to aversive stimuli. This heterogeneity 
and its complex effects on neural circuit function 
remain active areas of investigation.
  5.  Drug addiction can be defined as the compul-
sive seeking and taking of a drug despite nega-
tive consequences to one’s physical health or 
occupational and social functioning. The risk 
for addiction is roughly 50% genetic, with many 
hundreds of genes, each of which contributes 
a very small effect to this heritability. Impor-
tant nongenetic risk factors include a history of 
adverse life events.
  6.  Drugs of abuse compose only a very small frac-
tion of known chemical compounds. These drugs 
are chemically diverse, with each type acting ini-
tially on a distinct protein target. Nevertheless, 
the drugs can induce a common behavioral syn-
drome because their actions at these targets con-
verge in producing similar functional effects on 
midbrain dopaminergic neurons or their projec-
tion regions such as the nucleus accumbens.
  7.  Addiction requires repeated exposure to a drug of 
abuse. Such repeated exposure is often accompa-
nied by tolerance, sensitization, and dependence/
withdrawal. While many nonabused drugs can 
produce tolerance and dependence/withdrawal, 
drugs of abuse are unique in their ability to pro-
duce these adaptations as well as sensitization in 
motivational and reward states.
  8.  The adaptations underlying drug addiction are 
mediated in part through lasting changes in gene 
expression, which result in altered intrinsic activ-
ity of neurons as well as structural and functional 
alterations in their synaptic contacts within the 
brain’s reward circuitry.
  9.  An important goal of current research is to under-
stand how a myriad of molecular changes sum-
mate to underlie specific changes in neural and 
synaptic function. Likewise, it will be important 
to understand how these neural and synaptic 
changes combine to alter the functioning of the 
brain’s larger reward-related circuitry, so as to 
mediate specific behavioral abnormalities that 
define an addicted state.
10.  This delineation of molecular, cellular, and circuit 
mechanisms of addiction will require increased 
attention to the specific cell types (neuronal and 
nonneuronal) in which certain drug-induced adap-
tations occur and to the specific microcircuits within 
the reward pathways affected by those adaptations.
11.  A subset of individuals show addiction-like 
behavioral abnormalities to nondrug rewards, 
such as food, gambling, and sex. Evidence sug-
gests that such so-called natural addictions are 
mediated by the same brain circuitry involved 
in drug addiction, with some common molecular 
and cellular abnormalities implicated as well.
12.  These considerations highlight the need to learn 
more about the precise molecular, cellular, and 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 43 / Motivation, Reward, and Addictive States    1079
circuit bases of drug addiction. Nonetheless, our 
evolving understanding of the brain’s reward 
circuitry and how individual synapses and cells 
in that circuitry are altered by drug exposure in 
a way that corrupts circuit function and usurps 
normal systems of reward and associative mem-
ory provides a compelling notion of what hap-
pens in the addicted brain.
 Eric J. Nestler  
 C. Daniel Salzman 
Selected Reading
Berridge KC, Robinson TE. 2016. Liking, wanting, incentive-
sensitization theory of addiction. Am Psychologist 71: 
670–679.
Di Chiara G. 1998. A motivational learning hypothesis of the 
role of mesolimbic dopamine in compulsive drug use.  
J Psychopharmacol 12:54–67.
Hyman SE, Malenka RC, Nestler EJ. 2006. Neural mecha-
nisms of addiction: the role of reward-related learning 
and memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 29:565–598.
Olds J, Milner PM. 1954. Positive reinforcement produced by 
electrical stimulation of septal area and other regions of 
rat brain. J Comp Physiol Psych 47:419–427.
Schultz W. 2015. Neuronal reward and decision signals: from 
theories to data. Physiol Rev 95:853–951.
Wise RA, Koob GF. 2014. The development and mainte-
nance of drug addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology 
39:254–262.
References
Bevilacqua L, Goldman D. 2013. Genetics of impulsive 
behavior. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368:20120380.
Calipari ES, Bagot RC, Purushothaman I, et al. 2016. In vivo 
imaging identifies temporal signature of D1 and D2 
medium spiny neurons in cocaine reward. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 113:2726–2731.
Carlezon WA Jr, Chartoff EH. 2007. Intracranial self-stimulation 
(ICSS) in rodents to study the neurobiology of motivation. 
Nat Protoc 2:2987–2995.
Dong Y. 2016. Silent synapse-based circuitry remodeling in 
drug addiction. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 19:pyv136.
Everitt BJ, Belin D, Economidou D, Pelloux Y, Dalley JW,  
Robbins TW. 2008. Review. Neural mechanisms underlying 
the vulnerability to develop compulsive drug-seeking 
habits and addiction. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
363:3125–3135.
Gipson CD, Kupchik YM, Kalivas PW. 2014. Rapid, transient 
synaptic plasticity in addiction. Neuropharmacology 
76 Pt B:276–286.
Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. 2011. Dysfunction of the prefron-
tal cortex in addiction: neuroimaging findings and clinical 
implications. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:652–669.
Grant S, London ED, Newlin DB, et al. 1996. Activation of 
memory circuits during cue-elicited cocaine cravings. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:12040–12045.
Loweth JA, Tseng KY, Wolf ME. 2014. Adaptations in AMPA 
receptor transmission in the nucleus accumbens contrib-
uting to incubation of cocaine craving. Neuropharmacology 
76 Pt B:287–300.
Lüscher C, Malenka RC. 2011. Drug-evoked synaptic plastic-
ity in addiction: from molecular changes to circuit remod-
eling. Neuron 69:650–663.
Matsumoto M, Hikosaka O. 2009. Two types of dopamine 
neuron distinctly convey positive and negative motiva-
tional signals. Nature 459:837–841.
Nestler EJ, Kenny PJ, Russo SJ, Schaefer A. 2020. Molecular 
Neuropharmacology: A Foundation for Clinical Neuroscience, 
4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Pessiglione M, Seymour B, Flandin G, Dolan RJ, Frith CD. 
2006. Dopamine-dependent prediction errors under-
pin reward-seeking behavior in humans. Nature 442: 
1042–1045.
Polter AM, Kauer JA. 2014. Stress and VTA synapses: impli-
cations for addiction and depression. Eur J Neurosci 
39:1179–1188.
Robbins TW, Clark L. 2015. Behavioral addictions. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 30:66–72.
Robinson TE, Kolb B. 2004. Structural plasticity associated 
with exposure to drugs of abuse. Neuropharmacology 
47(Suppl 1):33–46.
Robison AJ, Nestler EJ. 2011. Transcriptional and epigenetic 
mechanisms of addiction. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:623–637.
Russo SJ, Nestler EJ. 2013. The brain reward circuitry in 
mood disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 14:609–625.
Schmidt HD, McGinty JF, West AE, Sadri-Vakili G. 2013. 
Epigenetics and psychostimulant addiction. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Med 3:a012047.
Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. 1997. A neural substrate 
of prediction and reward. Science 275:1593–1599.
Scofield MD, Kalivas PW. 2014. Astrocytic dysfunction and 
addiction: consequences of impaired glutamate homeo-
stasis. Neuroscientist 20:610–622.
Stuber GD, Britt JP, Bonci A. 2012. Optogenetic modulation of 
neural circuits that underlie reward seeking. Biol Psychiatry 
71:1061–1067.
Volkow ND, Morales M. 2015. The brain on drugs: from 
reward to addiction. Cell 162:712–725.


===== Page 5 =====
44
Sleep and Wakefulness
Sleep Has Many Functions
Highlights
S
leep is a remarkable state. It consumes fully a 
third of our lives—approximately 25 years in the 
average lifetime—yet we know little about what 
happens in the brain during this daily excursion. Per-
haps even more surprising, the exact functions of sleep 
and of dreaming, one of the more noteworthy compo-
nents of sleep, are still unknown.
Although the psychological content of dreams 
has been a rich subject of speculation from Plato and 
Aristotle to Sigmund Freud, we still do not understand 
whether dreams carry deep personal meaning, as 
Freud hypothesized, or represent the brain “throwing 
out its trash,” the bits and pieces of daily experience 
that are not worth retaining, as Francis Crick specu-
lated. One function of sleep may be to allow synap-
tic remodeling and consolidation of memory traces 
reflecting the day’s experiences, but the role of dream-
ing in this process remains a subject of intense debate.
When studying sleep and wakefulness, research-
ers typically use a polysomnogram, which consists of 
three physiological measures: brain activity measured 
by an electroencephalogram (EEG) (see Figure 58–1), 
eye movements recorded by an electro-oculogram 
(EOG), and muscle tone measured by an electromyo-
gram (EMG) (Figure 44–1B). In clinical polysomno-
grams, respiration is also measured, as breathing 
during sleep is disrupted in many patients with sleep 
disorders.
Sleep Consists of Alternating Periods of REM Sleep  
and Non-REM Sleep
The Ascending Arousal System Promotes Wakefulness
The Ascending Arousal System in the Brain Stem and 
Hypothalamus Innervates the Forebrain
Damage to the Ascending Arousal System  
Causes Coma
Circuits Composed of Mutually Inhibitory Neurons 
Control Transitions From Wake to Sleep and From  
Non-REM to REM Sleep
Sleep Is Regulated by Homeostatic and Circadian Drives
The Homeostatic Pressure for Sleep Depends on 
Humoral Factors
Circadian Rhythms Are Controlled by a Biological Clock 
in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Circadian Control of Sleep Depends on  
Hypothalamic Relays
Sleep Loss Impairs Cognition and Memory
Sleep Changes With Age
Disruptions in Sleep Circuitry Contribute to  
Many Sleep Disorders
Insomnia May Be Caused by Incomplete Inhibition of the 
Arousal System
Sleep Apnea Fragments Sleep and Impairs Cognition
Narcolepsy Is Caused by a Loss of Orexinergic Neurons
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Is Caused by Failure of 
REM Sleep Paralysis Circuits
Restless Legs Syndrome and Periodic Limb Movement 
Disorder Disrupt Sleep
Non-REM Parasomnias Include Sleepwalking, Sleep 
Talking, and Night Terrors


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1081
Figure 44–1  Electrophysiological pat-
terns of wakefulness and sleep.
A. A hypnogram or graph showing the 
progression of sleep stages over a typical 
night in a healthy young person. Periods 
of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep alter-
nate with non-REM sleep about every 90 
minutes. An individual typically progresses 
from the awake state into light non-REM 
sleep (N1) then progressively deeper non-
REM sleep (N2, N3), then back to lighter 
non-REM sleep before the first period 
of REM sleep occurs (light blue bars). 
As the night progresses, the individual 
spends less time in the deepest stage of 
non-REM sleep, and the duration of REM 
sleep periods increases.
B. The records show the components of 
the polysomnogram used to distinguish 
sleep stages. The electro-oculogram (EOG) 
records eye movements from electrodes 
on either side of the eyes. The electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) records cortical field 
potentials from the scalp; the electromyo-
gram (EMG) records muscle fiber firing 
through the skin. During the awake state, 
the EOG shows voluntary eye move-
ments, the EEG shows fast low-amplitude 
activity, and the EMG shows variable mus-
cle tone. Stage N1 sleep is characterized 
by a slight slowing of EEG frequencies 
and slow roving eye movements, with less 
EMG activity; stage N2 is characterized by 
bursts of 12- to 14-Hz activity called sleep 
spindles and high-voltage slow waves 
called K-complexes; stage N3 is domi-
nated by high-voltage slow waves. During 
REM sleep, the EEG is similar to that of 
the awake state. Rapid eye movements 
can be seen on the EOG, but the EMG is 
so silent that contamination by tiny elec-
trocardiogram signals can sometimes be 
seen (as in the illustrated case).
A  Hypnogram
B  Components of the polysomnogram
REM
REM
REM
REM
REM
N1
Awake
REM
N2
N3
N1
Awake
REM
N2
N3
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Time (hours)
Eye movement
Spindle
K complex
Eye movement
(EOG) 
Muscle ﬁber activity
(EMG)
Brain activity
(EEG)
Slow wave
During wakefulness, the EEG is characterized by 
mainly high-frequency, low-voltage activity, indica-
tive of the unique activity of individual cortical neu-
rons; the EOG shows frequent eye movements; and the 
EMG shows moderate and variable muscle tone. Dur-
ing quiet wakefulness, with eyes closed, rhythmic EEG 
waves in the alpha range (8–13 Hz) are common, par-
ticularly over the occipital region. For most of the sleep 
period, the EEG shows slower activity, but periodically 
during the night, there are shifts into a sleep state with 
a faster, lower-voltage EEG, loss of muscle tone, and 
rapid eye movements called rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep. The entire period of slow EEG activity, 
from light drowsiness to deep sleep, is referred to as 
non-REM sleep and is divided into three stages, N1 to 
N3 (Figure 44–1).
Sleep Consists of Alternating Periods of REM 
Sleep and Non-REM Sleep
As an individual becomes drowsy and transitions into 
light non-REM sleep (stage N1), the EEG slows and 
shows waves in the theta range (4−7 Hz) (Figure 44–1B). 


===== Page 7 =====
1082    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Consciousness begins to fade during stage N1, but the 
individual may still be awakened by minimal stimula-
tion. Stage N2 often contains some slow EEG activity 
in the theta and delta range (0.5−4 Hz) as well as sleep 
spindles, 10- to 16-Hz waxing and waning EEG oscil-
lations lasting 1 to 2 seconds, typically with a gradual 
onset and offset so the EEG waves resemble an old-
fashioned spindle tapered at both ends. The EEG also 
may show large, single slow waves called K-complexes 
(Figure 44–1B). During stage N3, the EEG shows abun-
dant, very slow EEG delta activity. During stages N2 
and N3, people are generally unconscious of the world 
around them as the slow cortical activity disrupts 
information processing. Across all stages of non-REM 
sleep, eye movements are absent, muscle tone is low, 
breathing is slow and regular, and body temperature 
falls.
Slow EEG activity and sleep spindles arise, respec-
tively, from cortico-cortical and cortico-thalamic elec-
trophysiological interactions. During non-REM sleep, 
the membrane potential of cortical pyramidal neurons 
fluctuates between Up states (when they are depolarized 
and fire) and Down states (when they are hyperpolarized 
and silent). These slow oscillations in membrane poten-
tial, which occur even in an isolated cortical slab, corre-
late with slow waves in the EEG. During stage N2 sleep, 
spindles arise from an interaction of neurons in the 
reticular nucleus of the thalamus and thalamocortical 
relay neurons. Thalamocortical neurons are generally 
hyperpolarized and inactive during non-REM sleep, 
but inhibition from the reticular thalamic neurons can 
result in the opening of low-threshold Ca2+ channels, 
which drive a burst of Na+ spikes in the thalamocorti-
cal neurons. The thalamocortical neurons then excite 
and recruit more reticular neurons, initiating the next 
cycle of the sleep spindle. This pattern of inhibition and 
excitation repeats about every 100 ms, and after several 
cycles, the spindle activity wanes as the reticular neu-
rons become less responsive (Figure 44–2).
After about 90 minutes of sleep, people usually 
enter the stage known as REM sleep, a period in which 
dreams are often vivid and sometimes bizarre. REM 
sleep was discovered in 1953 when Eugene Aserinsky 
and Nathaniel Kleitman observed that across a night of 
sleep, adults have several episodes of jerky conjugate 
eye movements, and when awakened from this state, 
about three-fourths of subjects reported dreams with 
visual imagery.
Muscle tone is extremely low during REM sleep, 
owing to inhibition of motor neurons by descending 
pathways from the brain stem. This paralysis affects 
nearly all motor neurons except those that support 
respiration, eye movements, and a few other functions 
such as sphincter control. As discussed later in this 
chapter, this inhibition of motor neurons is crucial as it 
prevents the physical enactment of dreams.
During REM sleep, the body undergoes many 
additional physiological changes. Body temperature 
falls during non-REM sleep, and it can fall further 
during REM sleep as the generation and retention of 
heat are minimal. Autonomic regulation is altered such 
that heart rate and blood pressure can vary wildly. In 
addition, men experience penile erections and women 
experience physiological signs of sexual arousal dur-
ing REM sleep.
Across the night, episodes of non-REM sleep alter-
nate with REM sleep, and each of these sleep cycles 
takes about 90 minutes. Sleep in a healthy young adult 
usually begins with a rapid descent into stage N3 non-
REM sleep, followed by lighter non-REM sleep and 
then some REM sleep, and with each cycle, non-REM 
sleep becomes lighter and the periods of REM sleep 
become longer (Figure 44–1A). At the end of the sleep 
period, people often wake spontaneously from an epi-
sode of REM sleep.
The Ascending Arousal System  
Promotes Wakefulness
Modern perspectives of the neural basis of sleep 
and wakefulness go back about 100 years to the con-
cepts derived by the neurologist and neuropatholo-
gist Baron Constantin von Economo. Around World 
War I, he observed an unusual type of encephalitis, 
believed to be a viral infection of the brain that specifi-
cally attacked the sleep–wake control circuitry. In most 
cases, patients had “encephalitis lethargica,” sleeping 
20 or more hours per day. When they awoke, they were 
generally cogent, but they would stay awake only long 
enough to eat and then go right back to sleep. This 
intense sleepiness would persist for many months 
before improving. But in patients who died during 
this interval, von Economo found focal damage to the 
brain, at the junction of the midbrain and diencepha-
lon, leading him to hypothesize that the upper brain 
stem and posterior hypothalamus contain critical cir-
cuitry that activates the forebrain, producing a normal 
wakeful state.
Other patients afflicted in the same epidemic had 
just the opposite problem: unrelenting severe insom-
nia. They would be restless and, despite feeling sleepy, 
unable to fall asleep. Eventually, they would fall into 
a fitful sleep for only a few hours each day, but would 
waken without feeling refreshed. In post mortem 
examinations of these patients, von Economo found 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1083
Figure 44–2  Cellular mechanisms of electroencephalogram 
rhythms during sleep.
A. The slow oscillation that underlies the slow waves of the 
EEG during non-REM sleep is generated within the cerebral 
cortex by intrinsic massively recurrent excitatory and inhibitory 
connections. Slow waves will continue even in an isolated corti-
cal slab. Intracellular recordings from such neurons during slow 
oscillations show rhythmic down states when the individual 
neurons are hyperpolarized and do not fire, alternating with up 
states when the membrane potential is more depolarized and 
the neurons fire multiple action potentials. This synchronous fir-
ing produces waves of dendritic potentials, which appear as slow 
waves in the EEG. (Data from Dr. David McCormick.)
B. Similarly, in a thalamic slice, recurrent circuitry generates spin-
dle waves. A burst of spikes in reticular nucleus neurons (gray) 
hyperpolarizes thalamocortical relay neurons (red) sufficiently to 
de-inactivate low-threshold (T-type) Ca2+ channels. As the hyper-
polarization wanes, these Ca2+ channels open and the resultant 
Ca2+ current depolarizes the relay neuron, producing a brief burst 
of Na+ channel spikes on top of a Ca2+ channel spike plateau. 
Meanwhile, as the burst in the relay cell continues, its excitatory 
output generates a T-type Ca2+ channel spike in the reticular neu-
ron, which drives another burst of Na+ spikes. The resultant vol-
ley of feedback inhibition to the relay cells initiates a new burst 
cycle. This firing pattern recurs 12 to 14 times per second, and 
the resulting waves of thalamocortical action potentials reaching 
the cortex produce sleep spindles in the EEG. The upper trace 
shows action potentials from a local population of relay cells. The 
lower trace shows inhibitory postsynaptic potentials and spike 
bursts from an individual relay cell; on this slow time base, each 
upstroke in the intracellular record represents a burst of up to six 
action potentials. As the trace shows, individual relay neurons do 
not reach spike threshold during every cycle of the spindle wave. 
As a result, the amplitude of the extracellular spike activity varies 
from cycle to cycle, depending on which neurons happen to fire 
and their distances from the extracellular electrode tip. However, 
each burst of thalamic firing would produce a volley of excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials in the cortex, resulting in an electroen-
cephalogram wave, time-locked to the thalamic firing. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Bal, von Krosigk, and McCormick 
1995. Copyright © 1995 The Physiological Society.)
–
Extracellular
(multiple neurons)
Intracellular
(pyramidal 
neuron)
5 s
20 mV
Slow oscillation
A  Slow oscillation in cortex
B  Spindle wave in thalamus
Thalamus
A
B
600 ms
20 mV
Na+ channel spikes
Ca2+ channel spike
Extracellular
(multiple neurons)
Intracellular
(thalamocortical
neuron)


===== Page 9 =====
1084    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 44–3  The ascending arousal system.  The ascending 
arousal system comprises primarily axons from glutamatergic 
neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine tegmental 
nuclei and cholinergic and GABAergic (dark gray) neurons in the 
basal forebrain. Lesions of either the parabrachial and pedunculo-
pontine nuclei or the basal forebrain cause coma. Of somewhat 
lesser importance are dopaminergic neurons in the ventral teg-
mental area (VTA) and ventral periaqueductal gray (vPAG) matter 
and glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in the supramammil-
lary nucleus, where lesions can increase sleep by about 20%. 
In addition, populations of modulatory neurons can strongly pro-
mote wakefulness when stimulated, but when damaged cause 
minimal changes in wake–sleep amounts. These include the 
monoaminergic neurons in the noradrenergic locus ceruleus, the 
serotonergic dorsal and median raphe nuclei, and the histaminer-
gic tuberomammillary nucleus; the cholinergic neurons  
in the pedunculopontine and lateral dorsal tegmental nuclei; and 
the orexinergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus (LH). All of 
these neurons send their axons through the hypothalamus and 
basal forebrain directly to the cerebral cortex, where their net 
effect is to increase cortical arousal. Many of the modulatory 
pathways also activate the thalamus, enabling thalamic transmis-
sion of sensory information to the cerebral cortex. GABAergic 
neurons in the lateral hypothalamus also promote wakefulness 
by inhibiting neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area and reticu-
lar nucleus of the thalamus that oppose wakefulness.
lesions in the anterior hypothalamus. He proposed 
that neurons in this area are important for inhibiting 
the brain stem arousal system to allow sleep. Modern 
studies have shown a system of wake–sleep circuitry 
in the brain that is remarkably close to von Economo’s 
model.
The Ascending Arousal System in the Brain Stem 
and Hypothalamus Innervates the Forebrain
The composition of the ascending arousal system has 
been debated since von Economo’s time. In the late 
1940s and early 1950s, lesion studies confirmed that 
damage to the upper midbrain reticular formation 
could cause coma, whereas electrical stimulation of this 
region could arouse animals. The location and nature 
of the wake-promoting neurons were unknown.
GABA 
Acetylcholine 
Basal 
forebrain
Glutamate
Parabrachial
nucleus
Acetylcholine
Laterodorsal
tegmental nucleus
Histamine 
Tuberomammillary
nucleus
GABA
Glutamate
Supramammillary
nucleus
 
Modulatory system
Ascending arousal system
Thalamus 
Serotonin 
Raphe nucleus
VTA / vPAG 
Dopamine 
LH
GABA 
Norepinephrine 
Locus ceruleus
Acetylcholine
Glutamate
Pedunculopontine
nucleus
LH
Orexin 
In the succeeding decades, it became clear that 
these lesions damaged the axons of neurons in the 
upper brain stem that project to the forebrain, includ-
ing noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus, sero-
tonergic neurons in the dorsal and median raphe, and 
midbrain dopaminergic neurons (Chapter 40). The 
axons of other neurons in the posterior hypothalamus, 
including those producing histamine and orexin, also 
join this pathway, which splits into two bundles, with 
some projections innervating the thalamus and others 
the hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and cerebral cortex 
(Figure 44–3).
Neurons contributing to all of these ascend-
ing pathways fire fastest during the awake state but 
much slower during sleep, suggesting that they are 
wake-promoting. However, although many mono-
amine antagonists cause sleepiness, and lesions of the 


