===== Page 1 =====
660    Part IV / Perception
Bushy cell
in cochlear 
nucleus
Cochlear 
nerve
ITD
Coincidence 
detectors
Delay line from right
Time
Right ear
Left ear
A  Phase-locked ﬁring in bushy cells
Right nerve
Left nerve
B  Mapping of ITD onto array of neuronal 
 
coincidence neurons
ITD>0
ITD=0
ITD<0
C  Bilateral medial superior olivary nuclei
Delay line from left


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    661
Figure 28–5  (Opposite) Interaural differences in the arrival 
of a sound help localize sound in the horizontal plane.
A. When a sound such as a pure tone arises from the right, the 
right ear detects the sound earlier than the left ear. The differ-
ence in the time of arrival at the two ears is the interaural time 
delay (ITD). Cochlear nerve fibers and their bushy cell targets 
fire in phase with pressure changes. Although individual bushy 
cells may fail to fire at some cycles, a set of cells will encode 
the timing of a low-frequency sound and its frequency with 
every cycle. Comparison of the onset of action potentials in the 
bushy cells at the two sides reveals the ITDs (slanted black 
lines).
B. Interaural time differences can be measured by an array of 
neurons whose inputs from the two ears are delay lines as 
proposed by Lloyd Jeffress (1948). Action potentials propagate 
to reach the nearest terminals before they reach the farthest 
ones; thus, in the delay line from the right, terminals will gen-
erate synaptic potentials sequentially from right to left, and in 
the delay line from the left, terminals will generate synaptic 
potentials sequentially from left to right. Suppose that such 
postsynaptic neurons are coincidence detectors, firing only 
when they receive excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) 
simultaneously from the right and left. Sounds that arise at the 
midline reach the right and left ears simultaneously with no 
interaural time disparity (ITD = 0). The neuron in the middle of 
the array that receives input from equally long axons from the 
two sides will thus receive simultaneous EPSPs from the two 
sides. When sounds come from the right, signals from the right 
ear arrive at the central nervous system earlier than those from 
the left ear (ITD >0). Sound from the right generates synchro-
nous EPSPs in the (yellow) neuron because the earlier arrival of 
sound from the right (red) is compensated by a longer conduc-
tion delay relative to that from the left (blue). Likewise, when 
sound arises from the left, the ITD <0 and conduction delays 
from the left (blue) compensate for the early arrival at the left. 
Such a neuronal circuit produces a map of interaural time dis-
parities in the coincidence detectors; as sounds move from the 
right to left, they activate coincidence detectors sequentially 
from left to right. Such an arrangement of delay lines has been 
found in the nucleus laminaris of the barn owl, the homolog of 
the mammalian medial superior olivary nucleus.
C. Mammals use delay lines only in the nucleus contralateral 
to a sound source to form a map of interaural time differences. 
The bitufted neurons of the medial superior olivary nucleus 
form a sheet that is contacted on its lateral face by bushy cells 
from the ipsilateral cochlear nucleus and on the medial face by 
bushy cells from the contralateral cochlear nucleus. (Although 
it is depicted here schematically in a coronal section of the 
brain stem, the encoding of interaural disparities is in a sheet 
of neurons that also has a rostrocaudal dimension.) On the 
ipsilateral side, the branches of the bushy cell axon are of equal 
length and thus initiate synaptic currents in their targets in the 
medial superior olive simultaneously. On the contralateral side, 
the branches deliver synaptic currents sequentially first to the 
regions closest to the midline, and then to progressively more 
lateral regions. Neurons of the medial superior olive detect syn-
chronous excitation from the two ears only when sounds arise 
from the contralateral half of space. When sounds arise from 
the right side, their early arrival at the right ear is compensated 
by progressively longer conduction delays to activate neurons 
more and more toward the lateral end of the left medial supe-
rior olive (the yellow cell is activated by a sound from the far 
right, as in part B). When sounds arise from the front and there 
is no interaural time difference, neurons in the anterior end of 
the medial superior olive are activated synchronously from both 
sides. Each medial superior olive forms a map of where sounds 
arise in the contralateral hemifield. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Yin 2002.)
intensity at the near ear to be greater than that at the 
far ear. In humans, interaural intensities can differ 
in sounds that have frequencies greater than about  
2 kHz. Interaural intensity differences produced by 
such head shadowing are detected by a neuronal circuit 
that includes the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body 
and the lateral superior olive.
Although the lateral superior olive does not form 
a map of the location of sounds in the horizontal plane, 
it performs the first of several integrative steps that 
use interaural intensity differences to localize sounds. 
Neurons in this nucleus balance ipsilateral excitation 
with contralateral inhibition. Excitation comes from 
small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells in the ipsi-
lateral ventral cochlear nucleus. Inhibition comes from 
a disynaptic pathway that includes globular bushy 
cells in the contralateral ventral cochlear nucleus and 
principal neurons of the ipsilateral medial nucleus of 
the trapezoid body (Figure 28–6A). Sounds that arise 
ipsilaterally generate relatively strong excitation and 
relatively weak inhibition, whereas those that arise 
contralaterally generate stronger inhibition than exci-
tation. Neurons in the lateral superior olive are acti-
vated more strongly by sounds from the ipsilateral 
than from the contralateral hemifield. The firing of 
lateral superior olivary neurons is a function of the 
location of the sound source and thus carries informa-
tion about where sounds arise in the horizontal plane 
(Figure 28–6B).
In order to balance excitation and inhibition stim-
ulated by one sound, the ipsilateral excitation and 
contralateral inhibition must arrive at neurons in the 
lateral superior olive at the same time. Thus, excitation 
that arises monosynaptically from the ipsilateral ven-
tral cochlear nucleus must arrive at the same time as 
inhibition that arises disynaptically from the contralat-
eral ventral cochlear nucleus. The inhibition comes 
from the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body whose 
inputs through large axons of globular bushy cells 
and large calyces of Held produce synaptic responses 


===== Page 3 =====
662    Part IV / Perception
Figure 28–6  Interaural differences in the intensity of 
a sound also help localize sound in the horizontal 
plane.
A. Principal cells of the lateral superior olivary nucleus 
(LSO) receive excitatory input from the ipsilateral coch-
lear nucleus (CN) and inhibitory input from the contralat-
eral cochlear nucleus. A coronal section through the 
brain stem of a cat illustrates the anatomical connec-
tions. Small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells in the 
ipsilateral ventral cochlear nucleus provide direct excita-
tion. Globular bushy cells in the contralateral ventral 
cochlear nucleus project across the midline and excite 
neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body 
(MNTB) via large terminals, the calyces of Held. Cells of 
the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body inhibit neurons 
in the lateral superior olive as well as in the medial supe-
rior olive (MSO). For neurons of the lateral superior olive 
to compare intensities of the same sound, the timing of 
the ipsilateral excitatory input must be matched with the 
timing of the contralateral inhibitory input. To this end, 
globular bushy cells have particularly large axons that 
terminate in a calyx of Held in the medial nucleus of the 
trapezoid body where synaptic transmission is strong 
and thus the synaptic delay is short and invariant in its 
timing.
B. The firing of neurons in the lateral superior olive 
reflects a balance of ipsilateral excitation and contralat-
eral inhibition. When sounds arise from the ipsilateral 
side, excitation is relatively stronger and inhibition is 
relatively weaker than when sounds arise from the con-
tralateral side. The transition between the dominance 
of excitation and inhibition reflects the location of the 
sound source.
LSO
MNTB
CN
CN
Location of sound source
Firing rate in LSO cell
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsi excitation >
contra inhibition
Contra inhibition >
ipsi excitation
MSO
A
B
Globular 
bushy cell
Input from 
ipsilateral 
ear
Input from 
contralateral
ear
with short and consistently timed delays. The axons of 
small spherical bushy cells and stellate cells that carry 
ipsilateral excitation conduct more slowly than those 
of globular bushy cells.
The terminals of the globular bushy cells, the 
calyces of Held, engulf the cell bodies of trapezoid-
body neurons so dramatically that they caught the 
attention of early anatomists and modern biophysi-
cists. A single somatic terminal releases neurotrans-
mitter at numerous release sites and generates large 
synaptic currents. The reliability of pre- and postsyn-
aptic recordings at this synapse makes the site ideal 
for detailed studies of the mechanisms of synaptic 
transmission (Chapter 15).
The Superior Olivary Complex Provides Feedback 
to the Cochlea
Although sensory systems are largely afferent, bring-
ing sensory information to the brain, recent studies 
have led to an appreciation of the importance of effer-
ent signaling at many levels of the auditory system. 
Olivocochlear neurons form a feedback loop from the 
superior olivary complex to hair cells in the cochlea. 
Their cell bodies lie around the major dense clusters 
of cell bodies in the olivary nuclei. In mammals, two 
groups of olivocochlear neurons have been function-
ally distinguished. The medial olivocochlear neurons’ 
axons terminate on the outer hair cells bilaterally; the 
lateral olivocochlear neuron axons terminate ipsi-
laterally on the afferent fibers associated with inner 
hair cells.
Most medial olivocochlear neurons, with cell 
bodies that lie ventral and medial within the olivary 
complex, send their axons to the contralateral coch-
lea (Figure 28–7), but many also project to the ipsi-
lateral cochlea. These cholinergic neurons act on hair 
cells through a special class of nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor-channels formed from α9 and α10 subunits. 
The influx of Ca2+ through these channels leads to the 
opening of K+ channels that hyperpolarize outer hair 
cells. These neurons thus mediate tuned negative feed-
back and are binaural, being driven predominantly 
but not exclusively by stellate cells of the contralateral 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    663
Figure 28–7  Major components of the ascending and 
descending auditory pathways.  The auditory pathway is bilat-
erally symmetrical; the major connections among the nuclei 
that form the early auditory pathway are shown. The ascending 
pathway begins in the cochlea and progresses through several 
parallel pathways through the cochlear nuclei: the cochlear 
nuclei, the superior olivary nuclei, and the ventral and dorsal 
nuclei of the lateral lemniscus. These signals converge in the 
inferior colliculus, which projects to the medial geniculate 
body of the thalamus and thence to the cerebral cortex (see 
Figure 28–2). Some of the connections are through excitatory 
pathways (colored lines) and others through inhibitory path-
ways (black lines). These same nuclei are also interconnected 
through descending pathways (blue lines) and bilaterally 
through commissural projections. (LSO, lateral superior olivary 
nucleus; MNTB, medial nucleus of the trapezoid body; MSO, 
medial superior olive; VNTB, ventral nucleus of the trapezoid 
body).
Superior 
olivary 
complex
LSO
MSO
MNTB
VNTB
Dorsal 
cochlear
nucleus
Medial
olivocochlear
efferents
Lateral
olivocochlear
efferents
Ventral 
cochlear
nucleus
Pons
Medulla
To inferior colliculus 
Lateral 
lemniscus
Fusiform cells
Stellate cells
Bushy cells
Octopus cells
Cochlea
ventral cochlear nucleus. Activity in these efferent fib-
ers reduces the sensitivity of the cochlea and protects 
it from damage by loud sounds. Collateral branches 
of medial olivocochlear neurons terminate on stellate 
cells in the cochlear nucleus, acting on conventional 
nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, form-
ing an excitatory feedback loop.
Lateral olivocochlear neurons, with cell bodies that 
lie in and around the lateral superior olive, send their 
axons exclusively to the ipsilateral cochlea, where they 
terminate on the afferent fibers from inner hair cells. 
Charles Liberman and his colleagues demonstrated 
that these efferents balance the excitability of cochlear 
nerve fibers at the two ears.
Ventral and Dorsal Nuclei of the Lateral Lemniscus 
Shape Responses in the Inferior Colliculus With 
Inhibition
Fibers from the cochlear and superior olivary nuclei 
run in a band, or lemniscus, along the lateral edge of 
the brain as they ascend from the brainstem to the infe-
rior colliculus. Along this band of fibers are groups of 
neurons that form the dorsal and ventral nuclei of the 


===== Page 5 =====
664    Part IV / Perception
lateral lemniscus. Neurons in the ventral nuclei of the 
lateral lemniscus receive input from all major groups 
of principal cells of the ventral cochlear nuclei and 
respond predominantly to monaural input, driven 
by the contralateral ear, while neurons in the dor-
sal nucleus receive input from the lateral and medial 
superior olivary nuclei and respond to inputs from 
both ears. Neurons in both subdivisions are inhibitory 
and project to the inferior colliculus. Their roles are 
intriguing but not fully understood.
Since understanding the meaning of sounds is not 
greatly compromised by the loss of one ear, it would 
make sense that the largely monaural functions of the 
ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus involve the pro-
cessing of the meaning of sounds. Furthermore, mam-
mals vary in the information they extract from their 
acoustic environments, which may account for differ-
ences between species in the structure and function of 
the ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus.
A border that is more distinct in some mamma-
lian species than in others separates the ventral and 
intermediate nuclei and the subdivisions of the ventral 
nucleus of the lateral lemniscus. Neurons differ in their 
shapes, biophysical properties, and pattern of conver-
gence of cochlear nuclear inputs. One group of glycin-
ergic neurons is innervated by large calyceal terminals 
from octopus cells. These could generate inhibitory 
temporal reference signals in the inferior colliculus. 
Some broadly tuned neurons fire almost exclusively at 
the onset of tones with sharply timed action potentials 
but convey periodicity in complex sounds, raising the 
question of whether these neurons might have a role in 
encoding pitch in music and speech. Others respond 
by firing as long as a tone is present; these neurons 
track the fluctuations in intensity or the envelopes of 
sounds, a feature that is useful for understanding the 
meaning of sounds including speech. Tuning curves 
of the neurons are variable, with many being broad or 
W-shaped.
Neurons in the dorsal nucleus are predominantly 
binaural, receiving input from the ipsilateral medial 
superior olive and from the lateral superior olive, 
primarily from the contralateral side. These neurons 
are GABAergic, targeting the inferior colliculi on 
both sides and also targeting the contralateral dorsal 
nucleus of the lateral lemniscus. Excitation in neurons 
of the dorsal nucleus is amplified by NMDA-type glu-
tamate receptors so that the inhibition they generate in 
their targets outlasts sound stimuli for tens of millisec-
onds and thus has been termed persistent inhibition. 
To localize sounds accurately, animals must ignore the 
reflections of sounds from surrounding surfaces that 
arrive after the initial direct wave front. Psychophysical 
experiments have shown that mammals suppress all 
but the first-arriving sound, a phenomenon termed 
the precedence effect. It has been proposed that persis-
tent inhibition in the inferior colliculus from the dor-
sal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus serves to suppress 
spurious localization cues such as echoes and thus that 
it contributes to the precedence effect.
Afferent Auditory Pathways Converge in the 
Inferior Colliculus
The inferior colliculus occupies a central position in 
the auditory pathway of all vertebrate animals because 
all auditory pathways ascending through the brain 
stem converge there (Figure 28–7). The most important 
sources of excitation are stellate cells from the contralat-
eral ventral cochlear nucleus, fusiform cells from the 
contralateral dorsal cochlear nucleus, principal cells of 
the ipsilateral medial superior olive and of the contralat-
eral lateral superior olive, principal cells of ipsilateral 
and contralateral dorsal nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, 
commissural connections from the contralateral inferior 
colliculus, and pyramidal cells in layer V of the audi-
tory cortex. Important sources of inhibition include the 
nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, the ipsilateral lateral 
superior olive, the superior paraolivary nucleus, and 
the contralateral inferior colliculus.
The inferior colliculus of mammals is subdivided 
into the central nucleus, dorsal cortex, and external 
cortex. The central nucleus is tonotopically organized. 
Low frequencies are represented dorsolaterally and 
high frequencies ventromedially in laminae that have 
similar best frequencies. Fine mapping has shown 
that the tonotopic organization is discontinuous; the 
separation between best frequencies corresponds to 
psychophysically measured critical bands of approxi-
mately one-third octave. Although the central nucleus 
is organized tonotopically, the spectral range of inputs 
to these neurons is broader than at earlier stages in 
the auditory pathway. Inhibition can be broad and 
narrows the responses of excitatory neurons. Further-
more, tuning can be modulated by descending inputs 
from the cortex.
Many neurons in the central nucleus carry infor-
mation about the location of sound sources. The 
majority of these cells are sensitive to interaural time 
and intensity differences, essential cues for localizing 
sounds in the horizontal plane. Neurons are also sensi-
tive to spectral cues that localize sounds in the vertical 
plane. Physiological correlates of the precedence effect 
have been measured in the inferior colliculus, where 
inhibition suppresses simulated reflections of sounds.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    665
The inferior colliculus is not only a convergence 
point but also a branch point for ascending or outflow 
pathways. Neurons of the central nucleus project to the 
external cortex of the inferior colliculus and also to the 
thalamus and the nucleus of the brachium of the infe-
rior colliculus, both of which then project to the supe-
rior colliculus (or the optic tectum in birds).
Sound Location Information From the Inferior 
Colliculus Creates a Spatial Map of Sound in the 
Superior Colliculus
The inferior colliculus is not only a convergence point 
but also a branch point for ascending or outflow path-
ways. Central nucleus neurons project to the thalamus 
and also to the external cortex of the inferior colliculus 
and the nucleus of the brachium of the inferior collicu-
lus, both of which then project to the superior collicu-
lus (or the optic tectum in birds).
The superior colliculus is critical for reflexive 
orienting movements of the head and eyes to acous-
tic and visual cues in space. By the time the binaural 
sound cues and the monaural spectral cues that under-
lie mammalian sound localization reach the superior 
colliculus, they have been merged to create a spatial 
map of sound in which neurons are unambiguously 
tuned to specific sound directions. This convergence 
is critical since binaural differences in level and timing 
alone cannot unambiguously code for a single position 
in space. The spectral cues that provide information 
about vertical location must be taken into account, as 
different locations in the vertical plane can give rise 
to identical interaural differences in time or intensity. 
Such unambiguous spatial mapping occurs both in 
birds and in some mammals (Figure 28–8). In ferrets 
and guinea pigs, it occurs in the external cortex and 
the nucleus of the brachium of the inferior colliculus.
Within the superior colliculus, the auditory map 
is aligned with maps of visual space and the body 
surface. Unlike the visual and somatosensory spatial 
maps, the auditory spatial map does not reflect the 
peripheral receptor surface; instead, it is computed 
from a combination of cues that identify the specific 
position of a sound source in space.
Auditory, visual, and somatosensory neurons in 
the superior colliculus all converge on output pathways 
in the same structure that controls orienting move-
ments of the eyes, head, and external ears. The motor 
circuits of the superior colliculus are mapped with 
respect to motor targets in space and are aligned with 
the sensory maps. Such sensory-motor correspond-
ence facilitates the sensory guiding of movements.
The Inferior Colliculus Transmits Auditory 
Information to the Cerebral Cortex
Auditory information ascends from the inferior collic-
ulus to the medial geniculate body of the thalamus and 
from there to the auditory cortex. The pathways from 
the inferior colliculus include a lemniscal or core path-
way and extralemniscal or belt pathways. Descend-
ing projections from the auditory cortex to the medial 
geniculate body are prominent both anatomically and 
functionally.
Stimulus Selectivity Progressively Increases Along 
the Ascending Pathway
A marked feature of auditory neurons at structures 
along the ascending pathway is their progressively 
increased stimulus selectivity. An auditory nerve fiber 
is primarily selective to one stimulus dimension, the 
frequency of a pure tone. The stimulus selectivity of 
neurons in the central auditory system may be mul-
tidimensional, such as frequency, spectral bandwidth, 
sound intensity, modulation frequency, and spatial 
location. In this multidimensional acoustic space, neu-
rons become more selective at successive auditory 
areas along the ascending pathway.
Many neurons in the auditory cortex (especially 
those in upper cortical layers) are highly selective to 
acoustic stimuli, such that the preferred (nearly opti-
mal) stimulus of a neuron occupies only a small region 
of its receptive field in the multidimensional acoustic 
space. The region of the preferred stimulus becomes 
increasingly smaller at structures along the path to the 
auditory cortex (Figure 28–9A). Pure tones and broad-
band noises are two extreme cases of a wide range of 
acoustic stimuli that could preferentially drive audi-
tory cortex neurons. The majority of neurons in the 
auditory cortex are preferentially driven by stimuli 
with greater spectral and temporal complexity than 
pure tones and broadband noises.
The increased stimulus selectivity is also accom-
panied by changes in a neuron’s firing pattern. When 
neurons are driven by their preferred stimuli, they 
respond not only with higher firing rates but also with 
sustained firing throughout the stimulus duration 
(Figure 28–9B). The receptive field of a cortical neuron 
contains a “sustained firing region” (corresponding to 
preferred stimuli) within a larger “onset firing region” 
(corresponding to nonpreferred stimuli). This explains 
why it is common for experimenters to observe onset 
(phasic) responses in auditory cortex when a continu-
ous sound is played.


===== Page 7 =====
666    Part IV / Perception
Neurons in 
the superior 
colliculus
–90
0
1
2
3
4
5
A  Directional tuning of neurons in the ferret
–20
0
+20
R20
0
L20
Speaker elevation (deg)
Response (% of max)
–80
–60
–40
+20
–20
+40
50
100
0
0
Speaker azimuth (deg)
Response (% of max)
0
20
40
0
20
40
100
50
Left
Right
B   Directional tuning of a neuron in the barn owl
Superior 
colliculus
neuron
V
Figure 28–8  A spatial map of sound is formed in the supe-
rior colliculus.
A. Neurons in the ferret’s superior colliculus are directionally 
tuned to sound in the horizontal plane. The illustration shows the 
firing rate profiles of collicular neurons 1 through 5 as a function 
of where the sounds are located, plotted in polar coordinates 
centered on the head. The drawing on the right shows the loca-
tion of the recorded neurons in the colliculus. Note that neuron 1 
responds best to sounds in front of the animal, whereas neurons 
that are located progressively more caudally in the colliculus 
gradually shift their responses to sounds that originate farther 
contralaterally. (Adapted, with permission, from King 1999.)
B. The normalized responses of a neuron in the superior col-
liculus of a barn owl to noise bursts presented at various 
locations along the horizon are plotted below (bottom right). The 
yellow areas in these tuning curves indicate where responses 
exceed 50% of the maximum. The sensitivity of the neuron to 
a particular location along the horizon or a particular elevation 
(top right) creates a discrete best auditory area in space for this 
neuron (top middle), shown as the colored ellipse on a plot of 
spatial locations with respect to a point straight in front of the 
owl. The neuron also responds to visual cues from the same 
area (the box labeled V). The photo illustrates the neuron’s best 
area in space with respect to the position of the head (the 
intersection of the vertical and horizontal dotted lines indicates 
where the owl’s head is pointing). The recording site for this 
neuron is also shown. (Adapted, with permission, from Cohen 
and Knudsen 1999. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier Science.)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    667
Figure 28–9  Stimulus selectivity increases along the 
ascending auditory pathway.
A. Stimulus selectivity and the relationship between sustained 
and onset firings along the ascending auditory pathway. Each 
open ellipse represents the multidimensional receptive field 
(RF) of a neuron illustrated on a two-dimensional plane. The 
filled ellipse represents the “sustained firing region” (corre-
sponding to preferred stimuli) of a neuron’s RF. The rest of the 
area within the RF is the “onset firing region” (corresponding 
to nonpreferred stimuli). A neuron exhibits sustained or onset 
firing depending on which region of the RF is stimulated. The 
neuron does not fire if stimuli fall outside the RF. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Wang 2018.)
B. Population-averaged firing rate in response to each neuron’s 
preferred and nonpreferred stimuli from primary auditory cortex 
(A1). Extracellular recordings were made in awake marmoset 
monkeys. Thick bar = stimulus duration. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Wang et al. 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer 
Nature.)
C. Distribution of activity among A1 neurons in response 
to a sound burst. On the y-axis, all A1 neurons are ranked 
according to their preference for a particular stimulus. The 
blue-to-red color gradient represents increasing firing rate. 
The neuron with the highest firing rate is located at the top 
end of the y-axis. Black bar = stimulus duration. Most neu-
rons show a brief phasic response to the onset of the sound, 
but only those particularly tuned to the sound maintain their 
response until the end of the sound. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Middlebrooks 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer 
Nature.)
Auditory
cortex
Medial
geniculate
body
Inferior
colliculus
Cochlear
nucleus
Auditory
nerve
Multidimensional
receptive ﬁeld
Nonpreferred 
stimuli
(onset ﬁring)
Preferred 
stimuli
(sustained ﬁring)
Ascending
auditory
pathway
B
A
0
500
1,000
1,500
0
20
40
60
80
Time (ms)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Time (ms)
Firing rate (spikes s–1)
Preferred
Nonpreferred
Neuron rank by sound preference
C
The discovery of how sustained firing is evoked 
in the auditory cortex is important because it provides 
a direct link between neural firing and the perception 
of a continuous acoustic event. Such sustained firing 
by auditory cortex neurons has been observed only 
in awake animals. In contrast, an auditory nerve fiber 
typically shows sustains firing in response to a wide 
range of acoustic signals as long as the spectral energy 
of the stimulus falls within the neuron’s receptive 
field, under either anesthetized or awake conditions. 
When David Hubel and his colleagues ventured into 
the auditory cortex more than half a century ago, they 


===== Page 9 =====
668    Part IV / Perception
were puzzled by how difficult it was to drive neurons 
in the auditory cortex of awake cats. Now we know it 
was because they were probably recording from highly 
selective neurons and using nonpreferred stimuli. The 
availability of digital technology since then has made 
it possible to create and test a large battery of acoustic 
stimuli in search of the preferred stimulus of a highly 
selective neuron in auditory cortex. The overall picture 
elucidated by experimenters is that when a sound is 
heard, the auditory cortex first responds with tran-
sient discharges (encoding the onset of a sound) across 
a relatively large population of neurons. As the time 
passes, the activation becomes restricted to a smaller 
population of neurons that are preferentially driven by 
the sound (Figure 28–9C), which results in a selective 
representation of the sound within the neuronal popu-
lation and over time. Because each neuron has its own 
preferred stimulus that differs from preferred stimuli 
of other neurons, neurons in the auditory cortex col-
lectively cover the entire acoustic space with their sus-
tained firing regions. Therefore, any particular sound 
can evoke sustained firing throughout its duration in a 
particular population of neurons in the auditory cortex. 
In other words, the region of auditory cortex activated 
by acoustic stimulation in whole-brain imaging (eg, 
functional magnetic resonance imaging [fMRI], posi-
tron emission tomography [PET]) comprises neurons 
that are preferentially driven by the acoustic stimulus.
The Auditory Cortex Maps Numerous  
Aspects of Sound
The auditory cortex includes multiple distinct func-
tional areas on the dorsal surface of the temporal lobe. 
The most prominent projection is from the ventral divi-
sion of the medial geniculate nucleus to the primary 
auditory cortex (A1, or Brodmann’s area 41). As in the 
subcortical structures, the neurons in this cytoarchitec-
tonically distinct region are arranged tonotopically. In 
monkeys, neurons tuned to low frequencies are found 
at the rostral end of A1, while those responsive to high 
frequencies are in the caudal region (Figure 28–10). 
Thus, like the visual and somatosensory cortices, A1 
contains a map reflecting the sensory periphery.
Because the cochlea encodes discrete frequen-
cies at different points along the basilar membrane, 
however, a one-dimensional frequency map from the 
periphery is spread across the two-dimensional sur-
face of the cortex, with a smooth frequency gradient 
in one direction and isofrequency contours along the 
other direction. In many species, subregions of the 
auditory cortex that represent biologically significant 
frequencies are larger than others because of extensive 
1
5
15
20
Higher-order 
auditory 
cortex 
Primary
auditory 
cortex 
Characteristic
frequency 
(kHz) 
Figure 28–10  The auditory cortex of primates has multiple 
primary and secondary areas.  The expanded figure of the 
primary auditory cortex shows its tonotopic organization.  
The primary areas are surrounded by higher-order areas (see 
Figure 28–11).
inputs, similar to the large area in the primary visual 
cortex devoted to inputs from the fovea.
In addition to frequency, other features of auditory 
stimuli are mapped in the primary auditory cortex, 
although the overall organization is less clear and pre-
cise than for vision. Auditory neurons in A1 are excited 
either by input from both ears (EE neurons), with the 
contralateral input usually stronger than the ipsilateral 
contribution, or by a unilateral input (EI). The EI neu-
rons are inhibited by stimulation of the opposite ear.
Certain neurons in A1 also seem to be organ-
ized according to bandwidth, that is, according to 
their responsiveness to a narrow or broad range of 
frequencies. Neurons near the center of the isofre-
quency contours are tuned more narrowly to band-
width or frequency than those located away from the 
center. Distinct subregions of A1 form clusters of cells 
with narrow or broadband tuning within individual 
isofrequency contours. Within intracortical circuits, 
neurons receive input primarily from neurons with 
similar bandwidths and characteristic frequencies. 


