===== Page 1 =====
308    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
in the plasma membrane. Calcium can also act as a 
second messenger to trigger the release of additional 
Ca2+ from internal stores by binding to another inte-
gral protein in the membrane of the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum, the ryanodine receptor (so called 
because it binds the plant alkaloid ryanodine, which 
inhibits the receptor; in contrast, caffeine opens the 
ryanodine receptor). Like the IP3 receptor to which 
it is distantly related, the ryanodine receptor forms 
a Ca2+ channel that spans the reticulum membrane; 
however, cytoplasmic Ca2+, not IP3, opens the ryano-
dine receptor-channel.
Calcium often acts by binding to the small cyto-
plasmic protein calmodulin. An important function of 
the calcium/calmodulin complex is to activate calcium/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase). This 
enzyme is a complex of many similar subunits, each con-
taining both regulatory and catalytic domains within the 
same polypeptide chain. When the calcium/calmodulin 
complex is absent, the C-terminal regulatory domain of 
the kinase binds and inactivates the catalytic portion. 
Binding to the calcium/calmodulin complex causes con-
formational changes of the kinase molecule that unfet-
ter the catalytic domain for action (Figure 14–4B). Once 
activated, CaM kinase can phosphorylate itself through 
intramolecular reactions at many sites in the molecule. 
Autophosphorylation has an important functional effect: 
It converts the enzyme into a form that is independent 
of calcium/calmodulin and therefore persistently active, 
even in the absence of Ca2+.
Persistent activation of protein kinases is a gen-
eral and important mechanism for maintaining bio-
chemical processes that underlie long-term changes 
in synaptic function associated with certain forms of 
memory. In addition to the persistent activation of  
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, PKA 
can also become persistently active following a pro-
longed increase in cAMP because of a slow enzymatic 
degradation of free regulatory subunits through the 
ubiquitin pathway. The decline in regulatory subunit 
concentration results in the long-lasting presence of 
free catalytic subunits, even after cAMP levels have 
declined, leading to the continued phosphorylation of 
substrate proteins. PKC can also become persistently 
active through proteolytic cleavage of its regulatory 
and catalytic domains or through the expression of a 
PKC isoform that lacks a regulatory domain. Finally, 
the duration of phosphorylation can be enhanced by 
certain proteins that act to inhibit the activity of phos-
phoprotein phosphatases. One such protein, inhibi-
tor-1, inhibits phosphatase activity only when the 
inhibitor is itself phosphorylated by PKA.
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Compose  
the Second Major Family of  
Metabotropic Receptors
The receptor tyrosine kinases represent a distinct family 
of receptors from the G protein–coupled receptors. The 
receptor tyrosine kinases are integral membrane pro-
teins composed of a single subunit with an extracellu-
lar ligand-binding domain connected to a cytoplasmic 
region by a single transmembrane segment. The cyto-
plasmic region contains a protein kinase domain that 
phosphorylates both itself (autophosphorylation) and 
other proteins on tyrosine residues (Figure 14–5A). 
This phosphorylation results in the activation of a 
large number of proteins, including other kinases that 
are capable of acting on ion channels.
Receptor tyrosine kinases are activated when 
bound by peptide hormones, including epidermal 
growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), 
nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF), and insulin. Cells also contain impor-
tant nonreceptor cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, such 
as the protooncogene src. These nonreceptor tyrosine 
kinases are often activated by interactions with recep-
tor tyrosine kinases and are important in regulating 
growth and development.
Many (but not all) of the receptor tyrosine kinases 
exist as monomers in the plasma membrane in the 
absence of ligand. Ligand binding causes two mono-
meric receptor subunits to form a dimer, thereby 
activating the intracellular kinase. Each monomer 
phosphorylates its counterpart at a tyrosine residue, an 
action that enables the kinase to phosphorylate other 
proteins. Like the serine and threonine protein kinases, 
tyrosine kinases regulate the activity of neuronal pro-
teins they phosphorylate, including the activity of 
certain ion channels. Tyrosine kinases also activate an 
isoform of phospholipase C, phospholipase Cγ, which 
like PLCβ cleaves PIP2 into IP3 and DAG.
Receptor tyrosine kinases initiate cascades of reac-
tions involving several adaptor proteins and other 
protein kinases that often lead to changes in gene tran-
scription. The mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP 
kinases) are an important group of serine-threonine 
kinases that can be activated by a signaling cascade ini-
tiated by receptor tyrosine kinase. MAP kinases are acti-
vated by cascades of protein-kinase reactions (kinase 
kinases), each cascade specific to one of three types 
of MAP kinase: extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK), p38 MAP kinase, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK). Activated MAP kinases have several important 
actions. They translocate to the nucleus where they 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    309
Figure 14–5  Receptor tyrosine kinases.
A. Receptor tyrosine kinases are monomers 
in the absence of a ligand. The receptor 
contains a large extracellular binding domain 
that is connected by a single transmembrane 
segment to a large intracellular region that 
contains a catalytic tyrosine kinase domain. 
Ligand binding to the receptor often causes 
two receptor subunits to form dimers, ena-
bling the enzyme to phosphorylate itself on 
various tyrosine residues on the cytoplasmic 
side of the membrane.
B. After the receptor is autophosphorylated, 
several downstream signaling cascades 
become activated through the binding of 
specific adaptor proteins to the receptor phos-
photyrosine residues (P). Left: Activation of 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). A 
series of adaptor proteins recruits the small 
guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-binding protein 
Ras, which activates a protein kinase cascade, 
leading to the dual phosphorylation of MAP 
kinase on nearby threonine and tyrosine resi-
dues. The activated MAP kinase then phos-
phorylates substrate proteins on serine and 
threonine residues, including ion channels and 
transcription factors. Center: Phospholipase 
Cγ (PLCγ) becomes activated on binding to a 
different phosphotyrosine residue, providing 
a mechanism for producing inositol 1,4,5-tris-
phosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) that 
does not rely on G proteins. Right: Activation 
of the Akt protein kinase (also called PKB). 
Adaptor proteins first activate phospho-
inositide 3-kinase (PI3K), which adds a phos-
phate group to PIP2, yielding PIP3, which then 
enables Akt activation.
Tyrosine
kinase 
domain
Adaptor
proteins
Adaptor
proteins
PIP3
PLC
Ras
Protein
kinase
cascade
Substrate
Differentiation,
survival,
plasticity
Survival
IP3, DAG
PI3K
Substrate
MAPK
Akt
A
B
γ
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
turn on gene transcription by phosphorylating cer-
tain transcription factors. This action is thought to be 
important in stabilizing long-term memory formation 
(Chapters 53 and 54). MAP kinases also phosphorylate 
cytoplasmic and membrane proteins to produce short-
term modulatory actions (Figure 14–5B).
Several Classes of Metabolites Can Serve  
as Transcellular Messengers
The metabolic products we have considered so far 
in response to metabotropic receptor actions do not 
readily cross the cell membrane. As a result, they act 
as true intracellular second messengers: They only 
affect the cell that produces them. However, cells can 
also synthesize metabolites that are lipid soluble and 
so can both act on the cell that produces them and 
diffuse across the plasma membrane to affect neigh-
boring cells. We refer to such molecules as transcel-
lular messengers.
Although these molecules have some functional 
resemblance to neurotransmitters, they differ in a 
number of important ways. They are not contained 
within vesicles and are not released at specialized 
synaptic contacts. They often do not act on mem-
brane receptors but cross the plasma membrane of 
neighboring cells to reach intracellular targets. And 
their release and actions are much slower than those 
at fast synapses. We will consider three broad classes 
of transcellular messengers: the cyclooxygenase and 
lipoxygenase metabolites of the lipid molecule ara-
chidonic acid, the endocannabinoids, and the gas 
nitric oxide.


===== Page 3 =====
310    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Hydrolysis of Phospholipids by Phospholipase  
A2 Liberates Arachidonic Acid to Produce  
Other Second Messengers
Phospholipase A2 hydrolyzes phospholipids that are dis-
tinct from PIP2, cleaving the fatty acyl bond between 
the 2′ position of the glycerol backbone and arachi-
donic acid. This releases arachidonic acid, which is then 
converted through enzymatic action to one of a fam-
ily of active metabolites called eicosanoids, so called 
because of their 20 (Greek eicosa) carbon atoms.
Three types of enzymes metabolize arachidonic 
acid: (1) cyclooxygenases, which produce prostaglan-
dins and thromboxanes; (2) several lipoxygenases, 
which produce a variety of other metabolites; and (3) 
the cytochrome P450 complex, which oxidizes ara-
chidonic acid itself as well as cyclooxygenase and 
lipoxygenase metabolites (Figure 14–6). Synthesis of 
prostaglandins and thromboxanes in the brain is dra-
matically increased by nonspecific stimulation such 
as electroconvulsive shock, trauma, or acute cerebral 
ischemia (localized absence of blood flow). These 
metabolites can all be released by the cell that synthe-
sizes them and thus act as transcellular signals. Many 
of the actions of prostaglandins are mediated by acting 
in the plasma membrane on a family of G protein–
coupled receptors. The members of this receptor fam-
ily can, in turn, activate or inhibit adenylyl cyclase or 
activate phospholipase C.
Endocannabinoids Are Transcellular Messengers 
That Inhibit Presynaptic Transmitter Release
In the early 1990s, researchers identified two types 
of G protein–coupled receptors, CB1 and CB2, which 
bind with high affinity the active compound in mari-
juana, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Both classes of 
receptors are coupled to Gi and Go types of G proteins. 
The CB1 receptors are the most abundant type of G 
protein–coupled receptor in the brain and are found 
predominantly on axons and presynaptic terminals 
in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. 
Activation of these receptors inhibits release of sev-
eral types of neurotransmitters, including both GABA 
and glutamate. The CB2 receptors are found mainly 
on lymphocytes, where they modulate the immune 
response.
The identification of the cannabinoid receptors led 
to the purification of their endogenous ligands, the 
endocannabinoids. Two major endocannabinoids have 
been identified; both contain an arachidonic acid moiety 
and bind to both CB1 and CB2 receptors. Anandamide 
(Sanskrit ananda, bliss) consists of arachidonic acid 
coupled to ethanolamine (arachidonyl-ethanolamide); 
2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG) consists of arachidonic 
acid esterified at the 2 position of glycerol. Both are 
produced by the enzymatic hydrolysis of phospho-
lipids containing arachidonic acid, a process that is 
initiated either when certain G protein–coupled recep-
tors are stimulated or the internal Ca2+ concentration 
is elevated (Figure 14–6). However, whereas 2-AG is 
synthesized in nearly all neurons, the sources of anan-
damide are less well characterized.
Because the endocannabinoids are lipid metabo-
lites that can diffuse through the membrane, they 
function as transcellular signals that act on neighbor-
ing cells, including presynaptic terminals. Production 
of these metabolites is often stimulated in postsynap-
tic neurons by the increase in intracellular Ca2+ that 
results from postsynaptic excitation. Once produced, 
the endocannabinoids diffuse through the cell mem-
brane to nearby presynaptic terminals, where they 
bind to CB1 receptors and inhibit transmitter release. 
In this manner, the postsynaptic cell can control activ-
ity of the presynaptic neuron. There is now intense 
interest in understanding how the activation of these 
receptors in the brain leads to the various behavioral 
effects of marijuana.
The Gaseous Second Messenger Nitric  
Oxide Is a Transcellular Signal That  
Stimulates Cyclic GMP Synthesis
Nitric oxide (NO) acts as a transcellular messenger in 
neurons as well as in other cells of the body. The mod-
ulatory function of NO was discovered through its 
action as a local hormone released from the endothelial 
cells of blood vessels, causing relaxation of the smooth 
muscle of vessel walls. Like the metabolites of arachi-
donic acid, NO readily passes through cell membranes 
and can affect nearby cells without acting on a surface 
receptor. Nitric oxide is a free radical and so is highly 
reactive and short-lived.
Nitric oxide produces many of its actions by 
stimulating the synthesis of guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic 
monophosphate (cyclic GMP or cGMP), which like 
cAMP is a cytoplasmic second messenger that acti-
vates a protein kinase. Specifically, NO activates 
guanylyl cyclase, the enzyme that converts GTP to 
cGMP. There are two types of guanylyl cyclase. One 
is an integral membrane protein with an extracel-
lular receptor domain and an intracellular catalytic 
domain that synthesizes cGMP. The other is cyto-
plasmic (soluble guanylyl cyclase) and is the isoform 
activated by NO. In some instances, NO is thought 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    311
Figure 14–6  Three phospholipases generate distinct second 
messengers by hydrolysis of phospholipids containing ara-
chidonic acid.
Pathway 1. Stimulation of G protein–coupled receptors leads 
to activation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2) by the free βγ-subunit 
complex. Phospholipase A2 hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol (PI) 
in the plasma membrane, leading to the release of arachidonic 
acid, a 20-carbon fatty acid with four double bonds that is a 
component of many phospholipids. Once released, arachidonic 
acid is metabolized through several pathways, three of which 
are shown. The 12- and 5-lipoxygenase pathways both produce 
several active metabolites; the cyclooxygenase pathway pro-
duces prostaglandins and thromboxanes. Cyclooxygenase is 
inhibited by indomethacin, aspirin, and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs. Arachidonic acid and many of its metabo-
lites modulate the activity of certain ion channels. (HPETE, 
hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid.)
Pathway 2. Other G proteins activate phospholipase C (PLC), 
which hydrolyzes PI in the membrane to generate DAG (see 
Figure 14–4). Hydrolysis of DAG by a second enzyme, diacyl-
glycerol lipase (DAGL), leads to production of 2-arachidonyl-
glycerol (2-AG), an endocannabinoid that is released from 
neuronal membranes and then activates G protein–coupled 
endocannabinoid receptors in the plasma membrane of other 
neighboring neurons.
Pathway 3. Elevation of intracellular Ca2+ activates  
phospholipase D (PLD), which hydrolyzes phospholipids that 
have an unusual polar head group containing arachidonic acid 
(N-arachidonylphosphatidylethanolamine [N-arachidonyl PE]). 
This action generates a second endocannabinoid termed  
anandamide (arachidonylethanolamide).
Several active
metabolites
O
OH
O
NH
OH
OH
OH
1
2
3
12-Lipoxygenase
5-Lipoxygenase
Cyclooxygenase
12-HPETE
5-HPETE
Leukotrienes
Prostaglandins
and
thromboxanes
Several active
metabolites
Arachidonic 
acid
Anandamide
2-AG
N-arachidonyl PE
PI
PI
Receptor
Transmitter
G protein
PLA2
PI
PI
DAG
PLC
DAGL
PL
PLD


===== Page 5 =====
312    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Table 14–1  Comparison of Synaptic Excitation Produced by the Opening and Closing of Ion Channels
 
Ion channels 
involved
Effect on total 
membrane 
conductance
Contribution to 
action potential
Time course
Second  
messenger
Nature of 
synaptic action
EPSP caused 
by opening of 
channels
Nonselective 
cation channel
Increase
Triggers action 
potential
Usually fast 
(milliseconds)
None
Mediating
EPSP caused 
by closing of 
channels
K+ channel
Decrease
Modulates  
action potential
Slow (seconds 
or minutes)
Cyclic AMP  
(or other second 
messengers)
Modulating
to act directly by modifying sulfhydryl groups on 
cysteine residues of various proteins, a process 
termed nitrosylation.
Cyclic GMP has two major actions. It acts directly 
to open cyclic nucleotide-gated channels (important 
for phototransduction and olfactory signaling, as 
described in Chapters 22 and 29, respectively), and 
it activates the cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), 
which like PKA phosphorylates substrate proteins on 
certain serine or threonine residues. PKG differs from 
the PKA in that it is a single polypeptide with both reg-
ulatory (cGMP-binding) and catalytic domains, which 
are homologous to regulatory and catalytic domains in 
other protein kinases. It also phosphorylates a distinct 
set of substrates from PKA.
Cyclic GMP–dependent phosphorylation of pro-
teins is prominent in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, 
large neurons with copiously branching dendrites. 
There, the cGMP cascade is activated by NO produced 
and released from the presynaptic terminals of granule 
cell axons (the parallel fibers) that make excitatory syn-
apses onto the Purkinje cells. This increase in cGMP in 
the Purkinje neuron reduces the response of the AMPA 
receptors to glutamate, thereby depressing fast excita-
tory transmission at the parallel fiber synapse.
The Physiological Actions of Metabotropic 
Receptors Differ From Those of  
Ionotropic Receptors
Second-Messenger Cascades Can Increase or 
Decrease the Opening of Many Types of  
Ion Channels
The functional differences between metabotropic and 
ionotropic receptors reflect the differences in their 
properties. For example, metabotropic receptor actions 
are much slower than ionotropic ones (Table 14–1). The 
physiological actions of the two classes of receptors 
also differ.
Ionotropic receptors are channels that function as 
simple on-off switches; their main job is either to excite 
a neuron to bring it closer to the threshold for firing or 
inhibit the neuron to decrease its likelihood to fire. Because 
these channels are normally confined to the postsynaptic 
region of the membrane, the action of ionotropic recep-
tors is local. Metabotropic receptors, on the other hand, 
because they activate diffusible second messengers, can 
act on channels some distance from the receptor. Moreo-
ver, metabotropic receptors regulate a variety of channel 
types, including resting channels, ligand-gated channels, 
and voltage-gated channels that generate action poten-
tials, underlie pacemaker potentials, and provide Ca2+ 
influx for neurotransmitter release.
Finally, whereas transmitter binding leads to an 
increase in the opening of ionotropic receptor-chan-
nels, the activation of metabotropic receptors can lead 
to an increase or decrease in channel opening. For 
example, MAP kinase phosphorylation of an inactivat-
ing (A-type) K+ channel in the dendrites of hippocam-
pal pyramidal neurons decreases channel opening 
and, thus, K+ current magnitude, thereby enhancing 
dendritic action potential firing.
The binding of transmitter to metabotropic recep-
tors can greatly influence the electrophysiological prop-
erties of a neuron (Figure 14–7). Metabotropic receptors 
in a presynaptic terminal can alter transmitter release 
by regulating either Ca2+ influx or the efficacy of the 
synaptic release process itself (Figure 14–7A). Metabo-
tropic receptors in the postsynaptic cell can influence 
the strength of a synapse by modulating the ionotropic 
receptors that mediate the postsynaptic potential 
(Figure 14–7B). By acting on resting and voltage-gated 
channels in the postsynaptic neuron’s cell body, den-
drites, and axon, metabotropic receptor actions can also 
alter the resting potential, membrane resistance, length 
and time constants, threshold potential, action potential 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    313
Figure 14–7  The modulatory actions of second messengers 
can regulate fast synaptic transmission by acting at two 
synaptic sites.
A. In the presynaptic terminal, second messengers can regu-
late the efficacy of transmitter release and thus the size of the 
fast postsynaptic potential mediated by ionotropic receptors. 
This can occur by altering presynaptic Ca2+ influx, either directly 
by modulating presynaptic voltage-gated Ca2+ channels or 
indirectly by modulating presynaptic K+ channels, which alters 
Ca2+ influx by controlling action potential duration as illustrated 
(and thereby the length of time Ca2+ channels remain open). 
Some modulatory transmitters act to directly modulate the effi-
cacy of the release machinery.
B. In the postsynaptic terminal, second messengers can alter 
directly the amplitude of postsynaptic potentials by modulating 
ionotropic receptors.
Action
potential
Postsynaptic
potential
Control
+ transmitter
Control
+ transmitter
B  Postsynaptic modulation
Ionotropic 
receptor
Ca2+
channel
K+
channel
A  Presynaptic modulation
duration, and repetitive firing characteristics. Such 
modulation of the intrinsic excitability of neurons can 
play an important role in regulating information flow 
through neuronal circuits to alter behavior.
The distinction between direct and indirect regula-
tion of ion channels is nicely illustrated by choliner-
gic synaptic transmission in autonomic ganglia of the 
peripheral nervous system. Stimulation of the presyn-
aptic nerve releases ACh from the nerve terminals, 
directly opening nicotinic ACh receptor-channels 
in the postsynaptic neuron, thereby producing a fast 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). The fast 
EPSP is followed by a slow EPSP that takes approxi-
mately 100 ms to develop but then lasts for several 
seconds. The slow EPSP is produced by an action of 
ACh on metabotropic muscarinic receptors that leads 
to the closing of a delayed-rectifier K+ channel called 
the muscarine-sensitive (or M-type) K+ channel 
(Figure 14–8A). These voltage-gated channels, which 
are formed by members of the KCNQ gene family, are 
partially activated when the cell is at rest; as a result, 
the current they carry helps determine the cell resting 
potential and membrane resistance.
The M-type K+ channel differs from other delayed-
rectifier K+ channels by its much slower activation. It 
requires several hundred milliseconds to fully acti-
vate on depolarization. Because M-type channels are 
partially open at the resting potential, their closure in 
response to muscarinic stimulation causes a decrease 
in resting K+ conductance, thus depolarizing the cell 
(Figure 14–8B). How far will the membrane depolarize? 
This can be calculated using the equivalent circuit form 
of the Goldman equation (Chapter 9) by decreasing the 
gK term from its initial value. As the change in gK due 
to closure of M-type K+ channels is relatively modest, 
the depolarization at the peak of the slow EPSP is small, 
only a few millivolts. Nonetheless, M-type K+ channel 
closure by ACh can lead to a striking increase in action 
potential firing in response to a depolarizing input.
What are the special properties of M-type K+ chan-
nel closure that dramatically enhance excitability? 
First, the depolarization resulting from the reduction 
in resting gK drives the membrane closer to threshold. 
Second, the increase in membrane resistance decreases 
the amount of excitatory current necessary to depolar-
ize the cell to a given voltage. Third, the reduction in  
the delayed K+ current enables the cell to produce a 
more sustained firing of action potentials in response 
to a prolonged depolarizing stimulus.
In the absence of ACh, a ganglionic neuron nor-
mally fires only one or two action potentials and 
then stops firing in response to prolonged excitatory 
stimulation that is just above threshold. This process, 
termed spike-frequency adaptation, results in part from 


===== Page 7 =====
314    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 14–8  Fast ionotropic and slow metabotropic synap-
tic actions at autonomic ganglia.
A. The release of ACh onto a postsynaptic neuron in autonomic 
ganglia produces a fast EPSP followed by a slow EPSP. The 
fast EPSP is produced by activation of ionotropic nicotinic ACh 
receptors, the slow EPSP by activation of metabotropic mus-
carinic ACh receptors. The metabotropic receptor stimulates 
PLC to hydrolyze PIP2, yielding IP3 and DAG. The decrease in 
PIP2 causes the closure of M-type delayed-rectifier K+ channels.
B. Voltage-clamp recordings from an autonomic ganglion 
neuron indicate that ACh decreases the magnitude of the cur-
rent carried by the voltage-gated M-type K+ channels. In this 
experiment, the cell is initially clamped at a holding potential 
(Vh) near the resting potential in the absence of ACh (typically 
–60 mV). At this potential, the M-type K+ channels are partially 
open, leading to a steady outward K+ current. The voltage is 
then stepped for 1 second to a more positive test potential 
(Vt, typically –40 mV), which normally causes a slow increase 
in outward K+ current (IK) as the M-type K+ channels respond 
to the more positive voltage by increasing their opening (con-
trol). Application of muscarine, a plant alkaloid that selectively 
stimulates the muscarinic ACh receptor, causes a fraction of 
the M-type K+ channels to close. This decreases the outward K+ 
current at the holding potential (note the shift in baseline cur-
rent, ΔIK), by closing the M-type K+ channels that are open at 
rest, and decreases the magnitude of the slowly activating K+ 
current in response to the step depolarization. (Adapted from 
Adams et al. 1986.)
C. In the absence of muscarinic ACh receptor stimulation, the 
neuron fires only a single action potential in response to a pro-
longed depolarizing current stimulus, a process termed spike-
frequency adaptation (left). This is because the slow activation 
of the M-type K+ channel during the depolarization generates an 
outward current that repolarizes the membrane below thresh-
old. When the same current stimulus is applied during a slow 
EPSP, when a large fraction of M-type channels are now unable 
to open, the neuron fires a more sustained train of action 
potentials (right). (Adapted from Adams et al. 1986.)
DAG
P
P
P
PLC
G protein
PIP2
Ionotropic 
receptor
Metabotropic
receptor
ACh
M-type 
K+ channel
Current
Voltage
Before EPSP
Muscarine
C  M-type K+ current inhibition reduces spike adaptation
B  The effect of muscarine on the M-type K+ current
During slow EPSP
50 mV
IP3
M-type 
K+ channel
Slow EPSP
Fast EPSP
A  Fast and slow synaptic transmission
IK
∆IK
Vt
Vh
Current
Voltage
Control
1 nA
0
0.3
0.6
0
0.3
0.6
ACh
Presynaptic
Postsynaptic
(s)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 14 / Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers    315
the increase in M-type K+ current in response to the 
prolonged depolarization, which helps repolarize the 
membrane below threshold. As a result, if the same 
prolonged stimulus is applied during a slow EPSP 
(when the M-type K+ channels are closed), the neuron 
remains depolarized above threshold during the entire 
stimulus and thus fires a prolonged burst of impulses 
(Figure 14–8C). As this modulation by ACh illustrates, 
the M-type K+ channels do more than help set the rest-
ing potential—they also control excitability.
Although it has been known for some time that 
muscarinic receptor actions in autonomic ganglia result 
in the activation of PLC and the production of DAG 
and IP3, the precise mechanism by which this signaling 
cascade produces M-type channel closure remained 
mysterious. However, it is now clear that M-channel 
closure upon muscarinic receptor activation is not 
due to the production of a second messenger. Rather, 
the M-channels, as well as a number of other types 
of channels (eg, see Figure 14–10), bind membranous 
PIP2 as a cofactor for their proper functioning. Thus, 
muscarinic receptor activation closes M-type channels 
by activating PLC, and thereby decreasing the levels 
of PIP2 in the membrane due to hydrolysis by PLC. 
We shall next discuss the mechanisms by which other 
signaling cascades are capable of modulating other 
types of ion channels. We start by describing the sim-
plest mechanism, the direct gating of ion channels by 
G proteins, and then consider a more complex mecha-
nism dependent on protein phosphorylation by PKA.
G Proteins Can Modulate Ion Channels Directly
The simplest mechanism for the indirect gating of a 
channel occurs when transmitter binding to a metabo-
tropic receptor releases a G protein subunit that 
directly interacts with the channel to modify its open-
ing. This mechanism is used to gate two kinds of ion 
channels: the G protein–gated inward-rectifier K+ chan-
nels (GIRK1–4; encoded by the KCNJ1–4 genes) and 
a voltage-dependent Ca2+ channel. With both kinds of 
channels, it is the G protein’s βγ complex that binds to 
and regulates channel opening (Figure 14–9A).
The GIRK channel, like other inward-rectifier 
channels, passes current more readily in the inward 
than the outward direction, although in physiologi-
cal situations, K+ current is always outward. Inward-
rectifier channels resemble a truncated voltage-gated 
K+ channel in having two transmembrane regions con-
nected by a P-region loop that forms the selectivity fil-
ter in the channel (see Figure 8–11).
In the 1920s, Otto Loewi described how the release 
of ACh in response to stimulation of the vagus nerve 
slows the heart rate (Figure 14–9B). We now know that 
ACh activates muscarinic receptors to stimulate G pro-
tein activity, which directly opens the GIRK channel. 
For many years, this transmitter action was puzzling 
because it has properties of both ionotropic and metabo-
tropic receptor actions. The time course of activation of 
the K+ current following release of ACh is slower (50- to 
100-ms rise time) than that of ionotropic receptors (rise 
time <1 ms). However, the rate of GIRK channel activation 
is much faster than that of second-messenger-mediated 
actions that depend on protein phosphorylation (which 
can take many seconds to turn on). Although biochemi-
cal and electrophysiological studies clearly demon-
strated that a G protein was required for this action, 
patch-clamp experiments showed that the G protein did 
not trigger production of a diffusible second messenger 
(Figure 14–9C). These findings were reconciled when it 
was found that the GIRK channel was activated directly 
by the G protein’s βγ-subunit complex, which becomes 
available to interact with the GIRK channel when it dis-
sociates from the G protein α-subunit upon activation of 
the muscarinic receptors.
The mechanism by which the βγ-subunits activate 
the GIRK channel was recently elucidated at the atomic 
resolution through the solving of the X-ray crystal 
structure of the GIRK channel in a complex with the 
βγ-subunits. Each of the four GIRK channel subunits 
binds a single βγ-subunit complex, which interacts 
with the cytoplasmic surface of the channel, leading to 
a conformational change that promotes channel open-
ing (Figure 14–10).
Activation of GIRK channels hyperpolarizes the 
membrane in the direction of EK (–80 mV). In certain 
classes of spontaneously active neurons, the outward K+ 
current through these channels acts predominantly to 
decrease the neuron’s intrinsic firing rate, opposing the 
slow depolarization caused by excitatory pacemaker cur-
rents carried by the hyperpolarization-activated, cyclic 
nucleotide-regulated channels, which are encoded by 
the HCN gene family (Chapter 10). Because GIRK chan-
nels are activated by neurotransmitters, they provide a 
means for synaptic modulation of the firing rate of excit-
able cells. These channels are regulated in a wide vari-
ety of neurons by a large number of transmitters and 
neuropeptides that act on different G protein–coupled 
receptors to activate either Gi or Go, thereby releasing 
the βγ-subunits.
Several G protein–coupled receptors also act to inhibit 
the opening of certain voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, again 
as a result of the direct binding of the βγ complex of Gi or 
Go to the channel. Because Ca2+ influx through voltage-
gated Ca2+ channels normally has a depolarizing effect, 
the dual action of G protein βγ-subunits—Ca2+ channel 
inhibition and K+ channel activation—strongly inhibits 
neuronal firing. As we will see in Chapter 15, inhibition 


===== Page 9 =====
316    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
40 ms
5 pA
ACh
ACh
Gi protein
Extracellular
side
P
P
B  Opening of GIRK channels by ACh hyperpolarizes cardiac muscle cells
βγ
Cytoplasmic
side
P
P
P
Membrane
K+
αi
A  Direct opening of the GIRK channel by a G protein
Muscarinic ACh
receptor
GIRK channel
GIRK subunit
C  Opening of GIRK channels by ACh does not require second messengers
Vagus nerve stimulation
1 s
50 mV
ACh
No ACh
ACh in bath — no response
ACh in pipette — increased opening
N
C
Figure 14–9  Some G proteins can open ion 
channels directly without employing second 
messengers.
A. An inward-rectifying K+ channel (GIRK) is 
opened directly by a G protein. Binding of ACh to 
a muscarinic receptor causes the Gi protein and 
αiβγ complex to dissociate; the free βγ-subunits 
bind to a cytoplasmic domain of the channel, 
causing the channel to open.
B. Stimulation of the parasympathetic vagus 
nerve releases ACh, which acts at muscarinic 
receptors to open GIRK channels in cardiac mus-
cle cell membranes. The current through the GIRK 
channel hyperpolarizes the cells, thus slowing the 
heart rate. (Adapted from Toda and West 1967.)
C. Three single-channel records show that open-
ing of GIRK channels does not involve a freely 
diffusible second messenger. In this experiment, 
the pipette contained a high concentration of K+, 
which makes EK less negative. As a result, when 
GIRK channels open, they generate brief pulses 
of inward (downward) current. In the absence of 
ACh, channels open briefly and infrequently  
(top record). Application of ACh in the bath 
(outside the pipette) does not increase channel 
opening in the patch of membrane under the 
pipette (middle record). This is because the free 
βγ-subunits, released by the binding of ACh to its 
receptor, remain tethered to the membrane near 
the receptor and can only activate nearby chan-
nels. The subunits are not free to diffuse to the 
channels under the patch pipette. The ACh must 
be in the pipette to activate the channel (bottom 
record). (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Soejima and Noma 1984. Copyright © 1984 
Springer Nature.)


