===== Page 1 =====
1108    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
all of developmental biology: how to convert a single 
cell, the fertilized egg, into the highly differentiated 
cell types that characterize the mature organism. Only 
at later stages, as the neurons form complex circuits 
and experience modifies their connections, do prin-
ciples of neural development diverge from those in 
other organs.
Early developmental principles are conserved not 
only among tissues but also across species and phyla. 
Indeed, much of what we know about the cellular and 
molecular bases of neural development in vertebrates 
comes from genetic studies of so-called simple organ-
isms, most notably the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster 
and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. Nevertheless, 
because a main goal of studying neural development 
is to explain how the assembly of the nervous system 
underlies both human behavior and brain disorders, 
our description of the rules and principles of nervous 
system development focus primarily on vertebrate 
organisms.
The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm
The vertebrate embryo arises from the fertilized egg. 
Cell divisions initially form a ball of cells, called the 
morula, which then hollows out to form the blastula. 
Next, infoldings and growth generate the gastrula, a 
structure with polarity (dorsal-ventral and anterior-
posterior) and three layers of cells—the endoderm, 
mesoderm, and ectoderm (Figure 45–1A).
The endoderm is the innermost germ layer that 
later gives rise to the gut, as well as to the lungs, 
pancreas, and liver. The mesoderm is the middle germ 
layer that gives rise to muscle, connective tissues, and 
much of the vascular system. The ectoderm is the out-
ermost layer. Most of the ectoderm gives rise to the 
skin, but a narrow central strip flattens out to become 
the neural plate (Figure 45–1B). It is from the neural 
plate that the central and peripheral nervous systems 
arise.
Soon after the neural plate forms, it begins to 
invaginate, forming the neural groove. The folds then 
deepen and eventually separate from the rest of the 
ectoderm to form the neural tube, through a process 
called neurulation (Figure 45–1C,D). The caudal 
region of the neural tube gives rise to the spinal cord, 
whereas the rostral region becomes the brain. As the 
neural tube closes, cells at its junction with the over-
lying ectoderm are set aside to become the neural 
crest, which eventually gives rise to the autonomic 
and sensory nervous systems, as well as several non-
neural cell types (Figure 45–1E).
Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate
As with other organs, the emergence of the nervous 
system is the culmination of a complex molecular pro-
gram that involves the tightly orchestrated expression 
of specific genes. For the nervous system, the first step 
is the formation of the neural plate from a restricted 
region of the ectoderm. This step reflects the outcome 
of an early choice that ectodermal cells have to make: 
whether to become neural or epidermal cells. This deci-
sion has been the subject of intense study for nearly 
100 years.
Much of this work has focused on a search for sig-
nals that control the fate of ectodermal cells. We now 
know that two major classes of proteins work together 
to promote the differentiation of an ectodermal cell 
into a neural cell. The first are inductive factors, signal-
ing molecules that are secreted by nearby cells. Some 
of these factors are freely diffusible and exert their 
actions at a distance, but others are tethered to the cell 
surface and act locally. The second are surface recep-
tors that enable cells to respond to inductive factors. 
Activation of these receptors triggers the expression of 
genes encoding intracellular proteins—transcription 
factors, enzymes, and cytoskeletal proteins—that push 
ectodermal cells along the pathway to becoming neu-
ral cells.
The ability of a cell to respond to inductive signals, 
termed its competence, depends on the exact repertoire 
of receptors, transduction molecules, and transcrip-
tion factors that it expresses. Thus, a cell’s fate is deter-
mined not only by the signals to which it is exposed—a 
consequence of when and where it finds itself in the 
embryo—but also by the profile of genes it expresses 
as a consequence of its prior developmental history. 
We will see in subsequent chapters that the interaction 
of localized inductive signals and intrinsic cell respon-
siveness is evident at virtually every step throughout 
neural development.
Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by 
Signals From the Organizer Region
The discovery that specific signals are responsible for 
triggering the formation of the neural plate was the 
first major advance in understanding the mechanisms 
that pattern the nervous system. In 1924, Hans Spemann 
and Hilde Mangold made the remarkable observation 
that the differentiation of the neural plate from uncom-
mitted ectoderm depends on signals secreted by a  
specialized group of cells they called the organizer 
region.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1109
Figure 45–1  The neural plate 
folds to form the neural 
tube. (Scanning electron micro-
graphs of chick neural tube repro-
duced, with permission, from G. 
Schoenwolf.)
A. Following fertilization of the egg 
by sperm, cell divisions give rise 
successively to the morula, blastula, 
and gastrula. Three germ cell  
layers—the ectoderm, mesoderm, 
and endoderm—form during 
gastrulation.
B. A strip of ectoderm becomes 
the neural plate, the precursor of 
the central and peripheral nervous 
systems.
C. The neural plate buckles at its 
midline to form the neural groove.
D. Closure of the dorsal neural folds 
forms the neural tube.
E. The neural tube lies over the 
notochord and is flanked by 
somites, an ovoid group of meso-
dermal cells that give rise to muscle 
and cartilage. Cells at the junction 
between the neural tube and over-
lying ectoderm are set aside to 
become the neural crest.
Neural tube
Neural
crest cells
Neural crest cells
Paraxial 
mesoderm
Paraxial 
mesoderm
Lateral
plate 
mesoderm
Endoderm
Ectoderm
Oocyte
Morula
Blastula
Gastrula
B
A
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Neural groove
C
D
E
Somite
Endoderm
Notochord
Neural plate
Their experiments involved transplanting small 
pieces of tissue from one amphibian embryo to 
another. Most telling were transplantations of the dor-
sal lip of the blastopore, which is destined to form the 
dorsal mesoderm, from its normal dorsal position to 
the ventral side of a host embryo. The dorsal lip lies 
underneath the dorsal ectoderm, a region that nor-
mally gives rise to dorsal epidermis, including the 
neural plate (Figure 45–2). They grafted the tissue from 
a pigmented embryo into unpigmented host, allowing 
them to distinguish the position and fate of donor and 
host cells.


===== Page 3 =====
1110    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 45–2  Signals from the organizer region induce a  
second neural tube. (Micrographs reproduced, with permission, 
from Eduardo de Robertis.)
Left: In the normal frog, embryo cells from the organizer region 
(the dorsal blastopore lip) populate the notochord, floor plate, 
and somites. Right: Spemann and Mangold grafted the dor-
sal blastopore lip from an early gastrula stage embryo into a 
region of a host embryo that normally gives rise to the ventral 
epidermis. Signals from grafted cells induce a second embry-
onic axis, which includes a virtually complete neural tube. The 
donor tissue was from a pigmented embryo, whereas the host 
tissue was unpigmented, permitting the fate of grafted cells 
to be monitored by their color. Grafted cells themselves con-
tribute only to the notochord, floor plate, and somites of the 
host embryo. As the embryo matures, the secondary neural 
tube develops into a complete nervous system. In the Xenopus 
embryo shown in the micrograph, the second neural axis was 
induced by injection of an antagonist of bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP), in effect substituting for the organizer signal 
(Figure 45–3). The primary neural axis is also apparent.  
(Abbreviations: D, dorsal; V, ventral.)
D
V
V
Donor embryo
Normal
embryo
Secondary
axis
Primary
axis
Endoderm
Neural tube
Notochord
Somite
D
D
Host
embryo
Spemann and Mangold found that transplanted 
cells from the dorsal lip of the blastopore followed their 
normal developmental program, generating midline 
mesoderm tissue such as the somites and notochord. 
But the transplanted cells also caused a striking change 
in the fate of the neighboring ventral ectodermal cells 
of the host embryo. Host ectodermal cells were induced 
to form a virtually complete copy of the nervous sys-
tem (Figure 45–2). They therefore called the donor tis-
sue the organizer. Spemann and Mangold went on to 
show that the dorsal lip of the blastopore was the only 
tissue that possessed this “organizing” effect.
These pioneering studies also demonstrated that 
“induction” plays a critical role in neural develop-
ment. Induction is a process by which cells of one tis-
sue direct the development of neighboring cells at a 
region where the two come into proximity. The impor-
tance is that it provides a mechanism by which signals 
from one tissue can lead to subdivision of a second 
tissue. In this case, the mesoderm induces one part of 
the ectoderm to become the neural plate, and eventu-
ally the nervous system, while the remainder goes on 
to become epithelium, and eventually skin. The new 
juxtaposition thereby formed could, in principle, set 
the stage for a cascade of subsequent inductions and 
subdivisions. Indeed, we will see that many aspects of 
neural tube patterning are now known to depend on 
signals secreted by local organizing centers through 
actions similar in principle to that of the classical 
organizer region.
Neural Induction Is Mediated by Peptide Growth 
Factors and Their Inhibitors
For decades after Spemann and Mangold’s pioneer-
ing studies, identification of the neural inducer con-
stituted a Holy Grail of developmental biology. The 
search was marked by little success until the 1980s, 
when the advent of molecular biology and the avail-
ability of better markers of early neural tissue led to 
breakthroughs in our understanding of neural induc-
tion and its chemical mediators.
The first advance came from a simple finding: 
When the early ectoderm is dissociated into single 
isolated cells, effectively preventing cell-to-cell signal-
ing, the cells readily acquire neural properties in the 
absence of added factors (Figure 45–3A). The surpris-
ing implication of this finding was that the “default” 
fate of ectodermal cells is neural differentiation and 
that this fate is prevented by signaling among ectoder-
mal cells. In this model, the long sought-after “inducer” 
is actually a “de-repressor”: It prevents ectoderm from 
repressing neural fate.
These ideas immediately raised two further ques-
tions. What ectodermal signal represses neural differ-
entiation, and what does organizer tissue provide to 
overcome the effects of the repressor? Studies of neu-
ral induction in frogs and chicks have now provided 
answers to these questions.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1111
Figure 45–3  Inhibition of bone morphogenetic protein 
(BMP) signaling initiates neural induction.
A. In Xenopus frog embryos, signals from the organizer region 
(red line) spread through the ectoderm to induce neural tissue. 
Ectodermal tissue that is beyond the range of organizer signals 
gives rise to epidermis.
B. BMP inhibitors secreted from the organizer region (includ-
ing noggin, follistatin, and chordin) bind to BMPs and block the 
ability of ectodermal cells to acquire an epidermal fate, thus 
promoting neural character.
C. Ectodermal cells acquire neural or epidermal character 
depending on the presence or absence of BMP signaling. 
When ectodermal cell aggregates are exposed to BMP signaling, 
they differentiate into epidermal tissue. When BMP signaling 
is blocked, either by dissociating ectodermal tissue into single 
cells or by addition of BMP inhibitors to ectodermal cell aggre-
gates, the cells differentiate into neural tissue.
+BMP
Inhibitors
A
Ventral
mesoderm
Organizer
region
BMP inhibitors
spread from
organizer region
Intact
Dissociated
Neural
Neural
Epidermal
+BMPs
B
C
Ectodermal
cells
BMP
signaling
Epidermal
cells
Neural
cells
Epidermal
Chordin
Noggin
Follistatin
Neural
Epidermal
BMP signaling
In the absence of signals from the organizer, ecto-
dermal cells synthesize and secrete bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs), members of a large family of transform-
ing growth factor β (TGFβ)-related proteins. The BMPs, 
acting through serine/threonine kinase class receptors 
on ectodermal cells, suppress the potential for neural 
differentiation and promote epidermal differentiation 
(Figure 43–3B). Key evidence for the role of BMPs as 
neural repressors came from experiments in which a 
truncated version of a BMP receptor, which blocks BMP 
signaling, was found to trigger the differentiation of 
neural tissue in the Xenopus frog embryo. Conversely, 
exposure of ectodermal cells to BMP signaling pro-
moted differentiation as epidermal cells (Figure 45–3C).
The identification of BMPs as suppressors of 
neuronal differentiation in turn suggested that the 


===== Page 5 =====
1112    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
organizer might induce neural differentiation in ecto-
dermal cells by secreting factors that antagonize BMP 
signaling. Direct support for this idea came from the 
finding that cells of the organizer region express many 
secreted proteins that act as BMP antagonists. These 
proteins include noggin, chordin, follistatin, and even 
some variant BMP proteins. Each of these proteins has 
the ability to induce ectodermal cells to differentiate 
into neural tissue (Figure 45–3B). Thus, there is no sin-
gle neural inducer. In fact, multiple classes of proteins 
are required for induction, as shown by the later find-
ing that the exposure of ectodermal cells to fibroblast 
growth factors (FGFs) is also a necessary step in neural 
differentiation.
Together, these studies provided a molecular 
explanation of the cellular phenomenon of neural 
induction. Although many details of the pathway 
remain to be clarified and some mechanistic differ-
ences among species remain perplexing, a key chapter 
in neural development has now been brought to a sat-
isfying conclusion nearly a century after the organizer 
was discovered by Spemann and Mangold.
Rostrocaudal Patterning of the Neural Tube 
Involves Signaling Gradients and Secondary 
Organizing Centers
As soon as cells of the neural plate have been induced, 
they begin to acquire regional characteristics that mark 
the first steps in dividing the nervous system into 
regions such as forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and 
spinal cord. The subdivision is directed by a series of 
secreted inductive factors and follows the same basic 
principles of neural induction. Neural plate cells in 
different regions of the neural tube respond to these 
inductive signals by expressing distinct transcription 
factors that gradually constrain the developmental 
potential of cells in each local domain. In this way, 
neurons in different positions acquire functional dif-
ferences. Signaling occurs along both the rostrocaudal 
and the dorsoventral axes of the neural tube. We begin 
by describing rostrocaudal patterning and then return 
to dorsoventral patterning.
The Neural Tube Becomes Regionalized  
Early in Development
After the neural tube forms, cells divide rapidly, but 
rates of proliferation are not uniform. Individual 
regions of the neural epithelium expand at different 
rates and begin to form the specialized parts of the 
mature central nervous system. Differences in the rate 
of proliferation of cells in rostral regions of the neu-
ral tube result in the formation of three brain vesicles: 
the forebrain (or prosencephalic) vesicle, the midbrain 
(or mesencephalic) vesicle, and the hindbrain (or 
rhombencephalic) vesicle (Figure 45–4A).
At this early three-vesicle stage, the neural tube 
flexes twice: once at the cervical flexure, at the junc-
tion of the spinal cord and hindbrain, and once at the 
cephalic flexure, at the junction of the hindbrain and 
midbrain. A third flexure, the pontine flexure, forms 
later, and later still, the cervical flexure straightens out 
and becomes indistinct (Figure 45–4D). The cephalic 
flexure remains prominent throughout development, 
and its persistence is the reason why the orientation 
of the longitudinal axis of the forebrain deviates from 
that of the brain stem and spinal cord.
As the neural tube develops, two of the primary 
embryonic vesicles divide further, thus forming five 
vesicles (Figure 45–4B,C). The forebrain vesicle divides 
to form the telencephalon, which will give rise to the 
cortex, hippocampus, and basal ganglia, and the dien-
cephalon, which will give rise to the thalamus, hypo-
thalamus, and retina. The mesencephalon, which does 
not divide further, gives rise to the inferior and superior 
colliculi and other midbrain structures. The hindbrain 
vesicle divides to form the metencephalon, which will 
give rise to the pons and cerebellum, and the myelen-
cephalon, which will give rise to the medulla. Together 
with the spinal cord, these divisions make up the major 
functional regions of the mature central nervous sys-
tem (see Chapter 4). The progressive subdivision of the 
neural tube into these functional domains is regulated 
by a variety of secreted signals.
Signals From the Mesoderm and Endoderm Define 
the Rostrocaudal Pattern of the Neural Plate
It was originally believed that the organizer, as defined 
by Spemann and Mangold, was uniform in character, 
and therefore induced an initially uniform neural plate. 
Subsequent studies showed, however, that the organ-
izer is regionally specialized and secretes factors that 
initiate the rostrocaudal patterning of the neural plate 
almost as soon as induction commences. One impor-
tant class of factors comprises the Wnt proteins (an 
acronym based on their founding family members, the 
Drosophila Wingless protein and the mammalian Int1 
proto-oncogene protein). Others include retinoic acid 
and FGFs. They are produced by mesodermal cells of 
the organizer as well as nearby paraxial mesoderm.
The net level of Wnt signaling activity is low 
at rostral levels of the neural plate and increases 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1113
Figure 45–4  Sequential stages of neural tube development.
A. At early stages of neural tube development, there are three 
brain vesicles, which will form the prosencephalon (forebrain), 
mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain).
B. Further division within the prosencephalon and rhomben-
cephalon generate additional vesicles. The prosencephalon 
splits to form the telencephalon and diencephalon, and the 
rhombencephalon splits to form the metencephalon and the 
myelencephalon.
C. Top-down view of the neural tube of a chick embryo at the 
five-vesicle stage. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
G. Schoenwolf.)
D. The neural tube bends at borders between vesicles, forming 
the cephalic, pontine, and cervical flexures.
1
Proencephalon
A  Three-vesicle stage
D
B  Five-vesicle stage
C
Lateral 
ventricle
Forebrain
Telencephalon
2
3
Mesencephalon
Rhombencephalon
Caudal neural tube
Cephalic
ﬂexure
Cervical
ﬂexure
Pontine
ﬂexure
Cervical
ﬂexure
Cephalic
ﬂexure
1a
1b
2
3a
3b
Third 
ventricle
Cerebral 
aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Central canal
Neural
retina
Lens
Mesencephalon
(midbrain)
Metencephalon
(pons and
cerebellum)
Myelencephalon
(medulla)
Spinal cord
Diencephalon
Midbrain
Hindbrain
1
2
3
1a
1b
2
3b
3a
progressively in the caudal direction. This activity 
gradient arises because the mesoderm adjacent to the 
caudal region of the neural plate expresses high levels 
of Wnt. Sharpening this gradient, tissue that under-
lies the rostral region of the neural plate is a source of 
secreted proteins that inhibit Wnt signaling, much as 
BMP inhibitors attenuate BMP signaling at an earlier 
stage. Thus, cells at progressively more caudal posi-
tions along the neural plate are exposed to increas-
ing levels of Wnt activity and acquire a more caudal 
regional character, spanning the entire range from 
forebrain to midbrain to hindbrain and finally to spi-
nal cord (Figure 45–5A). These results suggest that 
an anterior character is the “default” state for neural 
tissue, with signals such as Wnt imposing a posterior 
character. Indeed, when ectodermal cells are induced 
to become neural by application of BMP inhibitors, 
they differentiate into cells characteristic of anterior 
structures.
Signals From Organizing Centers Within the  
Neural Tube Pattern the Forebrain, Midbrain,  
and Hindbrain
The early influence of mesodermal and endoder-
mal tissues on rostrocaudal neural pattern is further 
refined by signals from specialized cell groups in the 
neural tube itself. One that has been studied in particu-
lar detail is called the isthmic organizer, which forms at 
the boundary of the hindbrain and midbrain (Figure 
45–5B). The isthmic organizer serves a key role in pat-
terning these two domains of the neural tube as well 
as in specifying the neuronal types within them. Dopa-
minergic neurons of the substantia nigra and ventral 
tegmental area are generated in the midbrain, just 
rostral to the isthmic organizer, whereas serotonergic 
neurons of the raphe nuclei are generated just caudal 
to the isthmic organizer, within the hindbrain. As an 
illustration of how these secondary neural signaling 


===== Page 7 =====
1114    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 45–5  (Left) Early anteroposterior patterning signals 
establish distinct transcription factor domains and define 
the position of the midbrain–hindbrain boundary region.
A. The anteroposterior pattern of the neural plate is established 
by exposure of neural cells to a gradient of Wnt signals. Ante-
rior (A) regions of the neural plate are exposed to Wnt inhibitors 
secreted from the endoderm and thus perceive only low levels 
of Wnt activity. Progressively more posterior (P) regions of the 
neural plate are exposed to high levels of Wnt signaling from 
the paraxial mesoderm and to lower levels of Wnt inhibitors.
B. In response to this Wnt signaling gradient and other signals, 
cells in anterior and posterior regions of the neural plate begin 
to express different transcription factors: Otx2 at anterior levels 
and Gbx2 at more posterior levels. The intersection of these 
two transcription factor domains marks the region of the  
midbrain–hindbrain boundary (MHB), where Engrailed transcrip-
tion factors are expressed. The neural tube then forms  
segments anterior and posterior to the MHB.
C. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signals from the isthmic 
organizer act in concert with sonic hedgehog (Shh) signals 
from the ventral midline to specify the identity and position of 
dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons. The distinct fates of 
these two classes of neurons result from the expression of 
Otx2 in the midbrain and Gbx2 in the hindbrain.
(Adapted, with permission, from Wurst and Bally-Cuif 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
centers impose neural pattern, we describe the origin 
and signaling activities of the isthmic organizer.
The rostrocaudal positional character of the neural 
plate stems from the expression of homeodomain tran-
scription factors, the homeodomain being a section of 
the protein that binds to a specific DNA sequence in 
regulatory regions of genes, leading to changes in the 
gene’s transcription. Cells in forebrain and midbrain 
domains of the neural plate express Otx2, whereas 
cells in the hindbrain domain express Gbx2, both of 
which are homeodomain transcription factors. The 
point of transition between Otx2 and Gbx2 expression 
A
Neural plate
Otx2
Gbx2
Wnt inhibtors
Wnt signals
P
Hindbrain
Engrailed
Midbrain
Forebrain
Hindbrain
Spinal cord
Midbrain
Forebrain
MHB
C
A
B
Notochord
Notochord
Prechordal plate
Serotonergic 
neurons
Dopaminergic  
neurons
Shh
FGF signals 
from isthmic 
organizer
Isthmic 
organizer
Otx2 
expressed
Gbx2 
expressed
is located at the midbrain–hindbrain boundary (Figure 
45–5B) and marks the position at which the isthmic 
organizer will emerge after neural tube closure. At this 
boundary, other transcription factors are expressed, 
notably En1 (an Engrailed class transcription factor).
These transcription factors in turn control the 
expression of two signaling factors, Wnt1 and FGF8, 
by cells of the isthmic organizer. Wnt1 is involved in 
the proliferation of cells in the midbrain–hindbrain 
domain and in the maintenance of FGF8 expression. 
The spread of FGF8 from the isthmic organizer into the 
midbrain domain marked by Otx2 expression induces 
differentiation of dopaminergic neurons, whereas its 
spread into the hindbrain domain marked by Gbx2 
expression triggers the differentiation of serotonergic 
neurons (Figure 45–5C).
The roles of FGF8 and Wnt1 in signaling from the 
isthmic organizer illustrate an important economy in 
early neural patterning. The early actions of inductive 
signals impose discrete domains of transcription fac-
tor expression, and these transcriptional domains then 
allow cells to interpret the actions of the same secreted 
factor in different ways, producing different neuronal 
subtypes. In this way, a relatively small number of 
secreted factors—FGFs, BMPs, hedgehog proteins, 
Wnt proteins, and retinoic acid—are used in differ-
ent regions and at different times to program the vast 
diversity of neuronal cell types generated within the 
central and peripheral nervous systems.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 45 / Patterning the Nervous System    1115
Figure 45–6  Local signaling centers in the devel-
oping neural tube. This side view of the neural tube 
at a later stage shows the positions of three key 
signaling centers that pattern the neural tube along 
the anterior-posterior axis: the anterior neural ridge, 
the zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) at the boundary 
between the rostral and caudal forebrain (diencepha-
lon), and the isthmic organizer, the boundary of the 
midbrain and hindbrain. The ZLI is a source of sonic 
hedgehog, and the isthmic organizer and anterior 
neural ridge are sources of fibroblast growth factor 
(see Figure 45–5).
Other cell groups serve similar roles in subdivid-
ing the neural tube into domains. For example, at the 
very rostral margin of the neural tube, a specialized 
group of cells, called the anterior neural ridge, secretes 
FGF that patterns the telencephalon (Figure 45–6). 
More caudally is a restricted region called the zona 
limitans intrathalamica, which appears as a pair of horn-
like spurs within the diencephalon. Zona limitans 
intrathalamica cells secrete the protein sonic hedgehog 
(Shh), which patterns nearby cells that give rise to the 
nuclei of the thalamus. FGFs and Shh are described in 
detail below in the context of their prominent role in 
patterning the cortex and spinal cord, respectively.
Repressive Interactions Divide the Hindbrain  
Into Segments
An important next step in patterning the neural tube 
along the rostrocaudal axis is the subdivision of the 
forebrain and hindbrain into segments, compartmen-
tal units that are arrayed along the rostrocaudal axis. 
These units are called prosomeres in the forebrain and 
rhombomeres in the hindbrain.
We use the formation of rhombomeres 3 and 4 (of 7 
total) to illustrate the mechanisms leading to segmen-
tation (Figure 45–7). An initial morphogen gradient 
leads to expression of two distinct transcription fac-
tors in this region—krox20 in what will become rhom-
bomere 3, endowing these cells with a rhombomere 3 
identity, and hoxb1 in what will become rhombomere 
4, endowing these cells with a rhombomere 4 identity. 
Cells near the border express both factors and there-
fore have an uncertain identity. However, these two 
factors inhibit each other’s expression, so eventually 
the identity of each cell is fixed.
Notochord
Isthmic 
organizer
ZLI
Anterior
neural ridge
Telencephalon
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Diencephalon
The problem is that some cells are trapped within 
the wrong rhombomere. This intermingling is recti-
fied in several ways, one of which is a second inhibi-
tory interaction, this one of a markedly different type. 
Krox20 and Hoxb1 induce the expression of cell sur-
face recognition and signaling molecules called EphA4 
and ephrinB3, respectively. These two proteins bind 
to each other, leading to transmission of a repulsive 
signal that separates the cells. We will see below that 
this repulsion is also key to later decisions that axons 
make as they grow to their targets. In the hindbrain, 
before neurons form, it sharpens the borders between 
rhombomeres. More broadly, rhombomere segregation 
provides another example of a general theme in neural 
development: that inductive or adhesive interactions 
combine with repressive or inhibitory ones to pattern 
the nervous system.
Dorsoventral Patterning of the Neural Tube 
Involves Similar Mechanisms at Different 
Rostrocaudal Levels
As the neural epithelium acquires its rostrocaudal 
character, cells located at different positions along its 
dorsoventral axis also begin to acquire distinct iden-
tities. Together, patterning along the rostrocaudal and 
dorsoventral axes divides the neural tube into a three-
dimensional grid of molecularly distinct cell types, 
leading eventually to generation of the various neu-
ronal and glial cell types that distinguish one part of 
the nervous system from another.
In contrast to the diversity of signals and organ-
izing centers responsible for rostrocaudal patterning of 
developing neurons, there is a striking consistency in 


===== Page 9 =====
1116    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A  Induction of segmental identity
B  Establishment of mutually exclusive expression
C  Cell segregation and border sharpening
D
Hoxb1
Krox20
Dual expressing cell;
intermediate identity
Ephrin
B3
Eph
A4
r4 identity
r3 identity
Retinoic
acid
Anterior
Posterior
Figure 45–7  (Left) Repressive interactions divide the hindbrain 
into rhombomeres.  The sharp border between hindbrain rhom-
bomeres 3 and 4 forms in several steps. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Addison and Wilkinson 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc.)
A. A gradient of retinoic acid upregulates expression of hoxb1 in 
anterior cells (blue) and krox20 in posterior cells (yellow), with 
some cells at the prospective border expressing both genes 
(green).
B. Hoxb1 expression and Krox20 expression become mutually exclu-
sive, thus endowing each cell with a unique molecular identity.
C. Cells trapped in the wrong domain migrate to sharpen the border.
D. Inhibitory interactions underlying border formation. Hoxb1 and 
Krox20 repress each other’s expression in individual cells, so a mod-
est imbalance in level leads to exclusive expression of one factor. 
Krox20 then upregulates EphA4 in r3 cells, whereas ephrinB3 is 
upregulated in r4 cells. EphA4 and ephrinB3 repel each other, driving 
migration of isolated cells and sharpening the segment border.
the strategies and principles that establish dorsoven-
tral pattern. We focus initially on the mechanisms of 
dorsoventral patterning at caudal levels of the neural 
tube that give rise to the spinal cord and then describe 
how similar strategies are used to pattern the forebrain.
Neurons in the spinal cord serve two major func-
tions. They relay cutaneous sensory input to higher 
centers in the brain, and they transform sensory input 
into motor output. The neuronal circuits that medi-
ate these functions are segregated anatomically. Cir-
cuits involved in the processing of cutaneous sensory 
information are located in the dorsal half of the spinal 
cord, whereas those involved in the control of motor 
output are mainly located in the ventral half of the spi-
nal cord.
The neurons that form these circuits are generated 
at different positions along the dorsoventral axis of the 
spinal cord in a patterning process that begins with the 
establishment of distinct progenitor cell types. Motor 
neurons are generated close to the ventral midline, and 
most of the interneuron classes that control motor out-
put are generated just dorsal to the position at which 
motor neurons appear (Figure 45–8). The dorsal half of 
the neural tube generates projection neurons and local 
circuit interneurons that process incoming sensory 
information.
How are the position and identity of spinal neu-
rons established? The dorsoventral patterning of the 
neural tube is initiated by signals from mesodermal 
and ectodermal cells that lie close to the ventral and 
dorsal poles of the neural tube and is perpetuated by 
signals from two midline neural organizing centers. 
Ventral patterning signals are initially provided by the 
notochord, a mesodermal cell group that lies immedi-
ately under the ventral neural tube (Figure 45–1). This 
signaling activity is transferred to the floor plate, a 
specialized glial cell group that sits at the ventral mid-
line of the neural tube itself. Similarly, dorsal signals 
are provided initially by cells of the epidermal ecto-
derm that span the dorsal midline of the neural tube, 
and subsequently by the roof plate, a glial cell group 
embedded at the dorsal midline of the neural tube 
(Figure 45–8).
Thus, neural patterning is initiated through a 
process of homogenetic induction, in which like begets 
like: Notochord signals induce the floor plate, which 


