===== Page 1 =====
796    Part V / Movement
Neuronal membrane properties make an important con-
tribution to the function of the central pattern genera-
tor (CPG). Neurons have a variety of K+, Na+, and Ca2+ 
channels that determine their activity and response to 
synaptic inputs. Studies of CPGs in diverse experimental 
models have shown that ion channels may be important 
for promoting rhythmicity, through bursting properties, 
or patterning, through ion channels that affect phase 
transitions or the rate of neuronal discharge.
Bursting and Plateau Properties Amplify 
Cellular Responses
Membrane properties that produce bursting allow cells 
to produce sustained oscillations in the absence of syn-
aptic inputs. These properties are either intrinsic, as in 
cells in the sinusoidal node in the heart, or conditional, 
dependent on the presence of certain neurotransmitters. 
In some small motor CPGs (such as the pyloric network 
in the stomatogastric ganglion, which controls rhythmic 
movements in the gut of crustaceans), intrinsic bursting 
properties are essential for generating the rhythm.
Conditional bursting triggered by glutaminergic 
activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors 
has been described in spinal cord interneurons and 
motor neurons in lamprey, rodents, and amphibians. 
In the lamprey, bursting due to NMDA receptor activa-
tion plays a role in generating swimming. In mammals, 
it is as yet uncertain whether NMDA receptor–induced 
bursting is essential for rhythm generation, although it 
may facilitate excitatory synaptic inputs in the circuit.
Plateau potential is another membrane property that 
may cause a neuron’s membrane potential to jump to a 
depolarized state that will support action potential firing 
without further increase in the excitatory drive. Plateau 
properties amplify and prolong the effect of synaptic 
excitatory inputs and may promote rhythm generation 
and motor output. Plateau properties are generated by 
activation of slowly inactivating L-type Ca2+ channels or 
slowly inactivating Na+ channels. These channels have 
been found in vertebrate interneurons and motor neu-
rons. The expression of plateau properties mediated by 
L-type Ca2+ channels in motor neurons is controlled by 
neuromodulatory neurotransmitters, such as serotonin 
and norepinephrine. The slowly inactivating Na+ chan-
nels are generally not regulated by neurotransmitters. 
Blockage of these channels decreases rhythm generation.
Phase Transitions May Be Regulated by  
Voltage-Gated Ion Channel Activation
Reciprocal inhibition between neurons is a common 
design in locomotor circuits; ion channels activated in 
the subthreshold spike range may enhance or delay 
phase transitions by such inhibition. Three types of 
voltage-gated channels are involved: a transient low 
threshold Ca2+ channel, cation-nonselective permeable 
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 
(HCN) channels, and transient K+ channels.
The transient low-threshold Ca2+ channels are inac-
tivated at membrane potentials around rest. Transient 
inhibitory synaptic inputs remove the inactivation. 
When released from synaptic inhibition, activation of 
low-threshold Ca2+ channels will cause a short-lasting 
rebound excitation before the channels inactivate again. 
In the lamprey, spinal cord activation of metabotropic 
GABAB receptors depresses low-threshold Ca2+ channels 
involved in producing the swimming motor pattern. 
The suppression leads to a longer hyperpolarized phase 
and therefore to a slower alternation between antago-
nistic muscles, a possible mechanism for the slowing of 
swimming seen following GABAB receptor activation.
HCN channels are found in many CPG neurons and 
motor neurons and may help neurons escape from inhi-
bition. They are activated by hyperpolarization, such 
as occurs during synaptic inhibition. Their activation 
depolarizes the cell, counteracting the hyperpolariza-
tion. Finally, the kinetics of their activation and deacti-
vation are slow, so they stay open for some time after 
the hyperpolarization is released. The channel kinet-
ics affect the integrative properties of the cell in two 
important ways. First, the depolarization caused by the 
channel opening limits the effect of sustained inhibitory 
inputs and helps the cell escape from inhibition. Second, 
the slow closing following synaptic inhibition leads to a 
rebound excitation promoting the next burst.
Voltage-gated A-type transient K+ channels are 
usually inactivated at resting membrane potential. 
Hyperpolarization removes the resting inactivation, and 
subsequent depolarization will cause a transient activa-
tion of the channel. Their activation will therefore delay 
the onset of the next burst.
Regulation of Spiking Controls How Much 
Cells Are Activated
A number of different ion channels play a role in regu-
lating the firing rate of a cell. Activation and inactivation 
kinetics of Na+ channels are factors. Other important 
channels are sodium- and calcium-activated K+ chan-
nels. The effect of activation of these K+ channels is 
often seen as a slow after-hyperpolarization following 
an action potential or a train of action potentials. Activa-
tion of these channels therefore causes spike train adap-
tation and postactivation inhibition, which contribute to 
burst termination.
Box 33–2  Neuronal Ion Channels Contribute to Central Pattern Generator Function


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    797
To unravel the functional organization of the large 
neuronal networks in the spinal cord, researchers have 
used molecular-genetic–driven network analysis to take 
advantage of a molecular code that determines the spa-
tial layout of the spinal locomotor networks.
It has been well documented that motor neurons 
develop and differentiate according to a genetic code 
expressed in the embryonic spinal cord (Chapter 45). 
This feature extends also to the development of spinal 
interneurons, which can be identified by different tran-
scription factors (Table 33–1). The cardinal classes of 
interneuronal types belong to dorsally located interneu-
rons (dI1–dI6) and ventrally located interneurons (V0–V3), 
with further subdivision within these categories (eg, V0D 
and V0V, V2a-Shox2Off, V2a-ShoxOn) where a combination 
of transcription factors defines these subtypes (Table 
33–1). Each group of interneurons has specific transmit-
ter content and characteristic axonal projection patterns.
The ability to manipulate these specific interneu-
ron types gives an unparalleled opportunity to exam-
ine the functional contribution of specific subsets of 
interneurons in the mouse or zebrafish that is not pos-
sible in species such as the cat. The molecular code of 
the spinal cord neurons is used to mark cells with a 
marker protein such as green fluorescent protein or for 
the expression of proteins that allow for cell type-specific 
ablation or activation/inactivation of cells types. Such 
studies have ascribed specific locomotor functions to 
the dI3, V0–V3, and Hb9 cells, all molecularly differen-
tiated classes of neurons (Table 33–1).
Box 33–3  Molecular-Genetics Combined With Anatomical, Electrophysiological, and Behavioral 
Analyses Are Used to Unravel the Locomotor Network Organization
Table 33–1  Developmental Molecular Codes Specify the Identity of Spinal Neurons in 
the Spinal Cord
Postmitotic transcription 
factors
Neuron type
Transmitters
Islt1/Tlx3
dI3
Glutamate
Pax2/7
V0D
GABA/glycine
Evx1
V0V
Glutamate
Evx1/Pitx2
V0C
Acetylcholine
Evx1/Pitx2
V0D
Glutamate
En1
V1
GABA/glycine
Chx10
V2a-Shox2Off
Glutamate
Chx10/Shox2
V2a-Shox2ON
Glutamate
GATA2/3
V2b
GABA/glycine
Sox1
V2c
GABA/glycine
Shox2
V2d
Glutamate
Hb9/Islt1-2
MN
Acetylcholine
Hb9
Hb9
Glutamate
Sim1
V3D
Glutamate
Sim1
V3V
Glutamate
Chx10, Ceh-10 homeodomain-containing homolog; Evx1, even skipped homeobox 1; En1, 
engrailed 1; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GATA2/3, gata protein; Hb9, homeobox 9; Islt1-2, ISL1-2 
transcription factor; Pax, paired box gene; Pitx2, paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 2; 
Sim1, single-minded homolog 1; MN, motor neuron; Shox2, Short stature homeobox 2; Sox1, SRY 
box-containing gene 1; Tlx1/3, T cell leukemia, homeobox 1/3.
Source: Adapted from Jessell 2000, Goulding 2009, Dougherty et al. 2013.


===== Page 3 =====
798    Part V / Movement
the swing phase until the stimulus has ended (Figure 
33–9A). Sensory fibers from both types of receptors are 
active during stance, with the intensity of the signal 
from the Golgi tendon organs being strongly related to 
the load carried by the leg. Golgi tendon organs have 
inhibitory actions on ankle extensor motor neurons 
when the body is at rest (Chapter 32) but an excitatory 
action during walking. This reversal of the sign of the 
reflex is caused by inhibition of inhibitory interneuron 
pathways together with a release of excitatory path-
ways during locomotion. The functional consequence 
of this reflex reversal during locomotion is that the 
swing phase is not initiated until the extensor muscles 
are unloaded and the forces exerted by these muscles 
are low, as signaled by a decrease in activity from the 
Golgi tendon organs near the end of stance.
In sum, proprioceptive signals from the ankle 
extensor muscles and hip flexor muscles work syner-
gistically to facilitate the stance-to-swing phase transi-
tion. In the late stance phase, when the limb is unloaded, 
as inhibitory signals from Golgi tendon organs wane, 
their effects on extensor rhythm generation declines, 
while at the same time the activity in muscle afferents 
around the hip joint is increased, facilitating activity in 
flexor rhythm generation.
At least three excitatory pathways transmit sensory 
information from extensor muscles to extensor motor 
neurons during walking: a monosynaptic pathway from 
primary muscle spindles (group Ia afferents), a disyn-
aptic pathway from primary muscle spindles and Golgi 
tendon organs (group Ia and Ib afferents), and a polysyn-
aptic pathway from primary muscle spindles and Golgi 
tendon organs that includes interneurons in the exten-
sor rhythm generator (Figure 33–9B). These pathways all 
contribute to phase transition from stance to swing when 
the ankle is unloaded and maintain extensors in stance 
phase when the ankle is loaded.
In addition to regulating the transition from stance 
to swing, proprioceptive information from muscle 
spindles and Golgi tendon organs contributes signifi-
cantly to the generation of burst activity in extensor 
motor neurons. Reducing this sensory input in cats 
diminishes the level of extensor activity by more than 
half; in humans, it has been estimated that up to 30% of 
the activity of ankle extensor motor neurons is caused 
by feedback from the extensor muscles.
Mechanoreceptors in the Skin Allow Stepping to 
Adjust to Unexpected Obstacles
Mechanoreceptors in the skin, including some noci-
ceptors, have a powerful influence on the CPG for 
Figure 33–8  Hip extension initiates the transition from 
stance to swing phase of walking.
A. In an immobilized decerebrate cat, passive oscillating move-
ment around the hip joint initiates and entrains the fictive loco-
motor pattern in knee extensor and flexor motor neurons. The 
flexor electromyogram (EMG) bursts correspond to the swing 
phase and are generated when the hip is extended. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Kriellaars et al. 1994.)
B. In a walking decerebrate cat, stretching of the hip flexor 
muscle (iliopsoas) inhibits knee extensor EMG activity, allow-
ing knee flexor activity to begin earlier. The arrow in the knee 
flexor record indicates when activity in the muscle would have 
begun had the hip flexor muscle not been stretched. Activation 
of sensory fibers from muscle spindles in the hip flexor muscle 
is responsible for this effect. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Hiebert et al. 1996.)
A  Oscillate hip
B  Stretch hip ﬂexor
Knee
ﬂexor
Hip
extension
Hip ﬂexion
Knee
extensor
1 s
500 ms
Oscillate
hip
Stretch
ﬂexor
Knee extensor
Knee ﬂexor
Stretch hip ﬂexor


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    799
Figure 33–9  The swing phase of walking is initiated by sen-
sory feedback from extensor muscles.
A. In a decerebrate cat, electrical stimulation of group I sensory 
fibers from ankle extensor muscles inhibits the electromyo-
gram burst in ipsilateral flexors and prolongs the burst in the 
ipsilateral extensors during walking. The timing of contralat-
eral flexor activity is not altered. Stimulating group I fibers 
from ankle extensors prevents initiation of the swing phase, 
as can be seen in the position of the leg during the time the 
fibers were stimulated. The arrow shows the point at which 
the swing phase would normally have occurred had the ankle 
extensor afferents not been stimulated. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Whelan, Hiebert, and Pearson 1995. Copyright © 
Springer-Verlag 1995.)
B. Mutually inhibiting groups of extensor (Ext) and flexor 
(Flex) interneurons (Int) constitute a rhythm generator in the 
afferent pathway regulating the stance phase. Feedback  
from extensor muscles increases the level of activity in  
extensor motor neurons (MN) during the stance phase and 
maintains extensor activity when the extensor muscles are 
loaded. The feedback is relayed through three excitatory (+) 
pathways: (1) monosynaptic connections from Ia fibers to 
extensor motor neurons; (2) disynaptic connections from Ia 
and Ib fibers to extensor motor neurons; and (3) polysynaptic 
excitatory pathways that act through the extensor rhythm 
generator to maintain the extensor motor neurons active in 
stance phase.
walking. One important function of these receptors is 
to detect obstacles and adjust stepping movements to 
avoid them. A well-studied example is the corrective 
reaction to stumbling in cats.
A mild mechanical stimulus applied to the dor-
sal part of the paw during the swing phase produces 
excitation of flexor motor neurons and inhibition of 
extensor motor neurons, leading to rapid flexion of the 
paw away from the stimulus and elevation of the leg 
in an attempt to step over the object. Because this cor-
rective response is readily observed in spinal cats, it 
must be produced to a large extent by circuits entirely 
contained within the spinal cord.
One of the interesting features of the corrective reac-
tion is that corrective flexion movements are produced 
only if the paw is stimulated during the swing phase. 
An identical stimulus applied during the stance phase 
1500 ms
Stance
Extensors
Ib ﬁbers
Ia ﬁbers
Swing
Stimulus
Stimulate extensor
Ib afferents
Contralateral
ﬂexor
A
B
Ipsilateral
extensor
Ipsilateral
ﬂexor
Leg
position
Flex
Int
Ext
Int
Ext
MN
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
+
3
2
1
Flex
MN
produces the opposite response—excitation of extensor 
muscles that reinforces the ongoing extensor activity. 
This extensor action is appropriate; if a flexion reflex 
were produced during the stance phase, the animal 
might collapse because it is being supported by the limb. 
This is an example of a phase-dependent reflex reversal. 
The same stimulus can excite one group of motor neu-
rons during one phase of locomotion while activating 
the antagonist motor neurons during another phase.
Supraspinal Structures Are Responsible for 
Initiation and Adaptive Control of Stepping
Although the basic motor patterns for locomotion 
are generated in the spinal cord, the initiation, selec-
tion, and planning of locomotion require activation 


===== Page 5 =====
800    Part V / Movement
of supraspinal structures, including the brain stem, 
the basal ganglia, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex. 
Supraspinal regulation of stepping provides a number 
of behavioral modifications that cannot be mediated 
by spinal circuits alone. These include the voluntary 
initiation of locomotion and the regulation of speed; 
postural regulation, including weight support, bal-
ance, and interlimb coordination; and the planning 
and execution of anticipatory modifications of gait, 
particularly visually guided modifications.
Midbrain Nuclei Initiate and Maintain Locomotion 
and Control Speed
The locomotor networks in the spinal cord require a 
command or start signal from supraspinal regions to 
initiate and maintain their activity. The major neu-
ronal structure involved in the initiation in vertebrates 
is a region in the midbrain called the mesencephalic 
locomotor region (MLR). The MLR was first identified 
in cats as a unitary region localized in or around the 
cuneiform nucleus, just below the inferior colliculus. 
Tonic electrical stimulation in this area in the resting 
animal increased postural tonus so that the animal 
stood up and then started to walk. As the intensity of 
stimulation rose, the speed of locomotion increased 
and alternating gaits switched to synchronous gaits 
such as gallop or bound (Figure 33–10).
Later studies with electrical stimulation confirmed 
the presence of the MLR in all vertebrates, suggesting 
that the MLR is evolutionarily conserved from the old-
est vertebrates to humans. These studies have pointed 
to two midbrain structures as part of the MLR (Figure 
33–11A): the cuneiform nucleus (CNF) and the more 
ventrally located pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) 
(Figure 33–11A). These two nuclei differ in the types of 
neurons they contain.
Long-range projection neurons in the CNF are 
excitatory and use glutamate as their neurotransmit-
ter, whereas those in the PPN are both glutamatergic 
and cholinergic. In both nuclei, the excitatory neurons 
are intermingled with local GABAergic interneurons. 
Electrical stimulation has, however, been unable to 
determine which nucleus or which types of neurons 
are involved in the initiation of locomotion and speed 
control. However, the use of selective activation and 
inactivation of neurotransmitter-specific CNF and 
PPN neurons suggests that the two nuclei play specific 
roles in speed control and gait selection of locomotion 
(Figure 33–11B). Glutamatergic neurons in both PPN 
and CNF are sufficient for supporting alternating loco-
motion at slower speeds, such as walking and trot, 
while glutamatergic neurons in the CNF are necessary 
for high-speed locomotion, such as gallop and bound, 
characteristic of escape locomotion. Expression of 
these gaits is dependent on the stimulation frequency, 
possibly reflecting the effect of firing frequency in the 
intact animal.
The role of cholinergic PPN neurons for locomo-
tion is less well understood. In mammals, they do not 
seem to have a strong role in maintaining locomotion.
These roles of glutamatergic CNF and PPN neu-
rons in locomotor control may also be reflected in the 
different inputs. PPN neurons receive strong input 
from the basal ganglia, specifically the substantia nigra 
pars reticulata, globus pallidus pars interna, and sub-
thalamic nucleus, as well as from sensorimotor and 
frontal cortex. Additionally, the PPN receives sensori-
motor information from many nuclei in the midbrain 
and brain stem. The nucleus may therefore serve as 
a hub for integrating information from many brain 
structures, possibly leading to the release of slower 
exploratory locomotion. In contrast, the input to neu-
rons in CNF is much more restricted and arises princi-
pally from structures that may be involved in escape 
responses. The MLR is therefore composed of two 
regions that act together to select context-dependent 
locomotor behavior.
Another brain area that evokes locomotion when 
stimulated is the subthalamic (or diencephalic) loco-
motor region (to be distinguished from the subthalamic 
nucleus). This region includes nuclei in the dorsal and 
lateral hypothalamus involved in various homeostatic 
features such as regulating feeding. Neurons in these 
areas project to neurons in the reticular formation and 
bypass the PPN and CNF, suggesting a parallel path-
way for initiating locomotion, possibly driven by the 
need to find food.
Midbrain Nuclei That Initiate Locomotion  
Project to Brain Stem Neurons
The excitatory signals from CNF and PPN are relayed 
indirectly to the spinal cord by way of neurons in the 
brain stem reticular formation, which provide the final 
command signal to the locomotor networks in the spi-
nal cord. The identity of these neurons is only partly 
known. In general terms, two transmitter-defined path-
ways are involved: glutamatergic and serotonergic.
The glutamatergic locomotor pathways probably 
have multiple origins in the brain stem reticular for-
mation, forming parallel descending pathways. They 
project directly or indirectly via a chain of interseg-
mental (propriospinal) glutamatergic interneurons to 
locomotor neurons in the spinal cord (Figure 33–10A). 
Reticulospinal neurons also participate in regulating 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    801
Mesencephalic
locomotor region
Slow walk
Extension
Flexion
Left
hind limb
Right
hind limb
Stimulation
intensity
Fast walk
Trot
Gallop
0.5 s
MLR
Medial
reticular
formation
Rostral
pons
B
A
Caudal
pons
Medulla
Spinal
cord
Thoracic
Lumbar
VLF
Spinal
locomotor
system
Ventrolateral
funiculus
Stimulate
MLR
Figure 33–10  The mesencephalic locomotor region initiates 
locomotion.
A. Electrical stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region 
(MLR) in the cat initiates locomotion by activating neurons in 
the medial reticular formation whose axons descend in the ven-
trolateral funiculus (VLF) to the spinal locomotor system.
B.  When the strength of electrical stimulation of the MLR in a 
decerebrate cat walking on a treadmill is gradually increased, 
the gait and rate of stepping change from slow walking to trot-
ting and finally to galloping. As the cat progresses from trotting 
to galloping, the hind limbs shift from alternating to in-phase 
activity. (Adapted from Shik et al. 1966.)
the postural activity that is needed for the animal to 
locomote (see later discussion).
Evidence for the existence of a serotonergic loco-
motor pathway in mammals is restricted to experi-
ments in rats that have shown the involvement of 
serotonergic neurons in the caudal brain stem. The 
mechanisms by which the final command signals from 
the brain stem to the spinal cord activate the spinal 
locomotor networks, maintain their activity, and allow 
the expression of different gaits are unknown.
The episodic nature of locomotion indicates that 
the initiating signals may be complemented by stop 
commands to allow for sudden locomotor arrest. 
Such signals have been found in Xenopus tadpole, in 
which head contact with obstacles activates GABAer-
gic descending pathways that immediately terminate 
swimming. Likewise, in decerebrate cats, tonic electri-
cal stimulation of the medullary and caudal pontine 
reticular formation leads to a general motor inhibition. 
Studies in mice have identified a restricted contingent 
of V2a neurons in the reticular formation that medi-
ate an immediate arrest of ongoing locomotor activity. 
Such “V2a stop neurons” send a behaviorally relevant 
stop signal via descending projections to inhibitory 


===== Page 7 =====
802    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–11  The mesencephalic locomotor region is com-
posed of dual midbrain glutamatergic nuclei that control 
initiation of locomotion, speed and gait regulation, and 
context-dependent selection of locomotion.
A. Left: The site of the localization of mesencephalic locomotor 
region (MLR) in the midbrain of the mouse. Right: Transverse 
section shows that the MLR is composed of the cuneiform 
nucleus (CNF) and the pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN) in the 
midbrain, lateral to the cerebral aqueduct, and dorsal to the 
nucleus reticularis pontis oralis (NRPo). Glutamatergic, GABAe-
rgic, and cholinergic neurons are intermingled in the CNF and 
PPN. (Abbreviation: IC, inferior colliculus).
B. Effect in mice of optical stimulation of glutamatergic cells 
in the CNF or PPN that have been transfected with the 
light-sensitive channel, channelrhodopsin 2. Stimulation at 
low and high frequencies in the PPN leads only to alternating 
gaits—walking and trotting. Low-frequency simulation in the 
CNF likewise results only in slow, exploratory locomotion, while 
high-frequency stimulation evokes the synchronous gaits gallop 
and bound corresponding to escape locomotion.
   The different types of gaits are shown as idealized diagrams 
from low to high speeds of locomotion. Filled boxes repre-
sent the stance phase; open spaces the swing phase. Walk is 
characterized by periods of support by three or four feet simul-
taneously. Trot is characterized by simultaneous activity in the 
diagonal fore and hindlimbs. Gallop is characterized by the fore-
limbs moving slightly out of phase and hind limbs being almost 
in phase. Bound is characterized by hind limbs and forelimbs 
moving simultaneously and forelimb and hindlimb out of phase. 
(Abbreviations: LFL, left forelimb; LHL, left hindlimb; RFL, right 
forelimb; RHL, right hindlimb.) (Adapted from data in  
Caggiano et al. 2018.)
Low-frequency stimulation
IC
CNF
PPN
NRPo
High-frequency stimulation
LHL
LFL
RHL
RFL
LHL
LFL
RHL
RFL
LHL
LFL
RHL
RFL
LHL
LFL
RHL
RFL
MLR
CNF
PPN
CNF
PPN
Bound
Gallop
Trot
Walk
High
Low
Speed
A
B
interneurons in the ventral lumbar spinal cord that 
inhibits rhythm generation. A similar stop signal arrests 
swimming in the lamprey.
The Brain Stem Nuclei Regulate Posture  
During Locomotion
An important aspect of locomotor control is the regula-
tion of posture. This general term encompasses several 
types of behavior, including the production of the 
postural support on which locomotion is superimposed, 
the control of balance, the regulation of interlimb coor-
dination in quadrupeds, and the modification of muscle 
tonus required to adapt to locomotion on slopes or dur-
ing turning. In addition, anticipatory changes in posture 
precede changes in voluntary gait modifications, and 
compensatory changes in posture follow unexpected 
perturbations. These functions are largely subserved 
by two descending systems originating from the brain 
stem: the vestibulospinal tract (VST), originating in the 
lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN), and the reticulospinal 
tract (RST), originating in the pontomedullary reticular 
formation (PMRF). Both pathways are phylogenetically 
old and found in all vertebrates.
Lesions of the LVN, the PMRF, or their descend-
ing axons in the spinal cord lead to a loss of weight 
support and the control of equilibrium, expressed as 
a crouched gait and swaying of the hindquarters to 
one side or the other. Lesions of these nuclei are also 
followed by large changes in the interlimb coordina-
tion between the fore- and hindlimbs. Likewise, tonic 
electrical or chemical stimulation of the pons and the 
medulla modulates the level of muscle tonus in the 
limbs and can either facilitate or suppress locomotion 
depending on the exact site stimulated (Figure 33–12).
Activity in the VST and RST, together with activity 
in the rubrospinal tract, which originates from the red 
nucleus, also phasically modifies the level of muscle 
tonus during each step. Weak electrical stimulation of 
any of these three structures produces phase-dependent 
modulation of locomotor activity. Brief activation of 
these pathways with short trains of stimuli produces 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    803
transient changes in the amplitude of the muscle bursts 
but rarely produces any changes in the timing of the 
step cycle. Activation of the LVN primarily enhances 
responses in ipsilateral extensor muscles during their 
natural period of activity in the stance phase. In con-
trast, stimulation of the red nucleus generally pro-
duces transient increases in activity in contralateral 
flexor muscles, again during their natural period of 
activity in the swing phase.
Stimulation of the PMRF produces more complex 
and widespread responses that may modify activity in 
flexor muscles during the swing phase and in extensor 
muscles during the stance phase across all four limbs in 
a coordinated pattern (Figure 33–13). In flexor muscles, 
activity is generally facilitated by PMRF stimulation, 
but in extensor muscles, it may be facilitated or sup-
pressed depending on the exact site stimulated. This 
phase-dependent nature of the responses is thought to 
be mediated by activation of interneurons in the spinal 
CPG. Stimulation of these three structures at higher 
strengths, or with longer trains, may produce changes 
in the timing of the step cycle as well as in the magni-
tude of EMG activity.
During locomotion, neurons within the LVN, 
PMRF, and red nucleus are phasically modulated at 
the frequency of the step cycle. Neurons in the LVN 
are generally activated in phase with ipsilateral exten-
sor muscles, whereas neurons in the red nucleus are 
generally active during the contralateral swing phase. 
Neurons in the PMRF have more complicated periods 
of activity and may discharge in relation to ipsilateral 
or contralateral flexor or extensor muscles.
Brain stem structures also contribute to more com-
plex activities during locomotion. For example, the red 
nucleus contributes to the complex modifications in 
muscle activity required for precise modifications of 
5 s
5 s
A  Stimulation sites
B  Muscle activation
MLR
NRGc
NRPo
IC
CNF
PPN
NRMc
1 Stim MLR
5 Stim MLR+NRMc
2 Stim NRGc
4 Stim NRMc
lSol
rSol
lSol
rSol
lSol
rSol
3 Stim MLR +NRGc
Figure 33–12  Locomotor activity is modified by the level of 
postural tone. (Adapted, with permission, from Takakusaki  
et al. 2016.)
A. Transverse sections of the brain stem of the cat at three 
different rostrocaudal levels. Colored areas indicate the 
regions stimulated during the trials shown in part B.  
(Abbreviations: CNF, cuneiform nucleus; IC, inferior colliculus; 
MLR, mesencephalic locomotor region; NRPo, nucleus reticu-
laris pontis oralis; NRGc, nucleus reticularis gigantocellularis; 
NRMc, nucleus reticularis magnocellularis; PPN, pedunculo-
pontine nucleus.)
B. Effects of stimulating the different regions of the brain stem 
indicated in part A in the decerebrate cat.
1. Stimulation of the MLR (CNF/PPN) (green bar) produces 
rhythmic activation in the left and right hindlimb extensor soleus 
muscles (Sol).
2.  Tonic stimulation of the NRGc (red bar) in the medulla 
results in a loss of muscle tone in the extensor muscles.
3. Stimulation of the NRGc during CNF-induced  
locomotion reduces muscle tone and thereby inhibits 
locomotion.
4.  Tonic stimulation of the NRMc (blue bar) in the ventral 
medulla produces an increase in muscle tone.
5. Stimulation of the NRMc during MLR stimulation results in 
increased vigor of locomotion.


===== Page 9 =====
804    Part V / Movement
A  Left ﬂexion and right extension
C
B  Right ﬂexion and left extension
IF
Stim
Stim
lFmn
CPG
(IF)
Stim
rFmn
CPG
(rF)
PMRF
Left
Right
IE
rF
rE
rF
lE
lF
rE
F
E
F
E
Figure 33–13  Microstimulation 
of the pontomedullary reticular 
formation (PMRF) produces phase-
dependent responses in flexor and 
extensor muscles. (Data from  
T. Drew.)
A. Stimulation of the left PMRF dur-
ing the swing phase of the left limb 
produces a transient increase in the 
electromyogram activity of the left 
flexor muscles (lF) and a simultane-
ous decrease in activity in the right 
extensor muscles (rE) (red arrows). 
There is little stimulus-evoked activity 
in the left extensor (lE) or right flexor 
(rF) muscles, which are inactive at 
this phase of the step cycle.
B. Stimulation at the same location 
in the PMRF during the swing phase 
of the right limb produces the inverse 
responses.
C.  The phase-dependent nature of 
the responses is likely determined by 
the cyclical nature of the level of excit-
ability in interneurons that are part of 
the locomotor central pattern genera-
tor (CPG). Responses are gated by 
activity in the flexor (F) and extensor 
(E) parts of the locomotor CPG. When 
the first stimulation arrives, flexor 
interneurons in the left CPG (lF) are 
active, whereas those in the right 
CPG (rF) are inactive. The stimulation 
therefore produces a response only in 
the left flexor motor neurons (lFmn). 
When the second stimulation arrives, 
flexor interneurons in the right CPG 
(rF) are active, whereas those on the 
left side are inactive, and therefore, 
the stimulation elicits a response only 
in the flexor motor neurons on the 
right (rFmn).
gait (see below). In a complementary manner, the wide-
spread effects of the PMRF on multiple limbs allow it 
to produce the coordinated changes in postural activ-
ity that accompany gait modifications. The coordina-
tion between gait modifications and postural activity 
is assured by the strong connections from the motor 
cortex to the PMRF in the same manner as for discrete 
voluntary movements (Chapter 34). The PMRF also 
contributes to the compensatory changes in posture 
that occur as a consequence of perturbations. In this 
situation, it forms part of a spino-bulbo-spinal reflex 
that contributes to the widespread postural responses 
that follow the immediate spinal reflexes activated by 
a sudden perturbation.
Visually Guided Locomotion Involves the 
Motor Cortex
Walking is most often guided by vision, and the motor 
cortex is largely essential for visually guided move-
ment, especially when gait must be modified to ensure 
precise control over limb trajectory and foot place-
ment. In mammals, lesions of the motor cortex do not 


