===== Page 1 =====
596    Part IV / Perception
example, humans have great difficulty noticing a 
change in the visual world unless their attention 
is drawn to the spatial location of a change.
  7.  The activity of neurons in the parietal cortex 
predicts a monkey’s locus of spatial attention as 
measured by their perceptual thresholds. The 
parietal cortex sums a number of different signals—
motor, visual, cognitive—to create a priority map 
of the visual field. The motor system uses this 
map to choose targets for movement. The visual 
system uses the same map to find the locus of 
visual attention.
  8.  Lesions in the parietal cortex cause a neglect of 
the contralateral visual world.
  9.  Visual information provided by the parietal cor-
tex enables the motor system to adjust hand grip 
to match the size of the object to which it reaches 
before the hand actually lands on the target. By 
contrast, patients with perceptual deficits caused 
by lesions in inferior temporal cortex adjust their 
grip perfectly well even though they cannot 
describe the nature or size of the object to which 
they reach perfectly.
10.  There are at least four different visual maps in the 
intraparietal sulcus, each of which corresponds 
to a particular motor workspace.
11.  Neurons in the anterior intraparietal area respond 
to targets for grasping, respond even when mon-
keys make grasping movements in total darkness, 
and project to the grasp region of premotor cortex.
12.  Neurons in the ventral intraparietal area respond 
to objects coming toward the mouth, have tactile 
receptive fields on the face, and project to the 
mouth area of premotor cortex.
13.  Neurons in the medial intraparietal area have a 
representation of arm position and respond to 
targets for reaching.
14.  Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area respond 
to targets for eye movements and objects of vis-
ual attention, discharge before eye movements, 
and have a representation of eye position. Activ-
ity of these neurons is modulated by the position 
of the eyes in the orbit.
15.  Neurons in the face region of area 3a in the soma-
tosensory cortex have a representation of the 
position of the eye in the orbit that arises from 
the contralateral eye.
 Michael E. Goldberg 
  Robert H. Wurtz 
Selected Reading
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, intention, and pri-
ority in the parietal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:1–21.
Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame 
for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1999. Space and attention in pari-
etal cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:319–349.
Henderson JM, Hollingworth A. 1999. High-level scene per-
ception. Annu Rev Psychol 50:243–271.
Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1996. The Visual Brain in Action. 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Rensink RA. 2002. Change detection. Annu Rev Psychol 
53:245–277.
Ross J, Ma-Wyatt A. 2004. Saccades actively maintain percep-
tual continuity. Nat Neurosci 7:65–69.
Sommer MA, Wurtz RH. 2008. Brain circuits for the inter-
nal monitoring of movements. Annu Rev Neurosci 
31:317–338.
Sun LD, Goldberg ME. 2016. Corollary discharge and oculo-
motor proprioception: cortical mechanisms for spatially 
accurate vision. Annu Rev Vis Sci 2:61–84.
Wurtz RH. 2008. Neuronal mechanisms of visual stability. 
Vision Res 48:2070–2089.
Yarbus AL. 1967. Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum.
References
Andersen RA, Essick GK, Siegel RM. 1985. Encoding of 
spatial location by posterior parietal neurons. Science 
230:456–458.
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2003. Neuronal activity in the lateral 
intraparietal area and spatial attention. Science 299:81–86.
Cavanaugh J, Berman RA, Joiner WM, Wurtz RH. 2016. 
Saccadic corollary discharge underlies stable visual 
perception. J Neurosci 36:31–42.
Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame 
for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
Deubel H, Schneider WX, Bridgeman B. 1996. Postsaccadic 
target blanking prevents saccadic suppression of image 
displacement. Vision Res 36:985–996.
Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1992. The updating 
of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by 
intended eye movements. Science 255:90–92.
Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1998. Ventral intra-
parietal area of the macaque: congruent visual and 
somatic response properties. J Neurophysiol 79:126–136.
Duhamel J-R, Goldberg ME, FitzGibbon EJ, Sirigu A, 
Grafman J. 1992. Saccadic dysmetria in a patient with a 
right frontoparietal lesion: the importance of corollary dis-
charge for accurate spatial behavior. Brain 115:1387–1402.
Goodale MA, Meenan JP, Bulthoff HH, Nicolle DA, Murphy 
KJ, Racicot CI. 1994. Separate neural pathways for the 
visual analysis of object shape in perception and prehen-
sion. Curr Biol 4:604–610.
Hallett PE, Lightstone AD. 1976. Saccadic eye movements to 
flashed targets. Vision Res 16:107–114.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    597
Halligan PW, Marshall JC. 2001. Graphic neglect—more than 
the sum of the parts. Neuro Image 14:S91–S97.
Henderson JM, Hollingworth A. 2003. Global transsaccadic 
change blindness during scene perception. Psychol Sci 
14:493–497.
Kusunoki M, Gottlieb J, Goldberg ME. 2000. The lateral intrapa-
rietal motion, and task relevance. Vision Res 40:1459–1468.
Morrone MC, Ross J, Burr DC. 1997. Apparent position of 
visual targets during real and simulated saccadic eye 
movements. J Neurosci 17:7941–7953.
Murata A, Gallese V, Luppino G, Kaseda M, Sakata H. 2000. 
Selectivity for the shape, size, and orientation of objects 
for grasping in neurons of monkey parietal area AIP.  
J Neurophysiol 83:2580–2601.
Nakamura K, Colby CL. 2002. Updating of the visual repre-
sentation in monkey striate and extrastriate cortex during 
saccades. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:4026–4031.
Perenin MT, Vighetto A. 1988. Optic ataxia: a specific disrup-
tion in visuomotor mechanisms. I. Different aspects of the 
deficit in reaching for objects. Brain 111:643–674.
Rensink RA. 2002. Change detection. Annu Rev Psychol 
53:245–277.
Rizzolatti G, Luppino G, Matelli M. 1998. The organization of 
the cortical motor system: new concepts. Electroencepha-
logr Clin Neurophysiol 106:283–296.
Snyder LH, Batista AP, Andersen RA. 1997. Coding of inten-
tion in the posterior parietal cortex. Nature 386:167–170.
Thiele A, Henning P, Kubischik M, Hoffmann KP. 2002. 
Neural mechanisms of saccadic suppression. Science 
295:2460–2462.
Umeno MM, Goldberg ME. 1997. Spatial processing in the 
monkey frontal eye field. I. Predictive visual responses.  
J Neurophysiol 78:1373–1383.
Walker MF, Fitzgibbon EJ, Goldberg ME. 1995. Neurons in 
the monkey superior colliculus predict the visual result 
of impending saccadic eye movements. J Neurophysiol 
73:1988–2003.
Wang X, Zhang M, Cohen IS, Goldberg ME. 2007. The pro-
prioceptive representation of eye position in monkey pri-
mary somatosensory cortex. Nat Neurosci 10:640–646.
Xu B, Karachi C, Goldberg M. 2012. The postsaccadic unre-
liability of gain fields renders it unlikely that the motor 
system can use them to calculate target position in space. 
Neuron 76:1201–1209.


===== Page 3 =====
26
Auditory Processing by the Cochlea
Cochlear Nerve Fibers Encode Stimulus Frequency  
and Level
Sensorineural Hearing Loss Is Common but Is  
Amenable to Treatment
Highlights
H
uman experience is enriched by the ability 
to distinguish a remarkable range of sounds—
from the intimacy of a whisper to the warmth 
of a conversation, from the complexity of a symphony 
to the roar of a stadium. Hearing begins when the sen-
sory cells of the cochlea, the receptor organ of the inner 
ear, transduce sound energy into electrical signals and 
forward them to the brain. Our ability to recognize 
small differences in sounds stems from the cochlea’s 
capacity to distinguish among frequency components, 
their amplitudes, and their relative timing.
Hearing depends on the remarkable properties of 
hair cells, the cellular microphones of the inner ear. 
Hair cells transduce mechanical vibrations elicited by 
sounds into electrical signals, which are then relayed 
to the brain for interpretation. The hair cells can meas-
ure motions of atomic dimensions and transduce stim-
uli ranging from static inputs to those at frequencies of 
tens of kilohertz. Remarkably, hair cells can also serve 
as mechanical amplifiers that augment auditory sen-
sitivity. Each of the paired cochleae contains approxi-
mately 16,000 of these cells. Deterioration of hair cells 
and their innervation accounts for most of the hearing 
loss that afflicts about 10% of the population in indus-
trialized countries.
The Ear Has Three Functional Parts
Hearing Commences With the Capture of Sound Energy  
by the Ear
The Hydrodynamic and Mechanical Apparatus of the Cochlea 
Delivers Mechanical Stimuli to the Receptor Cells
The Basilar Membrane Is a Mechanical Analyzer of 
Sound Frequency
The Organ of Corti Is the Site of Mechanoelectrical 
Transduction in the Cochlea
Hair Cells Transform Mechanical Energy Into  
Neural Signals
Deflection of the Hair Bundle Initiates  
Mechanoelectrical Transduction
Mechanical Force Directly Opens Transduction Channels
Direct Mechanoelectrical Transduction Is Rapid
Deafness Genes Provide Components of the 
Mechanotransduction Machinery
Dynamic Feedback Mechanisms Determine the Sensitivity of 
the Hair Cells
Hair Cells Are Tuned to Specific Stimulus Frequencies
Hair Cells Adapt to Sustained Stimulation
Sound Energy Is Mechanically Amplified in  
the Cochlea
Cochlear Amplification Distorts Acoustic Inputs
The Hopf Bifurcation Provides a General Principle for 
Sound Detection
Hair Cells Use Specialized Ribbon Synapses
Auditory Information Flows Initially Through the  
Cochlear Nerve
Bipolar Neurons in the Spiral Ganglion Innervate 
Cochlear Hair Cells


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    599
Figure 26–1  The structure of the human ear.  The exter-
nal ear, especially the prominent auricle, focuses sound 
into the external auditory meatus. Alternating increases 
and decreases in air pressure vibrate the tympanum. These 
vibrations are conveyed across the air-filled middle ear by 
three tiny, linked bones: the malleus, the incus, and the 
stapes. Vibration of the stapes stimulates the cochlea, the 
hearing organ of the inner ear.
The Ear Has Three Functional Parts
Sound consists of alternating compressions and rarefac-
tions propagated by an elastic medium, the air, at a 
speed of approximately 340 m/s. This wave of pressure 
changes carries mechanical energy that stems from the 
work produced on air by our vocal apparatus or some 
other sound source. The mechanical energy is captured 
and transmitted to the receptor organ, where it is trans-
duced into electrical signals suitable for neural analy-
sis. These three tasks are associated with the external 
ear, the middle ear, and the cochlea of the inner ear, 
respectively (Figure 26–1).
The most obvious component of the human exter-
nal ear is the auricle, a prominent fold of cartilage-
supported skin. The auricle acts as a reflector to capture 
sound efficiently and focus it into the external auditory 
meatus, or ear canal. The ear canal ends at the tympa-
num, or eardrum, a diaphragm approximately 9 mm in 
diameter and 50 μm in thickness.
The external ear is not uniformly effective at cap-
turing sound from all directions; the auricle’s corrugated 
surface collects sounds best when they originate at dif-
ferent, but specific, positions with respect to the head. 
Our capacity to localize sounds in space, especially 
along the vertical axis, depends critically on these 
sound-gathering properties. Each auricle has a unique 
topography; its effect on sound reflections at different 
frequencies is learned by the brain early in life.
Stapes
Incus
Malleus
Auricle
Vestibular 
nerve
Cochlear 
nerve
Cochlea
Round 
window
Eustachian 
tube
Middle
ear
cavity
Tympanum
External
auditory
meatus
The middle ear is an air-filled pouch connected to 
the pharynx by the Eustachian tube. Airborne sound 
traverses the middle ear as vibrations of the auditory 
ossicles, three tiny bones that are linked together: the 
malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes (stirrup;  
Figure 26–1). A long extension of the malleus is 
attached to the tympanic membrane; its other extreme 
makes a ligamentous connection to the incus, which is 
similarly connected to the stapes. The flattened base 
of the stapes, the footplate, is seated in an opening—
the oval window—in the bony covering of the cochlea. 
The auditory ossicles are relics of evolution. The sta-
pes was originally a component of the gill support of 
ancient fish; the malleus and incus were components 
of the primary jaw joint in reptilian ancestors.
The inner ear includes the auditory sensory organ, 
the cochlea (Greek cochlos, snail), a coiled structure of 
progressively diminishing diameter wound around a 
conical bony core (Figure 26–1). In humans, the cochlea 
is approximately 9 mm across, the size of a chickpea, 
and is embedded within the temporal bone. The inte-
rior of the cochlea consists of three parallel liquid-filled 
compartments termed scalae. In a cross section of the 
cochlea at any position along its spiral course, the top 
compartment is the scala vestibuli (Figure 26–2). At the 
broad, basal end of this chamber is the oval window, 
the opening that is sealed by the footplate of the stapes. 
The bottom compartment is the scala tympani; it too has 
a basal aperture, the round window, which is closed by 


===== Page 5 =====
600    Part IV / Perception
Figure 26–2  The structure of the cochlea. A cross sec-
tion of the cochlea shows the arrangement of the three 
liquid-filled ducts or scalae, each of which is approximately 
33 mm long. The scala vestibuli and scala tympani commu-
nicate through the helicotrema at the apex of the cochlea. 
At the base, each duct is closed by a sealed aperture. The 
scala vestibuli is closed by the oval window, against which 
the stapes pushes in response to sound; the scala tympani 
is closed by the round window, a thin, flexible membrane. 
Between these two compartments lies the scala media, 
an endolymph-filled tube whose epithelial lining includes 
the 16,000 hair cells in the organ of Corti surmounting the 
basilar membrane (blue). The hair cells are covered by the 
tectorial membrane (green). The cross section in the lower 
diagram has been rotated so that the cochlear apex is ori-
ented toward the top.
Vestibular nerve
Cochlear nerve
Scala media
Organ of Corti
Basilar
membrane
Spiral
ganglion
Reissner’s
membrane
Scala vestibuli
Spiral ganglion
Helicotrema
Round window
Oval window
Anterior
vertical
Utricle
Saccule
Posterior
vertical
Semicircular
canals
Horizontal
Ampulla
Scala tympani
a thin, elastic diaphragm beyond which lies the air of 
the middle-ear cavity. The two chambers are separated 
along most of their length by the cochlear partition but 
communicate with one another at the very tip of the 
cochlea, through the helicotrema.
The cochlear partition contains the third liquid-
filled cavity, the scala media, and is delimited by two 
membranes. The thin Reissner’s, or vestibular, mem-
brane divides the scala media from the scala vestibuli. 
The basilar membrane separates the cochlear parti-
tion from the scala tympani and supports the complex 
sensory structure involved in auditory transduction, 
the organ of Corti (Figure 26–2).
Hearing Commences With the Capture of 
Sound Energy by the Ear
Psychophysical experiments have established that we 
perceive an approximately equal increment in loud-
ness for each 10-fold increase in the magnitude of a 
sound stimulus. This type of relation is characteristic 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    601
of many of our senses and is the basis of the Weber-
Fechner law (Chapter 17). A logarithmic scale is 
therefore useful in relating the magnitude of sound 
pressure to perceived loudness. Sound pressure cor-
responds to the sound-evoked modulation of the air 
pressure with respect to the mean atmospheric pres-
sure; the louder the sound, the larger is the modula-
tion. The sound-pressure level, L, of any sound may 
be expressed in decibels (dB) as
L = 20 · log10(P / PREF),
in which P, the magnitude of the stimulus, is the 
root-mean-square sound pressure (in units of pas-
cals, abbreviated Pa, or newtons per square meter). 
For a sinusoidal stimulus, the amplitude exceeds the 
root-mean-square value by a factor of √2. The arbi-
trary reference level on this scale, 0 dB sound-pressure 
level (SPL), corresponds to a root-mean-square 
sound pressure, PREF, of 20 μPa. This level represents 
the approximate threshold of human hearing at 1 to  
4 kHz, the frequency range in which our ears are 
most sensitive.
Sound consists of very small alternating changes 
in the local air pressure. The loudest sound tolerable to 
humans, approximately 120 dB SPL, transiently alters 
the local atmospheric pressure by only ±0.01%. In con-
trast, a sound at the threshold level causes a change 
in the local pressure of much less than one part in a 
billion. From the faintest sounds that can be detected 
to sounds so intense that they hurt, the sound pres-
sure increases by one millionfold, which correspond 
to a trillionfold range in stimulus power. The dynamic 
range of hearing is enormous.
Despite their small magnitude, sound-induced 
increases and decreases in air pressure move the tym-
panum inward and outward (Figure 26–3A,B). Near 
threshold, the amplitude of vibration is in the picom-
eter range, which is comparable to the tympanum’s 
own thermal fluctuations. Even loud sounds elicit 
vibrations of the tympanum that do not exceed 1 μm 
in amplitude. The resulting motions of the ossicles are 
essentially like those of two interconnected levers (the 
malleus and incus) and a piston (the stapes). The vibra-
tion of the incus alternately drives the stapes deeper 
into the oval window and retracts it, like a piston that 
pushes and pulls cyclically upon the liquid in the scala 
vestibuli. In humans, the area of the eardrum is about 
20-fold larger than that of the stapes footplate. As a 
result, pressure changes applied on the liquid of scala 
vestibuli by the stapes footplate are larger than those 
pushing and pulling the tympanum. Pressures are 
further magnified by the lever operating between the 
malleus and the incus, the incus in humans being only 
about 70% of the length of the malleus.
The action of the stapes produces pressure 
changes that propagate through the liquid of the scala 
vestibuli at the speed of sound in water. Because liq-
uids are virtually incompressible, however, the pri-
mary effect of the stapes’s motion is to displace the 
liquid in the scala vestibuli in the one direction that 
is not restricted by a rigid boundary: toward the elas-
tic cochlear partition (Figure 26–3B). The deflection of 
the cochlear partition downward increases the pres-
sure in the scala tympani, displacing a liquid mass 
that causes outward bowing of the round window. 
Each cycle of a sound stimulus thus evokes a cycle 
of up-and-down movement of a minuscule volume of 
liquid in each of the cochlea’s three chambers, thus 
displacing the sensory organ.
By increasing the magnitude of pressure changes 
by up to 30-fold, the overall effect of the middle ear 
is to match the low impedance of the air outside the 
ear to the higher impedance of the cochlear partition, 
thus ensuring the efficient transfer of sound energy 
from the first medium to the second. The pressure 
gain afforded by the middle ear depends on sound fre-
quency, which determines the U-shape tuning curve of 
auditory threshold.
Changes of the middle ear’s normal structure 
that reduce its displacement amplitudes can lead to 
conductive hearing loss, of which two forms are espe-
cially common. First, scar tissue caused by middle-ear 
infection (otitis media) can immobilize the tympanum 
or ossicles. Second, a proliferation of bone in the liga-
mentous attachments of the ossicles can reduce their 
normal freedom of motion. This chronic condition 
of unknown origin, termed otosclerosis, can lead to 
severe deafness.
A clinician may test for conductive hearing loss by 
the simple Rinné test. A patient is asked to assess the 
loudness of a vibrating tuning fork under two condi-
tions: when the tuning fork is held in the air or when it 
is pressed against the head just behind the ear. For the 
second stimulus, sound is conducted through bone to 
the cochlea. If the second stimulus is perceived to be 
louder, the patient’s conductive pathway through the 
middle ear may be damaged, but the inner ear is likely 
to be intact. In contrast, if bone conduction is not more 
efficient than airborne stimulation, the patient may 
have inner-ear damage, that is, sensorineural hear-
ing loss. The diagnosis of conductive hearing loss is 
important, because surgical intervention can be highly 
effective: Removal of scar tissue or reconstitution of 
the conductive pathway with a prosthesis may restore 
excellent hearing.


===== Page 7 =====
602    Part IV / Perception
Scala
media
Scala
tympani
Scala
vestibuli
Helicotrema
Oval window
Stapes
Incus
Malleus
Tympanum
Round
window
membrane
33 mm
100 Hz
1000 Hz
10,000 Hz
Oval window
membrane
Basilar
membrane
Round
window
Tympanic
membrane
Sound
Low
frequency
B
C
D
F
E
G
A
Medium
frequency
High
frequency
Complex
sound
Soft
Stiff
500 µm
50 µm
Radial ﬁber


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    603
The Hydrodynamic and Mechanical Apparatus 
of the Cochlea Delivers Mechanical Stimuli to 
the Receptor Cells
The Basilar Membrane Is a Mechanical  
Analyzer of Sound Frequency
The continuous variation of the mechanical properties 
of the basilar membrane along the cochlea’s length, 
approximately 33 mm, is key to the cochlea’s opera-
tion. The basilar membrane at the base of the human 
cochlea is less than one-fifth as broad as at the apex. 
Thus, although the cochlear chambers become pro-
gressively smaller from the organ’s base toward its 
apex, the basilar membrane increases in width (Figure 
26–3C). Moreover, the basilar membrane is relatively 
thick toward the base of the cochlea but thinner at the 
apex. Both morphological gradients contribute to a 
base-to-apex decrease in basilar-membrane stiffness. 
Radial collagen fibers within the membrane determine 
most of its elasticity. The basilar membrane may sche-
matically be regarded as a set of weakly coupled radial 
segments of increasing length along the longitudinal 
axis of the cochlea, with the shortest segment at the 
base and the longest segment at the apex, analogous to 
the multiple strings of a piano.
Stimulation with a pure tone evokes a complex 
and elegant movement of the basilar membrane. Over 
one complete cycle of a tone, each affected segment 
along the basilar membrane undergoes a single cycle 
of vibration (Figure 26–3D,E). The various segments 
of the membrane do not, however, oscillate in phase 
with one another. As first demonstrated by Georg von 
Békésy using stroboscopic illumination, each segment 
reaches its maximal amplitude of motion slightly later 
than its basal neighbor. The normalized sinusoidal 
movement of the basilar membrane reproduces that of 
the stapes, but with a time delay that increases with the 
distance from the cochlear base.
The overall pattern of motion of the membrane is 
that of a traveling wave that traverses the cochlea from 
the stiff base toward the floppier apex. As each wave 
advances toward the apex, the amplitude of vibration 
grows to a maximum and then declines rapidly. The 
position at which the traveling wave reaches its maxi-
mal amplitude depends on sound frequency. The basi-
lar membrane at the base of the cochlea responds best 
to the highest audible frequencies—in humans approx-
imately 20 kHz. At the cochlear apex, the membrane 
responds to frequencies as low as 20 Hz. The inter-
vening frequencies are represented along the basilar 
Figure 26–3  (Opposite) Motion of the basilar membrane.
A. An uncoiled cochlea, with its base displaced to show its 
relation to the scalae, indicates the flow of stimulus energy. 
Sound vibrates the tympanum, which sets the three ossicles of 
the middle ear in motion. The piston-like action of the stapes, 
a bone inserted partially into the elastic oval window, produces 
oscillatory pressure differences that rapidly propagate along the 
scala vestibuli and scala tympani. Low-frequency pressure dif-
ferences are shunted through the helicotrema, where the two 
ducts communicate.
B. The functional properties of the cochlea are conceptually 
simplified if the cochlea is viewed as a linear structure with only 
two liquid-filled compartments separated by the elastic basilar 
membrane.
C. The basilar membrane, here represented in a surface view, 
increases in width from approximately 50 μm near the base to 
500 μm near the apex of the cochlea. Radial collagen fibers run 
from the neural to the abneural edge of the membrane. As the 
result of its morphological gradients, the basilar membrane’s 
mechanical properties vary continuously along its length.
D. The oscillatory stimulation of a sound causes a trave-
ling wave on the basilar membrane, shown here within the 
envelope of maximal displacement over an entire cycle. The 
magnitude of movement is grossly exaggerated in the verti-
cal direction; the loudest tolerable sounds move the basilar 
membrane by only ±150 nm, a scaled distance less than one-
hundredth the width of the lines representing the basilar mem-
brane in these figures.
E. An enlargement of the active region in D demonstrates 
the motion of the basilar membrane in response to stimu-
lation with sound of a single frequency. The continuous 
curve depicts a traveling wave at one instant; the vertical 
scale of basilar-membrane deflection is exaggerated about 
one-millionfold. The dashed and dotted curves portray the 
traveling wave at successively later times as it progresses 
from the cochlear base (left) toward the apex (right). As the 
wave approaches the characteristic place for the stimulus fre-
quency, it slows and grows in amplitude. The stimulus energy 
is then transferred to hair cells at positions within the wave’s 
peak.
F. Each frequency of stimulation excites maximal motion at a 
particular position along the basilar membrane. Low-frequency 
sounds produce basilar-membrane motion near the apex, 
where the membrane is relatively broad and soft. Mid-fre-
quency sounds excite the membrane in its middle. The highest 
frequencies that we can hear excite the basilar membrane at 
its narrow, stiff base. The mapping of sound frequency onto the 
basilar membrane is approximately logarithmic.
G. The basilar membrane performs spectral analysis of com-
plex sounds. In this example, a sound with three prominent fre-
quencies, such as the three formants of a vowel sound, excites 
basilar-membrane motion in three regions, each of which 
represents a particular frequency. Hair cells in the correspond-
ing positions transduce the basilar-membrane oscillations into 
receptor potentials, which in turn excite the nerve fibers that 
innervate these particular regions.


===== Page 9 =====
604    Part IV / Perception
membrane in a continuous array (Figure 26–3F). In the 
19th century, the German physiologist Hermann von 
Helmholtz was the first to appreciate that the basi-
lar membrane’s operation is essentially the inverse 
of a piano’s. The piano synthesizes a complex sound 
by combining the pure tones produced by numerous 
vibrating strings; the cochlea, by contrast, deconstructs 
a complex sound by isolating the component tones at 
the appropriate segments of the basilar membrane.
For any frequency within the auditory range, 
there is a characteristic place along the basilar mem-
brane at which the magnitude of vibration is maximal. 
Although the morphological gradients of the basilar 
membrane are key to the process, the actual disper-
sion of a sound’s frequency components along the 
cochlea’s longitudinal axis depends on the mechani-
cal properties of the cochlear partition as a whole. In 
particular, as we shall detail later, the hair cells within 
the organ of Corti provide active mechanical feed-
back that sharpens mechanical tuning of the basilar 
membrane and enhances its sensitivity to sound. The 
arrangement of vibration frequencies along the basilar 
membrane is an example of a tonotopic map. The rela-
tionship between frequency and position along the 
basilar membrane varies monotonically, but is not lin-
ear; the logarithm of the frequency decreases roughly 
in proportion to the distance from the cochlea’s base. 
The frequencies from 20 kHz to 2 kHz, those between 
2 kHz and 200 Hz, and those spanning 200 Hz to 20 Hz 
are each represented by approximately one-third of 
the basilar membrane’s extent.
Analysis of the response to a complex sound illus-
trates how the basilar membrane operates in daily life. 
A vowel sound in human speech, for example, ordinar-
ily comprises three dominant frequency components 
termed formants. Each frequency component of the 
stimulus establishes a traveling wave that, to a first 
approximation, is independent of the waves evoked by 
the others (Figure 26–3G) and reaches its peak excur-
sion at a point on the basilar membrane appropriate for 
that frequency component. The basilar membrane thus 
acts as a mechanical frequency analyzer by distribut-
ing the energies associated with the different frequency 
components of the stimulus to hair cells arrayed along 
its length. In doing so, the basilar membrane begins the 
encoding of the frequencies in a sound.
The Organ of Corti Is the Site of Mechanoelectrical 
Transduction in the Cochlea
The organ of Corti, a ridge of epithelium extending 
along the basilar membrane, is the receptor organ of the 
inner ear. Each organ of Corti contains approximately 
16,000 hair cells that are innervated by approximately 
30,000 afferent nerve fibers; these are fibers that carry 
information into the brain along the eighth cranial 
nerve. Like the basilar membrane itself, each hair cell 
is most sensitive to a particular frequency, and these 
frequencies are logarithmically mapped in descend-
ing order from the cochlea’s base to its apex. Thus, 
the information transmitted by these sensory cells 
to their innervating nerve fibers is also tonotopically 
organized.
The organ of Corti includes a variety of cells, some 
of unknown function, but four types have obvious 
importance. First, there are two types of hair cells. The 
inner hair cells form a single row of approximately 3,500 
cells, whereas approximately 12,000 outer hair cells lie 
in three rows farther from the central axis of the coch-
lear spiral (Figure 26–4). The space between the inner 
and outer hair cells is delimited and mechanically sup-
ported by pillar cells. The outer hair cells are supported 
at their bases by Deiters’s (phalangeal) cells.
A second epithelial ridge adjacent to the organ of 
Corti, but nearer the cochlea’s central axis, gives rise 
to the tectorial membrane, a gelatinous shelf that 
covers the organ of Corti (Figure 26–4). The tectorial 
membrane is anchored at its base, and its tapered 
distal edge forms a fragile connection with the organ 
of Corti.
Hair cells are not neurons; they lack both dendrites 
and axons (Figure 26–5A). A special saline solution, 
the endolymph that fills scala media, bathes the cell’s 
apical aspect. Tight junctions between hair cells and 
supporting cells separate this liquid from the stand-
ard extracellular fluid, or perilymph, that contacts 
the basolateral surface of the cell. Immediately below 
the tight junctions, a desmosomal junction provides 
a strong mechanical attachment for the hair cell to its 
neighbors.
The hair bundle, which serves as a receptive antenna 
for mechanical stimuli, projects from the flattened api-
cal surface of the hair cell. Each bundle comprises a few 
tens to a few hundred cylindrical processes, the stereo-
cilia, arranged in 2 to 10 parallel rows and extending 
several micrometers from the cell surface. Successive 
stereocilia across a cell’s surface vary monotonically in 
height; a hair bundle is beveled like the tip of a hypoder-
mic needle (Figure 26–5B). The inner hair-cell bundles 
of the mammalian cochlea, when viewed from above, 
have a roughly linear form. Outer hair-cell bundles, in 
contrast, have a V or W shape (Figure 26–6).
Each stereocilium is a rigid cylinder whose core 
consists of a fascicle of actin filaments that are heav-
ily cross-linked by the proteins plastin (fimbrin), fas-
cin, and epsin. Cross-linking renders a stereocilium 


