===== Page 1 =====
51
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System
The physical differences between men and women 
that underlie partner recognition and reproduction are 
obvious to all of us, and their developmental origins 
are well understood. In contrast, our understanding of 
behavioral differences between the sexes is primitive. 
In many cases, their very existence remains contro-
versial, and the origins of those that have been clearly 
demonstrated remain unclear.
In this chapter, we first briefly summarize the 
embryological basis of sexual differentiation. We then 
discuss at greater length the behavioral differences 
between the two sexes, focusing on those differences 
or dimorphisms for which some neurobiological basis 
has been found. These dimorphisms include physio-
logical responses (erection, lactation), drives (maternal 
behavior), and even more complex behaviors (gender 
identity). In analyzing these dimorphisms, we will dis-
cuss three issues.
First, what are the genetic origins of sexual differ-
ences? Human males and females have a complement 
of 23 chromosomal pairs, and only one differs between 
the sexes. Females have a pair of X chromosomes (and 
are therefore XX), whereas males have one copy of 
the X chromosome paired with a Y chromosome (XY). 
The other 22 chromosome pairs, called autosomes, are 
shared between males and females. We will see that 
the initial genetic determinants arise from a single gene 
on the Y chromosome, while later ones arise indirectly 
from sex-specific patterns of expression imposed upon 
other genes as development proceeds.
Second, how are sexual differences initiated by the 
Y chromosome translated into differences between the 
brains of men and women? We will see that key inter-
mediates are the sex hormones, a set of steroids that 
Genes and Hormones Determine Physical Differences 
Between Males and Females
Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal Differentiation of 
the Embryo
Gonads Synthesize Hormones That Promote  
Sexual Differentiation
Disorders of Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis Affect  
Sexual Differentiation
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System Generates 
Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors
Erectile Function Is Controlled by a Sexually Dimorphic 
Circuit in the Spinal Cord
Song Production in Birds Is Controlled by Sexually 
Dimorphic Circuits in the Forebrain
Mating Behavior in Mammals Is Controlled by a Sexually 
Dimorphic Neural Circuit in the Hypothalamus
Environmental Cues Regulate Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors
Pheromones Control Partner Choice in Mice
Early Experience Modifies Later Maternal Behavior
A Set of Core Mechanisms Underlies Many Sexual 
Dimorphisms in the Brain and Spinal Cord
The Human Brain Is Sexually Dimorphic
Sexual Dimorphisms in Humans May Arise From 
Hormonal Action or Experience
Dimorphic Structures in the Brain Correlate with Gender 
Identity and Sexual Orientation
Highlights
F
ew words are more loaded with meaning than 
the word “sex.” Sexual activity is a biological 
imperative and a major human preoccupation. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1261
includes testosterone and estrogens. These hormones 
act during embryogenesis as well as postnatally, first 
organizing the physical development of both genitalia 
and brain regions, and later activating particular phys-
iological and behavioral responses. Hormonal regula-
tion is especially complex because the nervous system, 
which is profoundly influenced by sex steroids, also 
controls their synthesis. This feedback loop may help 
to explain how the external environment, including 
social and cultural factors, can ultimately shape sexual 
dimorphism at a neural level.
Third, what are the crucial neural differences that 
underlie sexually dimorphic behaviors? Clear physical 
and molecular differences between the brains of men 
and women have been found. These differences reflect 
differences in neural circuitry between the sexes, and 
in a few cases, these distinctions in connectivity are 
directly related to behavioral differences. In other 
cases, however, sexually dimorphic behaviors appear 
to result from differential usage of the same basic 
circuits.
Before proceeding, we must define two words that 
are commonly used in many ways and sometimes con-
fused with each other: sex and gender. As a descriptor 
of biological differences between men and women, 
the word sex is used in three ways. First, anatomical sex 
refers to overt differences including the differences in 
the external genitalia as well as other sexual charac-
teristics such as the distribution of body hair. Gonadal 
sex refers to the presence of male or female gonads, the 
testes or ovaries. Finally, chromosomal sex refers to the 
distribution of the sex chromosomes between females 
(XX) and males (XY).
Whereas sex is a biological term, gender encom-
passes the collection of social behaviors and mental 
states that typically differ between males and females. 
Gender role is the set of behaviors and social manner-
isms that is typically distributed in a sexually dimor-
phic fashion within the population. Toy preferences 
in children as well as distinctive attire are some exam-
ples of gender roles that can distinguish males from 
females. Gender identity is the feeling of belonging to 
the category of the male or female sex. Importantly, 
gender identity is distinct from sexual orientation, the 
erotic responsiveness displayed toward members of 
one or the other sex.
Are gender and sexual orientation genetically 
determined? Or are they social constructs molded by 
cultural expectations and personal experience? As the 
examples in this chapter will illustrate, we are still far 
from untangling the contributions of genes and envi-
ronment to these complex phenomena. However, our 
recognition that genes and experience interact to shape 
neural circuits gives us a more realistic framework 
with which to answer this question compared to our 
predecessors, who were constrained by the simplis-
tic view that genes and experience acted in mutually 
exclusive ways.
Genes and Hormones Determine Physical 
Differences Between Males and Females
Chromosomal Sex Directs the Gonadal 
Differentiation of the Embryo
Sex determination is the embryonic process whereby 
chromosomal sex directs the differentiation of the 
gonadal sex of the animal. Surprisingly, this process 
differs in fundamental ways within the animal king-
dom and even among vertebrates. In most mammals, 
including humans, however, an XY genotype drives 
differentiation of the embryonic gonad into testes, 
whereas an XX genotype leads to ovarian differen-
tiation. Hormones produced by the testes and ovaries 
subsequently direct sexual differentiation of the nerv-
ous system and the rest of the body.
It is the presence of the Y chromosome rather than 
the lack of a second X chromosome that is the crucial 
determinant of male differentiation. This was first evi-
dent in rare individuals born with two or even three X 
chromosomes in addition to a Y chromosome (XXY or 
XXXY). These individuals are men who exhibit male-
typical traits. In fact, female cells do not have two 
active X chromosomes. Early in embryogenesis, one 
of the two X chromosomes in each female cell is cho-
sen at random for inactivation, and the genes on it are 
rendered transcriptionally silent. Thus, both male and 
female cells have a single active X chromosome, and 
male cells also have a Y chromosome.
The sex-determining activity of the Y chromosome 
is encoded by the gene SRY (sex-determining region 
on Y) whose activity is required for masculinization of 
the embryonic gonads (Figure 51–1). Inactivation or 
deletion of SRY leads to complete sex reversal: Indi-
viduals are chromosomally male (XY) but externally 
indistinguishable from females. Conversely, in rare 
instances, SRY translocates to another chromosome 
(to the X chromosome or an autosome) during sper-
matogenesis. Such sperm can fertilize eggs to produce 
individuals who are chromosomally female (XX) but 
externally male. However, such XX sex-reversed men 
are infertile, as many of the genes required for sperm 
function are located on the Y chromosome.
How does SRY instruct the undifferentiated gonads 
to develop into testes? The female differentiation 


===== Page 3 =====
1262    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–1  The role of the SRY gene in sex determination 
in humans. SRY, the sex-determining locus (blue domain), 
resides on the nonhomologous region of the short arm of the 
Y chromosome. The presence of SRY is determinative for male 
differentiation in many mammals, including primates and most 
rodents. Normally X- or Y-bearing sperm fertilize an oocyte to 
generate XX females or XY males, and the resulting phenotypic 
sex is concordant for the chromosomal sex. Rarely, SRY trans-
locates to the X chromosome or an autosome (not shown). In 
such cases, XXSRY offspring are phenotypically male, whereas 
XYΔSRY offspring (the Δ indicating a gene deletion) are pheno-
typically female. (Adapted from Wilhelm, Palmer, and Koopman 
2007.)
program appears to be the default mode; patterning 
genes prime the body and gonads to develop along 
female-specific pathways. The SRY gene encodes a 
transcription factor that regulates expression of genes, 
some of which prevent execution of the default pro-
gram and initiate the process of male gonadal differ-
entiation. One of the best-studied targets of the SRY 
transcription factor is another transcription factor, 
SOX9, which is required for differentiation of the tes-
tes. Thus, SRY initiates a cascade of inductive inter-
actions that ultimately lead to male-specific gonad 
development.
Gonads Synthesize Hormones That Promote  
Sexual Differentiation
The chromosomal complement of the embryo directs 
sexual differentiation of the gonads, and in turn, the 
gonads determine the sex-specific features of all organs 
of the body, including the nervous system. They do this 
by secreting hormones. Gonadal hormones have two 
major roles. Their developmental role is traditionally 
referred to as organizational because the early effects of 
hormones on the brain and the rest of the body lead to 
major, generally irreversible, aspects of cell and tissue 
differentiation. Later, some of the same hormones trig-
ger physiological or behavioral responses. These influ-
ences, generally termed activational, are reversible.
One example of an organizational role of gonadal 
hormones is seen in the differentiation of structures 
that connect the gonads to the external genitalia. In 
males, the Wolffian duct gives rise to the vas deferens, 
the seminal vesicles, and the epididymis. In females, 
the Müllerian duct differentiates into the oviduct, the 
uterus, and the vagina (Figure 51–2). Initially, both 
female (XX) and male (XY) embryos possess Wolffian 
and Müllerian ducts. In males, the developing testes 
secrete a protein hormone, the Müllerian inhibiting 
substance (MIS), and a steroid hormone, testosterone. 
MIS leads to a regression of the Müllerian duct, and 
testosterone induces the Wolffian duct to differentiate 
into its mature derivatives. In females, the absence of 
MIS permits the Müllerian duct to differentiate into its 
adult derivatives, and the absence of circulating tes-
tosterone causes the Wolffian duct to resorb. Thus, the 
Y chromosome overrides a female default program to 
generate male gonads, which in turn secrete hormones 
that override a female default program of genital 
differentiation.
The action of MIS is largely confined to embryos, 
but steroid hormones exert effects throughout life—
that is, they also have activational roles at later stages. 
All of the steroid hormones derive from cholesterol 
(Figure 51–3). The sex steroids can be divided into 
androgens, which generally promote male character-
istics, and the estrogens plus progesterone that pro-
mote female characteristics. The testes produce mostly 
the androgen testosterone, while the ovaries produce 
mostly progesterone and an estrogen, 17-β-estradiol. 
The menstrual cycle is a good example of the activa-
tional function of estrogen and progesterone.
A glance at the metabolic relationships among 
steroid hormones (Figure 51–3) reveals a surprise. 
The female hormone progesterone is the precursor of 
the male hormone testosterone, and testosterone is the 
direct precursor of the female hormone 17-β-estradiol. 
Thus, the enzymes that convert one hormone to the 
other control not only the level of the hormone but 
also the “sign” (male or female) of the hormonal effect. 
Aromatase, the enzyme that converts testosterone to 
estradiol, is present at high levels in the ovaries but 
not in the testes. Differential expression of aromatase 
is the reason for sexual dimorphism in circulating tes-
tosterone and estrogen. Aromatase is also expressed in 
various regions of the brain (Figure 51–4A), and many 
of the effects of testosterone on neurons are thought 
to occur after its conversion to estrogen. Testosterone 
Female
phenotype
Male
phenotype
Fertilization
Normal crossover
Abnormal crossover
X
XSRY
X
Y∆SRY
X
X
X
Y
Female
phenotype
Male
phenotype


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1263
Figure 51–2  Sexual differentiation of the 
internal genitalia. Embryos of both sexes 
develop bilateral genital ridges (the gonadal 
anlagen) that can differentiate into either 
testes or ovaries; Müllerian ducts, which 
can differentiate into oviducts, the uterus, 
and the upper vagina; and Wolffian ducts, 
which can differentiate into the epididymis, 
the vas deferens, and the seminal vesicles. 
In XY embryos, the expression of the SRY 
gene in the genital ridge induces differen-
tiation of this tissue into testes and of the 
Wolffian ducts into the rest of the male 
internal genitalia, while the Müllerian ducts 
are resorbed. In XX embryos, the absence 
of SRY permits the genital ridges to develop 
into ovaries and the Müllerian ducts to dif-
ferentiate into the rest of the female internal 
genitalia; in the absence of circulating tes-
tosterone, the Wolffian ducts degenerate. 
(Abbreviation: MIS, Müllerian inhibiting sub-
stance.) (Adapted, with permission, from 
Wilhelm, Palmer, and Koopman 2007.)
is also converted by the enzyme 5α-reductase into 
another androgenic steroid, 5α-dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT), in various target tissues, including the exter-
nal genitalia. In these tissues, DHT is responsible for 
induction of secondary male characteristics such as 
facial and body hair and growth of the prostate. Later 
in life, DHT is the culprit in male pattern baldness.
Disorders of Steroid Hormone Biosynthesis  
Affect Sexual Differentiation
As one can imagine, mutations in genes encoding 
enzymes involved in steroid hormone biosynthesis 
have far-reaching consequences. The resulting pheno-
types dramatically illustrate both the organizational 
and activational effects of steroid hormones, as well as 
the difficulty of neatly distinguishing the two. Here, 
we describe three disorders (Table 51–1).
The first, congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), is 
a genetic deficiency in the synthesis of corticosteroids 
by the adrenal glands that results in overproduction of 
testosterone and related androgens. This condition is 
autosomal recessive and occurs once in 10,000 to 15,000 
live births. In girls born with CAH, excess androgens 
lead to some masculinization of the external genitalia, 
a process called virilization. Virilization clearly reflects 
the organizational roles of steroids. This condition can 
be diagnosed at birth and resolved by surgical inter-
vention. Treatment with corticosteroids reduces tes-
tosterone levels, permitting these females to undergo 
puberty and become fertile.
A second genetic disorder, 5α-reductase II defi-
ciency, can also affect sexual differentiation. In male 
fetuses, 5α-reductase II is expressed at high levels in 
the precursor of the external genitalia, where it con-
verts circulating testosterone into DHT. The high local 
concentrations of DHT virilize the external genitalia. 
Clinical 5α-reductase II deficiency is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner, and males present at birth 
with ambiguous (under-virilized) or overtly feminized 
external genitalia. In many instances, therefore, chro-
mosomally male patients (XY) with this condition are 
mistakenly raised as females until puberty, at which 
time the large increase in circulating testosterone viri-
lizes the body hair, musculature, and, most dramati-
cally, the external genitalia.
The critical role of steroid receptors in controlling 
sexual differentiation is well illustrated by patients 
Müllerian duct
Genital ridge
Wolfﬁan duct
XY
SRY
Testosterone
MIS
Male
Female
Ovary
Epididymis
Oviduct
Uterus
XX
Vas deferens
Seminal vesicle
Vagina
Testis


===== Page 5 =====
1264    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–3  Steroid hormone biosynthesis. Cholesterol is 
the precursor of all steroid hormones and is converted via a 
series of enzymatic reactions into progesterone and testoster-
one. Testosterone or related androgens are obligate precursors 
of all estrogens in the body, a conversion that is catalyzed by 
aromatase. The expression of 5α-reductase in target tissues 
converts testosterone into dihydrotestosterone, an androgen.
with a third disorder, complete androgen insensitiv-
ity syndrome (CAIS). Testosterone, estrogen, and pro-
gesterone are hydrophobic molecules that are able to 
diffuse across cell membranes, enter the bloodstream, 
enter cells in many organs, and bind to intracellular 
ligand-specific receptors. The receptors for these hor-
mones are encoded by distinct but homologous genes.
A single gene encodes a receptor that binds the 
androgens testosterone and DHT. The androgen recep-
tor binds DHT approximately three-fold more tightly 
than testosterone, accounting for the greater potency 
of DHT. There is also a single receptor for proges-
terone (progesterone receptor), whereas two genes 
encode receptors that bind estrogens (estrogen recep-
tors α and β). These steroid hormone receptors are 
present in many tissues of the body, including the 
brain (Figure 51–4B).
These receptor proteins are transcription factors 
that bind specific sites in the genome and modu-
late transcription of target genes. They contain sev-
eral signature motifs, including a hormone-binding 
domain, a DNA-binding domain, and a domain that 
modulates the transcriptional activity of target genes 
(Figure 51–5A). Hormones activate the transcriptional 
activity by binding to the receptor. In the absence of 
ligand, the receptors bind to protein complexes that 
sequester them in the cytoplasm. Upon binding of 
ligand, the receptors dissociate from the complex 
and enter the nucleus, where they dimerize and bind 
to specific sequence elements in the promoter and 
enhancer regions of target genes, modulating their 
transcription (Figure 51–5B).
Patients with CAIS are chromosomally XY but 
carry a loss-of-function allele of the X-linked androgen 
receptor that abolishes cellular responses to testoster-
one and DHT. Because the pathway of sex determina-
tion via SRY remains functional, these patients have 
testes. However, because of deficient androgen signal-
ing, the Wolffian ducts do not develop, the testes fail 
to descend, and the external genitalia are feminized. 
In adulthood, most of these patients opt for surgical 
removal of the testes and hormonal supplementation 
appropriate for females.
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System 
Generates Sexually Dimorphic Behaviors
Sex-specific behaviors occur because the nervous sys-
tem differs between males and females. These differ-
ences arise from a combination of genetic factors, such 
as signaling pathways initiated by sex determination, 
as well as environmental factors, such as social expe-
rience. In many cases, both genetic and environmen-
tal inputs act through the steroid hormone system to 
sculpt the nervous system. Many instances of sexual 
dimorphism have been documented, including differ-
ences in the numbers and size of neurons in particular 
structures, differences in gene expression in various 
neuronal groups, and differences in the pattern and 
number of connections. Here, we examine a few cases 
in which studies in experimental animals have pro-
vided insights. In later sections, we ask whether similar 
17-β-Estradiol
(Estrogen)
5α-Dihydrotestosterone
(DHT)
Progesterone
Testosterone
Cholesterol
HO
OH
O
O
O
OH
O
OH
HO
Aromatase
5α-Reductase


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 51–4  Aromatase and estrogen 
receptors are expressed in specific regions 
of the brain.
A. The enzyme aromatase catalyzes the con-
version of testosterone into estrogen (Figure 
51–3) and is expressed in discrete neuronal 
populations in the brain. The distribution of 
aromatase-expressing neurons labeled with 
a reporter protein (blue) in transgenic mice 
is shown here in three coronal planes of the 
brain: in neurons in the preoptic hypothalamus 
(1), in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis 
(BNST) (2), and in the medial amygdala (3). 
These areas contain sexually dimorphic neu-
rons that regulate sexual behavior, aggres-
sion, and maternal behaviors. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Wu et al. 2009.)
B. This midsagittal section of an adult rat brain 
shows binding of estrogen to cells in various 
hypothalamic regions, including the sexually 
dimorphic preoptic area. Additional estrogen 
binding is seen in the septum, hippocampus, 
pituitary, and midbrain. Other, more lateral 
areas such as the amygdala (not shown) also 
contain estrogen receptors.
Table 51–1  Three Clinical Syndromes That Highlight the Role of Androgens in Masculinization in Humans
Complete androgen 
insensitivity syndrome 
(CAIS)
5α-Reductase II deficiency
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
Chromosomal sex
XY
XY
XX
Molecular basis
Nonfunctional androgen 
receptor, leading to inability 
to respond to circulating 
androgens
Nonfunctional 5α-reductase 
II, leading to deficit in con-
version of testosterone to 
5α-dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) in target tissues
Defect in corticosteroid syn-
thesis, leading to increase in 
circulating androgens from 
the adrenals
Gonad
Testis
Testis
Ovary
Wolffian derivatives
Vestigial
Present
Absent
Müllerian derivatives
Absent
Absent
Present
External genitalia
 
 
 
  At birth
Feminized
Variably feminized
Variably virilized
  After puberty
Feminized
Masculinized
Feminized
  Gender identity
Female
Female or male
Female or male
  Sexual partner preference
Male
Female or male
Female or male
Corpus callosum
Olfactory bulb
Septum
Preoptic area
Pituitary
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Midbrain
Cerebellum
A  Aromatase distribution
B  Estrogen receptor distribution
1
2
3
3
2
1


===== Page 7 =====
1266    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–5  Steroid hormone receptors and their 
mechanism of action.
A. The canonical receptors for steroid hormones are 
ligand-activated transcription factors. These receptors 
have an N-terminal domain, which contains a  
transcriptional transactivator domain; a central  
DNA-binding domain; and a C-terminal ligand-binding 
domain, which may contain an additional transcrip-
tional transactivator domain.
B. Sex steroid hormones are hydrophobic and enter 
the circulation by diffusing across the plasma mem-
brane of steroidogenic cells in the gonads. They enter 
target cells in distant tissues such as the brain by 
passing through the plasma membrane and bind their 
cognate receptors. The steroid hormone receptor 
typically exists in a multiprotein complex with chaper-
one proteins in the cytoplasm of hormone-responsive 
cells. Ligand-binding promotes dissociation of the 
receptor from the chaperone complex and transloca-
tion into the nucleus. In the nucleus, the receptor is 
thought to bind to hormone response elements as a 
homodimer to modulate transcription of target genes. 
(Adapted from Wierman 2007.)
mechanisms underlie sexually dimorphic behaviors in 
humans.
However, before proceeding, we note that the ways 
in which chromosomal mechanisms of sex determina-
tion are linked to the cellular processes of sexual dif-
ferentiation in the central nervous system vary widely 
among species. In insects, sex differences in behav-
ior are independent of hormonal secretion from the 
gonads, and instead rely exclusively on a sex determi-
nation pathway within individual neurons. This mode 
of sexual differentiation of the brain and behavior is 
particularly well understood in the fruit fly, where it 
has been demonstrated that the sex determination cas-
cade initiates expression of a transcription factor, fruit-
less (Fru), that specifies much of the repertoire of male 
sexual behaviors (Box 51–1).
Erectile Function Is Controlled by a Sexually 
Dimorphic Circuit in the Spinal Cord
The lumbar spinal cord of many mammals, including 
humans, contains a sexually dimorphic motor center, 
the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB). 
Motor neurons in the SNB innervate the bulbocaver-
nosus muscle, which plays an important part in penile 
reflexes in males and vaginal movements in females.
In adult rats, the male SNB contains many more motor 
neurons than the female SNB. In addition, male SNB 
motor neurons are larger in size and have larger dendritic 
arbors, with a corresponding increase in the number of 
synapses they receive. Like the SNB motor neurons, the 
bulbocavernosus muscle is larger in males than females; 
it is completely absent in the females of some mamma-
lian species. SNB motor neurons also innervate the leva-
tor ani muscle, which is involved in copulatory behavior 
and is also larger in males than females.
How do these differences arise? Initially, the circuit 
is not sexually dimorphic. At birth, male and female 
rats have similar numbers of neurons in the SNB and 
similar numbers of fibers in the bulbocavernosus and 
levator ani muscles. In females, however, many motor 
neurons in the SNB and many fibers in the bulbocav-
ernosus and levator ani muscles die in early postnatal 
life. Thus, this sexual dimorphism arises not by male-
specific generation of cells, but rather by female-specific 
cell death (Figure 51–7A).
B  Steroid hormone pathway
A  Steroid hormone receptor structure
N-terminal
domain
DNA-binding
domain
Ligand-binding
domain
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Steroid 
hormone
Steroid 
hormone
Steroid 
hormone
receptor 
Chaperone
proteins
Gonads


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1267
Perinatal injections of testosterone or DHT can 
rescue a significant number of the dying neurons and 
muscle fibers in the female rat. Conversely, treatment 
of male pups with an androgen receptor antagonist 
increases the number of dying neurons and muscle 
fibers. So at a deeper level, we see that the dimorphism 
results from male-specific preservation of motor neu-
rons and muscle fibers that would die in the absence 
of hormone.
Where does testosterone act to establish this struc-
tural dimorphism? Is it primarily a survival factor for 
the motor neurons, with muscle fibers dying secondar-
ily because they lose their innervation? Or does testos-
terone act on muscles, which then provide a trophic 
factor to support the survival of SNB motor neurons? 
This issue has been examined in rats carrying a muta-
tion of the androgen receptor (tfm allele) that reduces 
binding of ligand to 10% of normal. The receptor 
resides on the X chromosome, so all males that carry 
a mutant gene on their one and only X chromosome 
are feminized and sterile. For female heterozygotes, 
the situation is more complicated. As described earlier, 
one of the X chromosomes is randomly inactivated in 
each XX female.
Female heterozygotes are therefore mosaics: 
Some cells express a functional androgen receptor 
allele, others the mutated allele. Each muscle fiber has 
many nuclei, so most bulbocavernosus muscle fibers 
in the heterozygous female express functional andro-
gen receptors. Motor neurons have a single nucleus, 
however, so each neuron is either normal or receptor-
deficient. If androgen receptors were required in the 
neuron, one would expect only receptor-expressing 
SNB motor neurons to survive, whereas if receptors 
were required only in muscles, one would expect sur-
viving motor neurons to be a mixture of wild type and 
mutant.
In fact, the latter situation occurs, indicating that 
survival of SNB motor neurons does not depend on a 
neuron-autonomous function of the androgen recep-
tor. Rather, these neurons receive a trophic cue from 
the androgen-dependent bulbocavernosus and the 
levator ani muscles (Figure 51–7A). These cues may 
include the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) or a 
related molecule, because mutant male mice lacking 
a CNTF receptor exhibit a decreased number of SNB 
motor neurons, typical of females.
Male and female SNB motor neurons also differ in 
size. Androgens determine the differences in number 
and size of these neurons in different ways. Studies of 
tfm mutants showed that androgens exert an organiza-
tional effect during early postnatal life through a direct 
effect on muscle. Low levels of androgens during this 
critical period lead to an irreversible reduction in the 
number of SNB motor neurons. Later, androgens act 
directly on SNB motor neurons to increase the extent 
of their dendritic arbors. A loss of circulating testos-
terone, such as that occurring after castration, leads 
to a dramatic pruning of dendritic arbors; injection of 
supplemental testosterone to a castrated male rat can 
restore this dendritic branching pattern (Figure 51–7B). 
This effect persists in adulthood and is reversible, so 
it can be viewed as an activational influence. Thus, 
androgens can exert diverse effects, even on a single 
neuronal type.
Song Production in Birds Is Controlled by Sexually 
Dimorphic Circuits in the Forebrain
Several species of songbirds learn species-specific 
vocalizations that are used for courtship rituals and 
territorial marking (Chapter 55). A set of intercon-
nected brain nuclei controls the learning and produc-
tion of birdsong (Figure 51–8A). In some songbird 
species, both sexes sing and the structure of the song 
circuit is similar in males and females. In other species, 
such as zebra finches and canaries, males alone sing. 
In these species, several song-related nuclei are signifi-
cantly larger in the male than in the female.
The development of sexual dimorphism in song 
circuitry has been studied in detail in the zebra finch. 
The robust nucleus of the archistriatum (RA) in the 
adult male zebra finch contains five times as many 
neurons as the same nucleus in females. In addition, 
the afferent projections to RA exhibit a striking sexual 
dimorphism—only in males does the RA receive input 
from high vocal centers (HVCs) (Figure 51–8B). These 
sex differences in cell number and connectivity of RA 
are not evident until after hatching, when in females 
a large number of RA neurons die and in males the 
axons of HVC neurons enter the RA nucleus.
These sexually dimorphic anatomical features are 
regulated by steroid hormones. When females are sup-
plied with estrogen (or an aromatizable androgen such 
as testosterone) after hatching, the number of neurons 
in the RA and the termination pattern in the nucleus 
are similar to that of the male. However, early hor-
mone administration to young females is not sufficient 
to masculinize the song nuclei to a size comparable to 
that of adult males, nor is it sufficient to induce sing-
ing in females. To achieve these functions, female birds 
that receive testosterone or estradiol after hatching 
must also receive testosterone or dihydrotestosterone 
(but not estrogen) as adults. Thus, steroids play both 
organizational and activational roles in this system 
as well.


===== Page 9 =====
1268    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
In the presence of a female fruit fly, the adult male fly 
engages in a series of essentially stereotyped routines 
that usually culminate in copulation (Figure 51–6A). 
This elaborate male courtship ritual is encoded by a cas-
cade of gene transcription within the brain and periph-
eral sensory organs that masculinizes the underlying 
neural circuitry.
Sex determination in the fly does not depend on 
gonadal hormones as it does in vertebrates. Instead, 
it occurs cell autonomously throughout the body. In 
other words, sexual differentiation of the brain and 
the rest of the body is independent of gonadal sex. The 
male-specific Y chromosome of fruit flies does not bear 
a sex-determining locus. Instead, sex is determined 
by the ratio of X chromosome number to autosome 
number (X:A). A ratio of 1 is determinative for female 
differentiation, whereas a ratio of 0.5 drives male 
differentiation.
The X:A ratio sets into motion a cascade of gene 
transcription and alternative splicing programs that 
leads to the expression of sex-specific splice forms of 
two genes, doublesex (dsx) and fruitless (fru). The dsx gene 
encodes a transcription factor that is essential for sexual 
differentiation of the nervous system and the rest of the 
body, with the sex-specific splice variants responsible 
for male- and female-typical development.
The fru gene encodes a set of putative transcrip-
tion factors that are generated by multiple promoters 
and alternative splicing. In males, one particular mRNA 
(fruM) is translated into functional proteins. In female 
flies, alternative splicing results in the absence of such 
proteins.
Males carrying a genetically modified fru allele that 
can only be spliced in the female-specific manner (fruF) 
have essentially normal, dsx-dependent sexual differen-
tiation. These fruF males therefore resemble wild type 
males externally. However, the loss of FruM in these ani-
mals abolishes male courtship behavior directed toward 
females. These data indicate that FruM is required for 
male courtship and copulation.
Conversely, transgenic female flies carrying a fruM 
allele exhibit male mating behavior toward wild type 
females, indicating that fruM is sufficient to inhibit female 
sexual responses and promote male mating.
Intriguingly, fruF males do not court females and, 
like wild type females, do not reject mating attempts by 
wild type males or fruM females. Similarly, fruM females 
attempt to mate with both fruM and wild type females. 
These data suggest that fruM may also specify sexual 
partner preference, which in the case of wild type males 
would be directed to females.
In wild type females without fruM, the neural path-
ways are wired such that these flies exhibit sexually 
receptive behaviors toward males. When groups of fruF 
males (or fruM females) are housed together, they court 
each other vigorously, often forming long chains of flies 
attempting copulation.
To build the circuitry underlying male courtship 
rituals, fruM appears to initiate cell-autonomous male-
typical differentiation of the neurons in which it is 
expressed. This leads to overt neuroanatomic dimor-
phism in cell number or projections of many classes 
of neurons (Figure 51–6B). Some neurons that express 
fruM are not distributed in dimorphic patterns. In these 
neurons, fruM may regulate the expression of particular 
classes of genes whose products drive a male-specific 
program of physiology and function.
Are neurons that express fruM required for male 
courtship behavior? When synaptic transmission is 
genetically blocked in these neurons in adult males, all 
components of courtship behavior are abolished. Impor-
tantly, these males continue to exhibit normal move-
ment, flight, and other behaviors in response to visual 
and olfactory stimuli. These findings demonstrate that 
fruM appears to be expressed in a neural circuit that is 
essential for and dedicated to male fly courtship.
Box 51–1  Genetic and Neural Control of Mating Behavior in the Fruit Fly


