===== Page 1 =====
1196    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
adaptor proteins Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL; and strength-
ening of an interaction between a cytoplasmic protein 
rapsyn and the ACh receptors. Rapsyn may be the final 
element in the sequence: It binds directly to the ACh 
receptors and can induce their aggregation in vitro. 
In mice lacking rapsyn, muscles form normally and 
ACh receptors accumulate in normal numbers but fail 
to aggregate at the synaptic sites on the membrane. 
Accordingly, muscles of mutant mice lacking Dok7 or 
rapsyn resemble those lacking MuSK or LRP4: They 
synthesize ACh receptors but do not have ACh recep-
tor clusters.
Thus, an extracellular protein (agrin), transmem-
brane proteins (MuSK and LRP4), adaptor proteins 
(Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL), and a cytoskeletal protein 
(rapsyn) form a chain that links commands from the 
motor axon to ACh receptor clustering in the muscle 
membrane.
Nevertheless, postsynaptic differentiation can 
occur in the absence of agrin signaling. This capacity 
was apparent in early studies on cultured muscle (see 
Figure 48–9) and is also seen in vivo: ACh receptor clus-
ters form initially but then disperse in agrin mutants 
(Figure 48–12C). Clustering also occurs in muscles that 
lack innervation entirely. Thus, the signaling pathway 
that initiates postsynaptic differentiation can be acti-
vated without agrin, but agrin is required to maintain 
clustering of ACh receptors.
The role of agrin is perhaps best understood in 
terms of the requirement that pre- and postsynap-
tic specializations be perfectly aligned. ACh recep-
tor aggregates persist in uninnervated muscles but 
disappear in agrin mutant muscles, suggesting that 
axons sculpt the postsynaptic membrane through 
the combined action of agrin and a dispersal factor. 
One major dispersal factor is ACh itself; clustering 
persists in mutants that lack both agrin and ACh  
(Figure 48–12C). Thus, agrin may render ACh recep-
tors immune to the declustering effects of ACh. 
Through a combination of positive and negative fac-
tors, the motor neuron ensures that the patches of 
postsynaptic membrane contacted by axon branches 
are rich in ACh receptors.
The Nerve Regulates Transcription of  
Acetylcholine Receptor Genes
Along with redistribution of ACh receptors in the 
plane of the membrane, the motor nerve orchestrates 
the transcriptional program responsible for expres-
sion of ACh receptor genes in muscle. To understand 
this aspect of transcriptional control, it is important to 
appreciate the geometry of the muscle.
Individual muscle fibers are often more than a 
centimeter long and contain hundreds of nuclei along 
their length. Most nuclei are far from the synapse, but 
a few are clustered beneath the synaptic membrane, so 
that their transcribed and translated products do not 
have far to go to reach the synapse. In newly formed 
myotubes, most nuclei express genes encoding ACh 
receptor subunits. In adult muscles, however, only 
synaptic nuclei express ACh receptor genes; nonsyn-
aptic nuclei do not. Two processes contribute to this 
transformation.
First, as synapses begin to form, expression of the 
ACh receptor subunit genes is increased in synaptic 
nuclei (Figure 48–13). Signals acting through MuSK 
are needed for this specialization. Second, around 
the time of birth, ACh receptor gene expression shuts 
down in nonsynaptic nuclei. This change reflects a 
repressive effect of the nerve, as originally shown by 
studies of denervated muscle. When muscle fibers are 
denervated, as happens when the motor nerve is dam-
aged, the density of ACh receptors in the postsynaptic 
membrane increases markedly, a phenomenon termed 
denervation supersensitivity.
This repressive effect of the nerve is mediated by 
electrical activation of the muscle. Under normal con-
ditions, the nerve keeps the muscle electrically active, 
and fewer ACh receptors are synthesized in active 
muscle than in inactive muscle. Indeed, direct stimu-
lation of denervated muscle through implanted elec-
trodes decreases ACh receptor expression, preventing 
or reversing the effect of denervation (Figure 48–13B). 
Conversely, when nerve activity is blocked by applica-
tion of a local anesthetic, the number of ACh receptors 
throughout the muscle fiber increases, even though the 
synapse is intact.
In essence, then, the nerve uses ACh to repress 
expression of ACh receptor genes extrasynaptically. 
Current that passes through the channel of the receptor 
leads to an action potential that propagates along the 
entire muscle fiber. This depolarization opens voltage-
dependent Ca2+ channels, leading to an influx of Ca2+, 
which activates a signal transduction cascade that 
reaches nonsynaptic nuclei and regulates transcription 
of ACh receptor genes. Thus, the same voltage changes 
that produce muscle contraction over a period of mil-
liseconds also regulate transcription of ACh receptor 
genes over a period of days.
The increase in transcription of ACh receptor 
genes in nuclei beneath the synapse, along with the 
decrease in nuclei distant from synapses, leads to local-
ization of ACh receptor mRNA and thus preferential 
synthesis and insertion of ACh receptors near synap-
tic sites. This local synthesis is reminiscent of that seen 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1197
Figure 48–13  Clustering of acetylcholine (ACh) receptors 
at the neuromuscular junction results from transcriptional 
regulation and local protein trafficking.
A. ACh receptors (AChR) are distributed diffusely on the sur-
face of embryonic myotubes.
B. After the muscle is innervated by a motor axon, the num-
ber of receptors in extrasynaptic regions decreases, whereas 
receptor density at the synapse increases. This reflects the 
aggregation of preexisting receptors and enhanced expression 
of ACh receptor genes in nuclei that lie directly beneath the 
nerve terminal. In addition, the transcription of receptor genes 
is repressed in nuclei in extrasynaptic regions. Electrical activ-
ity in muscle represses ACh gene expression in nonsynaptic 
nuclei, leading to a lower density of ACh receptors in these 
regions. The nuclei at synaptic sites are immune to this repres-
sive effect. Following denervation, ACh receptor gene expres-
sion is upregulated in extrasynaptic nuclei, although not to 
the high level attained by synaptic nuclei. Paralysis mimics the 
effect of denervation, whereas electrical stimulation of dener-
vated muscle mimics the influence of the nerve and decreases 
the density of ACh receptors in the extrasynaptic membrane.
AChR gene
transcription
repressed     
Paralysis
Denervation
Reinnervation
Electrical
stimulation
AChR gene
transcription 
increased
AChR gene
transcription
increased     
A  Embryonic muscle ﬁber
AChR
B  Adult muscle ﬁber
Increase in 
AChR gene
transcription 
Aggregation 
of existing 
AChR proteins
Decrease in 
AChR
transcription 
Nucleus
AChR
AChR
AChR
at postsynaptic sites on dendritic spines in the brain. 
Local synthesis in muscle is advantageous since ACh 
receptors synthesized near the ends of fibers would 
never reach the synapse without degradation.
Many components of the postsynaptic appara-
tus are regulated in ways similar to those we have 
described for ACh receptors—their aggregation 
depends on agrin and MuSK, and their transcription is 
enhanced in synaptic nuclei and repressed in extrasyn-
aptic nuclei by electrical activity. Thus, synaptic com-
ponents have tailor-made regulatory mechanisms, but 
many of these components are regulated in parallel.
The Neuromuscular Junction Matures in  
a Series of Steps
The adult neuromuscular junction is dramatically dif-
ferent in its molecular architecture, shape, size, and 
functional properties from the simple nerve-muscle 
contact that initiates neurotransmission in the embryo. 
Maturation of the nerve terminal, the postsynaptic 
membrane, and the intervening synaptic cleft occurs 
in a complex series of steps. We illustrate this stepwise 
synaptic construction with a continued focus on the 
development of ACh receptors.


===== Page 3 =====
1198    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
As we have seen, ACh receptors aggregate in the 
plane of the membrane as the neuromuscular junc-
tion begins to form, and receptor gene transcription 
is enhanced in postsynaptic nuclei. A few days later, 
activity begins to decrease the level of extrasynaptic 
receptors. These transcriptional changes are soon fol-
lowed by changes in the stability of the receptors. In 
embryonic muscle, ACh receptors are turned over rap-
idly (with a half-life of approximately 1 day) in both 
synaptic and extrasynaptic regions. In contrast, in 
adult muscle, the receptors are relatively stable (with a 
half-life of approximately 2 weeks). The metabolic sta-
bilization of ACh receptors helps concentrate them at 
synaptic sites and stabilize the postsynaptic apparatus.
Yet another alteration is in the composition of the 
ACh receptors. In the embryo, ACh receptors are com-
posed of α-, β-, δ-, and γ-subunits. During the first few 
postnatal days, the γ gene is turned off and a closely 
related gene called ε is activated. As a result, new ACh 
receptors inserted in the membrane are composed of 
α-, β-, δ-, and ε-subunits. This altered subunit com-
position tunes the receptor in a way that is suited to 
its mature function. However, although it occurs at 
the same time as the metabolic stabilization, the two 
changes are not causally linked.
These molecular changes in the ACh receptors are 
accompanied by changes in their distribution (Figure 
48–14). Soon after birth, junctional folds begin to form 
in the postsynaptic membrane and ACh receptors 
become concentrated at the crests of the folds, along 
with rapsyn, whereas other membrane and cytoskel-
etal proteins are localized in the depths of the folds. 
The initial aggregate of ACh receptors appears to have 
a plaque-like appearance. Perforations that undergo 
fusion and fission eventually transform the dense 
plaque into a pretzel shape that follows the branches 
of the nerve ending. New receptor-associated cytoskel-
etal proteins are added to the aggregate, presumably 
to drive the geometric changes. Finally, the postsynap-
tic membrane enlarges and eventually contains many 
more ACh receptors than were present in the initial 
cluster. Each of these changes occurs while the synapse 
is functional, suggesting that ongoing activity plays an 
important role in synaptic maturation.
Central Synapses and Neuromuscular Junctions 
Develop in Similar Ways
Synapses in the central nervous system are structur-
ally and functionally similar to neuromuscular junc-
tions in many ways. Presynaptically, most of the major 
protein components of synaptic vesicles are identical 
at both types of synapses. Likewise, the mechanisms 
of transmitter release differ only quantitatively, not 
qualitatively. Postsynaptically, neurotransmitter recep-
tors are concentrated beneath the nerve terminal and 
associated with “clustering” proteins.
These parallels extend to synaptic development. 
Studies of cultured neurons have shown that the cel-
lular logic of synapse formation is conserved between 
neuromuscular junctions and central synapses. At both 
synaptic types, pre- and postsynaptic elements regulate 
each other’s differentiation by organizing synaptic com-
ponents rather than by inducing their expression, and 
synapses develop in a progressive series of steps (Figure 
48–15). The molecular details differ, however. Neuromus-
cular organizing molecules such as agrin and laminins 
do not play key roles at central synapses, suggesting that 
other synaptic organizers are involved. Recently, some of 
these organizing molecules have been identified.
Neurotransmitter Receptors Become Localized  
at Central Synapses
The concentration of neurotransmitter receptors in the 
postsynaptic membrane is a feature shared by many 
synapses. In the brain, receptors for glutamate, gly-
cine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and other neuro-
transmitters are concentrated in patches of membrane 
aligned with nerve terminals that contain the corre-
sponding transmitter.
The processes by which these receptors become local-
ized may be similar to those at the neuromuscular junc-
tion. In cultures of dissociated hippocampal neurons, for 
example, both glutamatergic and GABAergic nerve termi-
nals appear to stimulate clustering of appropriate recep-
tors in the postsynaptic membrane. Moreover, nerves can 
induce expression of genes encoding glutamate receptors 
in central neurons, much as occurs for ACh receptors in 
muscle. Finally, electrical activity also regulates expres-
sion of neurotransmitter receptors in neurons.
In forming receptor clusters, central neurons face 
an obvious challenge that myotubes do not: They are 
contacted by axon terminals from distinct classes of 
neurons that use different neurotransmitters (Figure 
48–16A). Thus, the nerve terminal probably has an 
instructive role in the clustering of receptors. In cul-
tures of hippocampal neurons, glutamatergic and 
GABAergic axons terminate on adjacent regions of the 
same dendrite. Initially, glutamate and GABA recep-
tors are dispersed, but soon, each type becomes selec-
tively clustered beneath terminals that release that 
neurotransmitter. This observation implies the exist-
ence of multiple clustering signals with parallel path-
ways of signal transduction.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1199
Figure 48–14  The postsynaptic membrane at the neuro-
muscular junction matures in stages. During early embryo-
genesis, ACh receptors exist as loose aggregates. Later, these 
aggregates condense into a plaque-like structure. After birth, 
the dense cluster opens up as the nerve develops multiple 
terminals. These axon branches expand in an intercalary fashion 
as the muscle grows, and the plaque indents to form a gutter, 
which then invaginates to form folds. Receptors are concen-
trated at the crests of the folds. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Sanes and Lichtman 2001.)
Early embryo
Newborn
30 days old
At the neuromuscular junction, rapsyn binds to 
the intracellular domain of ACh receptors and clus-
ters them. Several proteins have been found to play 
similar roles at central synapses. One, gephyrin, is 
highly concentrated in the synaptic densities at glycin-
ergic and some GABAergic synapses (Figure 48–16A). 
Gephyrin is not structurally related to rapsyn but 
has the same function: It links the receptors to the 
underlying cytoskeleton. In nonneural cells, glycine 
receptors cluster when gephyrin is co-expressed; con-
versely, clusters fail to form at inhibitory synapses in 
gephyrin-deficient mutant mice (Figure 48–16B). Simi-
larly, a class of proteins that share conserved segments 
called PDZ domains—the prototypes being PSD-95 or 
SAP-90—facilitate clustering of N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA)-type glutamate receptors and their associated 
proteins. Other PDZ-containing proteins interact with 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate 
acid (AMPA), kainate, and metabotropic types of glu-
tamate receptors.
Synaptic Organizing Molecules Pattern  
Central Nerve Terminals
Although central synapses and neuromuscular junc-
tions share many features, their synaptic clefts differ 


===== Page 5 =====
1200    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
B  Mature central synapse
Axon
Dendrite
Spine
Active zone
protein
Axonal process
Mitochondria
Active
zone
Vesicles
Nerve terminal
Dendrite
A  Development stages
t = 0
t + 60 min
t + 600 min
Filopodium
Immature
spine
NMDA and
AMPA 
receptors
Figure 48–15  Ultrastructure of a synapse in the mammalian 
central nervous system.
A. Initial contact between an axon and a filopodium on 
a developing dendrite leads to a stable dendritic spine 
and an axodendritic synapse. This entire process can 
take as little as 60 minutes. (Abbreviations: AMPA, 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate acid; NMDA, 
N-methyl-d-aspartate.)
B. In a mature interneuron synapse in the cerebellum, synaptic 
vesicles in the nerve terminal are clustered at active zones 
(arrows) directly opposite receptor-rich patches of postsynaptic 
membrane. (Reproduced, with permission, from J.E. Heuser 
and T.S. Reese.)
dramatically. Whereas muscle fibers are ensheathed by 
a basal lamina that has a distinctive molecular struc-
ture at the neuromuscular junction, central neurons 
do not have a prominent basal lamina. Instead, for-
mation of central synapses is regulated in large part 
by molecules embedded in the pre- and postsynaptic 
membranes.
Several interacting pairs of membrane proteins 
have now been found that link the pre- and postsynaptic 
membranes and also organize synaptic differentiation 
as synapses form. Perhaps the best studied are a set of 
proteins called neurexins, which are enriched in presyn-
aptic membranes, and their partners, the neuroligins, 
which are concentrated in postsynaptic membranes 
(Figure 48–17A). There are three neurexin and four 
neuroligin genes in the mammalian genome. The abil-
ity of neurexins and neuroligins to promote synaptic 
differentiation was first revealed by culturing neurons 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1201
Figure 48–16  Localization of neurotransmitter receptors in 
central neurons.
A. Glutamate receptors are localized at excitatory synapses, 
and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine receptors are 
localized at inhibitory synapses. The receptors are linked to the 
cytoskeleton by adaptor proteins. Glycine receptors are linked 
to microtubules by gephyrin (left), and N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA)-type glutamate receptors are linked to each other 
and to the cytoskeleton by PSD-95–related molecules (right). 
The PSD family of molecules contains PDZ domains that 
interact with a variety of synaptic proteins to assemble signal-
ing complexes. Other PDZ-containing proteins interact with 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate acid  
(AMPA)-type and metabotropic glutamate receptors (see  
Chapter 13). (Abbreviations: GAD, glutamate decarboxylase; 
GKAP, Guanylate-kinase-associated protein; TARP, transmem-
brane AMPA receptor regulatory proteins; VGlut, vesicular  
glutamate transporter.)
B. In gephyrin mutant mice, glycine receptors do not cluster at 
synaptic sites on spinal motor neurons, and the animals show 
spasticity and hyperreflexia. In the same neurons, glutamate 
receptor clusters are unaffected. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Feng et al. 1998.)
Metabotropic
glutamate
receptor
NMDA
receptor
AMPA
receptor
TARP
GKAP
Homer Shank
Inhibitory synapse (GABA/glycine)
Excitatory synapse (glutamate)
A
B
Gephyrin
GAD
VGlut
Glycine
or GABA
receptor
Cytoskeleton
(actin/tubulin)
PSD–95
Glutamate receptors
Glycine receptors
Gephyrin 
mutant
Glutamate
receptors
Glycine
receptors
Glutamate
receptors
Glycine
receptors
Wild
type


===== Page 7 =====
Fibroblast
Neuron
No presynaptic organization
Neuroligins promote presynaptic organization
No postsynaptic organization
Neurexins promote postsynaptic organization
Synaptic
vesicle
Fibroblast
Fibroblast
Axon
Neuroligins
Neurexin
Neurexin
Ca2+ 
channel
Neuroligin
patches
Fibroblast
Neuron
Neurexin
Neurexin
patches
A
B
Dendrite
Neuroligin
Glutamate
receptors
Neuroligin
Dendrites
Figure 48–17  Synaptic organizers such as neurexins and 
neuroligins promote differentiation of central synapses.
A. When brain neurons are cultured with fibroblast cells that 
express neuroligin, those segments of the axon that contact 
these cells form presynaptic specializations, marked by clus-
tered neurexin, Ca2+ channels, and synaptic vesicles.
B. Similarly, when neurons are cultured with cells that express 
neurexin, dendrites that contact these cells accumulate aggre-
gates of glutamate receptors, accompanied by scaffolding 
molecules (not shown) and clustered neuroligins. Neurons 
grown with control cells fail to form such pre- and postsynaptic 
specializations.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1203
Figure 48–18  Numerous macromolecular complexes link 
pre- and postsynaptic membranes at central synapses. The 
figure shows some of the many transsynaptic proteins that 
interact at synaptic sites. Some bias synapse formation in favor 
of appropriate partners, whereas others act to regulate the 
properties of the synapse; some may do both.
with nonneural cells engineered to express one or the 
other. In culture, synaptic vesicles form clusters at sites 
of contact with the neuroligin-expressing cells, and 
they are capable of releasing neurotransmitter when 
stimulated (Figure 48–17A). Conversely, neurotrans-
mitter receptors in dendrites aggregate at sites that con-
tact nonneural cells engineered to express neurexins  
(Figure 48–17B). Thus, neurexin–neuroligin interac-
tions facilitate precise apposition of pre- and postsyn-
aptic specializations.
How do neurexins and neuroligins work? Part 
of the answer is that their carboxy terminal tails bind 
to PDZ domains in proteins such as PSD-95 (Figure 
48–16). Indeed, a remarkable number of proteins in 
both pre- and postsynaptic membranes have PDZ 
domain-binding motifs, notably adhesion molecules, 
neurotransmitter receptors, and ion channels. Moreover, 
many cytoplasmic proteins that possess PDZ domains 
are present in nerve terminals and beneath the post-
synaptic membrane. Thus, PDZ-containing proteins 
can serve as scaffolding molecules that link key com-
ponents on both sides of the synapse. Interactions of 
proteins such as neurexins and neuroligins may pro-
vide a means of coupling the intercellular interactions 
required for synaptic recognition to the intracellular 
interactions required to cluster synaptic components 
within the cell membrane.
Although neurexin–neuroligin interactions pro-
mote synaptic differentiation in culture, mice lacking 
FGF7
FGFR2b
FGF22
FGF11
Cbln
Neuroligin
SLITRK
Netrin GL-1
Neurexin
Dystroglycan
GluD
LRRTM
Netrin G-1
SynCam
SynCam
PTP-∂
TrkC
Frizzled
Wnt7
Presynaptic
Postsynaptic
neurexins or neuroligins form synapses in vivo. How-
ever, the synapses that form in the mutants are defec-
tive, with the nature and severity of the defects varying 
among synaptic types. Thus, the primary role of these 
synaptic organizers may be to specify the properties 
of particular synapses. For example, neuroligin1 is 
concentrated in the postsynaptic membrane of excita-
tory synapses, and levels of glutamate receptors are 
reduced at excitatory synapses in neuroligin1 mutants. 
Conversely, neuroligin2 is concentrated at inhibitory 
synapses and plays a critical role in patterning the 
inhibitory postsynaptic membrane.
Additional complexity in the tuning of central syn-
apses by neurexins arises from the fact that they bind 
to multiple postsynaptic organizing molecules in addi-
tion to the neuroligins (Figure 48–18). Moreover, thou-
sands of neurexin isoforms are generated from each 
neurexin gene as a result of differences in promoter 
choice (generating α and β forms) and alternative 
splicing at multiple sites. Different neurexin isoforms 
are differentially expressed by neurons and have dif-
ferent affinities for the various neurexin ligands. Neu-
roligins are also alternatively spliced and differentially 
expressed and thus are likely to have multiple presyn-
aptic partners.
More recently, other synaptic organizing mole-
cules have been found; they include protein tyrosine 
phosphatases and leucine-rich repeat proteins as well 
as members of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and 


===== Page 9 =====
1204    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–19  Some neuromuscular synapses are elimi-
nated after birth. Early in the development of the neuromus-
cular junction, each muscle fiber is innervated by several motor 
axons. After birth, all motor axons but one withdraw from each 
fiber, and the surviving axon becomes more elaborate. Synapse 
elimination occurs without any overall loss of axons—axons 
that “lose” at some muscle fibers “win” at others. Central  
synapses are also subject to elimination.
Wnt families of secreted morphogens and their recep-
tors (Figure 48–18). They are present at specific subsets 
of synapses and play distinct roles. For example, simi-
lar to neuroligin1 and neuroligin2, FGF22 and FGF7 are 
localized to and promote differentiation of excitatory 
and inhibitory synapses, respectively. Some of these 
organizing proteins may act in parallel with neurexins, 
while others may act as initial organizers, with neu-
roligins and neurexins consolidating the synapses at 
a later time and specifying their particular properties.
Together, these results suggest that central syn-
apses are not patterned by master organizers akin to 
agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminins. Indeed, loss of no 
single central organizer studied to date is lethal in the 
manner observed for agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminin 
mutants. Instead, the enormous variety of neuronal 
and synaptic types in the central nervous system and 
their wide range of functional properties arise from a 
multitude of organizers that act combinatorially and 
in cell type–specific ways. Consistent with this view, 
genetic variation in many central organizers and syn-
aptic recognition molecules, including neurexins, neu-
roligins, cadherins, and contactins, has been associated 
with behavioral perturbations in experimental animals 
and with behavioral disorders, including autism, in 
humans (Chapter 62).
Some Synapses Are Eliminated After Birth
In adult mammals, each muscle fiber bears only a 
single synapse. However, this is not the case in the 
embryo. At intermediate stages of development, sev-
eral axons converge on each myotube and form syn-
apses at a common site. Soon after birth, all inputs but 
one are eliminated.
The process of synapse elimination is not a mani-
festation of neuronal death. Indeed, it generally occurs 
long after the period of naturally occurring cell death 
(Chapter 46). Each motor axon withdraws branches 
from some muscle fibers but strengthens its connec-
tions with others, thus focusing its increasing capac-
ity for transmitter release on a decreasing number of 
targets. Moreover, axonal elimination is not targeted to 
defective synapses; all inputs to a neonatal myotube 
are morphologically and electrically similar, and each 
can activate the postsynaptic cell (Figure 48–19).
What is the purpose of the transient stage of poly-
neuronal innervation? One possibility is that it ensures 
that each muscle fiber is innervated. A second is that it 
allows all axons to capture an appropriate set of target 
cells. A third, intriguing idea is that synapse elimina-
tion provides a means by which activity can change 
A single motor 
axon innervates a 
single muscle ﬁber
Maturation
Polyneuronal 
innervation of
immature muscle
the strength of specific synaptic connections. We will 
explore this idea in Chapter 49.
Like synapse formation, synapse elimination 
results from intercellular interactions. Every mus-
cle fiber ends up with exactly one input: None have 
zero, and very few have more than one. It is difficult to 
imagine how this could occur without feedback from 
the muscle cell. Moreover, the axons that remain after 
partial denervation at birth have a larger number of 
synapses than they did initially. Thus, synapse elimi-
nation appears to be a competitive process.
What drives the competition, and what is the 
reward? There is good evidence that neural activity 
plays a role: Paralysis of muscle reduces synapse elimi-
nation, whereas direct stimulation enhances it. These 
findings showed that activity was involved but did not 
reveal how the outcome was determined, because all 
axons were stimulated or paralyzed together. Because 
the essence of the competitive process is that some 
synapses gain territory at the expense of others, dif-
ferential activity among axons may be a determinant 


