===== Page 1 =====
900    Part V / Movement
Control of Posture Is Task Dependent
The senses and muscles used to control posture vary, 
depending on task constraints and requirements. For 
example, when vestibular and somatosensory infor-
mation is altered while working on a space station, 
vision is used to orient the body to tasks, and the goal 
of postural equilibrium changes from preventing falls 
due to gravity to preventing unintended collision with 
objects due to inertia. A healthy nervous system very 
quickly adapts to changing tasks, goals, and environ-
ments by modifying its relative dependence upon dif-
ferent sensory information and by using different sets 
of muscles to optimize achieving the goals of both pos-
ture control and voluntary movements.
Task Requirements Determine the Role of  
Each Sensory System in Postural Equilibrium  
and Orientation
The postural control system must be able to change the 
weighting of different sensory modalities to accommo-
date changes in the environment and movement goals. 
Subjects standing on a firm stable surface tend to rely 
primarily on somatosensory information for postural 
orientation. When the support surface is unstable, sub-
jects depend more on vestibular and visual informa-
tion. However, even when the support surface is not 
stable, light touch with a fingertip on a stable object 
is more effective than vision in maintaining postural 
orientation and balance. Vestibular information is par-
ticularly critical when visual and somatosensory infor-
mation is ambiguous or absent, such as when skiing 
downhill or walking below deck on a ship.
The changeable weighting of individual sensory 
modalities was demonstrated in an experiment in 
which subjects were blindfolded and asked to stand 
quietly on a surface with a tilt that slowly oscillated 
by varying amounts, up to 8° in magnitude. For tilts 
of less than 2°, all subjects sway with the platform, 
suggesting that they use somatosensory information 
to orient their body to the support surface (Figure 
36–12B). At larger tilts, healthy subjects attenuate their 
sway and orient their posture more with respect to 
gravitational vertical than to the surface, as they rely 
more on vestibular information so they stop increasing 
body sway. Thus, relative sensory weighting changes 
in control subjects such that somatosensory weight is 
highest with a stable platform and vestibular weight 
is highest when standing on an unstable surface, such 
as with large surface tilts (Figure 36–12B2). In contrast, 
patients who have lost vestibular function persist in 
swaying along with the platform and subsequently fall 
during large surface tilts. This behavior is consistent 
with the patients’ inappropriate automatic postural 
response to platform tilts.
Studies such as these suggest that when people are 
standing on moving or unstable surfaces, the weight-
ing of vestibular and visual information increases, 
whereas that of somatosensory information decreases. 
Any sensory modality may dominate at a particular 
time, depending on the conditions of postural support 
and the specific motor behavior to be performed.
Control of Posture Is Distributed in the 
Nervous System
Postural orientation and balance are achieved through 
the dynamic and context-dependent interplay among 
all levels of the central nervous system, from the spinal 
cord to cerebral cortex. The major areas of the brain 
involved in postural control are shown in Figure 
36–13. Signals from specific areas in all lobes of the 
cerebral cortex converge and are integrated to deter-
mine appropriate outputs from motor cortical areas to 
subcortical structures. The basal ganglia, cerebellum, 
and pedunculopontine nucleus then send outputs to 
the brain stem. Ultimately, inputs from these varied 
sources result in activation of the reticulospinal and 
vestibulospinal pathways, which descend to the spinal 
cord where they contact interneurons and spinal motor 
neurons for postural control.
Afferent inputs from visual, vestibular, and soma-
tosensory sources are integrated along the neuraxis, 
including the vestibular nuclei and right parietal 
cortex, to inform the internal model of body orienta-
tion and balance. This internal model is continually 
updated by the cerebellum based on error signals 
between expected and actual sensory feedback follow-
ing motor commands.
Spinal Cord Circuits Are Sufficient for Maintaining 
Antigravity Support but Not Balance
Adult cats with complete spinal transection at the tho-
racic level can, with experience, support the weight of 
their hindquarters with fairly normal hind limb and 
trunk postural orientation, but they have little control 
of balance. These animals do not exhibit normal pos-
tural responses in their hind limbs when the support 
surface moves. Their response to horizontal motion 
consists of small, random, and highly variable bursts 
of activity in extensor muscles, and postural activity 
in flexor muscles is completely absent. Active balance 
is absent despite the fact that extensors and flexors can 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    901
Thalamus
Vestibulocerebellum
Spinocerebellum
Visual
cortex
Visual
Vestibular
Somatosensory
Premotor
cortex / 
SMA
Temporo-
parietal
cortex
Vestibular
cortex
Posterior
parietal cortex
S1
M1
Vestibular
nuclei
Pontomedullary
reticular formation
PPN
Reticulo-
spinal track
Spinal cord
Vestibulo-
spinal track
Basal 
ganglia
Body schema
Plan/
intention
Postural
synergies
Anticipatory postural
adjustments
Figure 36–13  Many parts of the 
nervous system control pos-
ture. Areas of frontal, parietal, 
temporal, and occipital cortex, as 
well as the basal ganglia,  
cerebellum, and pendunculopon-
tine nucleus (PPN), provide inputs 
to the recticulospinal and vesti-
bulospinal pathways descending 
to spinal motor neurons. Afferent 
inputs from the visual, vestibular, 
and somatosensory systems 
are integrated in the brainstem 
and cortex to update the body 
schema and inform future postural 
commands. (Abbreviations: M1, 
primary motor cortex; S1, primary 
somatosensory cortex; SMA, sup-
plementary motor area.) (Adapted 
from Beristain 2016.)
be recruited for other movements such as stepping on 
a treadmill, suggesting that unlike locomotion, postural 
muscle activation requires supraspinal control.
An adult cat with a spinal transection can stand 
independently for only short periods of time and 
within a narrow range of stability; head turns in par-
ticular cause the animal to lose balance. What stability 
there is likely results from the broad base of support 
afforded by quadrupedal stance, the stiffness of the 
tonically contracting hind limb extensors that support 
the weight of the hindquarters, and active compensa-
tion by forelimbs that continue to produce postural 
responses. Humans with spinal cord injuries have 
various amounts of antigravity muscle tonus but lack 
automatic postural responses below the level of the 
lesion. These results emphasize that antigravity sup-
port and balance control are distinct mechanisms and 
that the control of balance requires the involvement of 
supraspinal circuits.
The Brain Stem and Cerebellum Integrate  
Sensory Signals for Posture
If spinal circuits alone are not capable of producing 
automatic postural responses, what supraspinal cent-
ers are responsible for these responses? Although the 
answer to this question remains unknown, good can-
didates include the brain stem and cerebellum, which 
are highly interconnected and work together to modu-
late the descending commands to spinal motor centers 
of the limbs and trunk. These regions have the input–
output structure that would be expected of centers for 
postural control.
Muscle synergies for automatic postural responses 
may be organized in the brain stem, perhaps the reticu-
lar formation. However, adaptation of postural syner-
gies to changes in the environment and task demands 
may require the cerebellum.
Two regions of the cerebellum influence orienta-
tion and balance: the vestibulocerebellum (nodulus, 
uvula, and fastigial nucleus) and the spinocerebel-
lum (anterior lobe and interpositus nucleus). These 
regions are interconnected with the vestibular nuclei 
and reticular formation of the pons and medulla (see 
Figure 37–4). Lesions of the brain stem and vestibu-
locerebellum produce a variety of deficits in head and 
trunk control including a tendency to tilt from vertical, 
even with eyes open, suggesting a deficit in the inter-
nal representation of postural orientation. Lesions of 
the spinocerebellum result in excessive postural sway 
that is worse with the eyes closed, ataxia during walk-
ing, and hypermetric postural responses, suggesting 


===== Page 3 =====
902    Part V / Movement
deficits in balance corrections. Certain regions in the 
pons and medulla facilitate or depress extensor tonus 
and could be involved in antigravity support.
The brain stem and cerebellum are sites of integra-
tion of sensory inputs, perhaps generating the inter-
nal model of body orientation and balance. Vestibular 
and visual inputs are distributed to brain stem cent-
ers (Chapters 25 and 27) and the vestibulocerebellum. 
The spinocerebellum receives signals from rapidly 
conducting proprioceptive and cutaneous fibers. More 
slowly conducting somatosensory fibers project to the 
vestibular nuclei and reticular formation.
Two major descending systems carry signals from 
the brain stem and cerebellum to the spinal cord and 
could trigger automatic postural responses for balance 
and orientation. The medial and lateral vestibulospi-
nal tracts originate from the vestibular nuclei, and the 
medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts originate from 
the reticular formation of the pons and medulla (see 
Figure 37–5). Lesions of these tracts result in profound 
ataxia and postural instability. In contrast, lesions of 
the corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts have minimal 
effect on balance even though they produce profound 
disturbance of voluntary limb movements.
The Spinocerebellum and Basal Ganglia Are 
Important in Adaptation of Posture
Patients with spinocerebellar disorders such as alco-
holic anterior-lobe syndrome and basal ganglia deficits 
such as Parkinson disease experience postural diffi-
culties. Studies suggest that the spinocerebellum and 
basal ganglia play complementary roles in adapting 
postural responses to changing conditions.
The spinocerebellum is where the amplitude of 
postural responses is adapted based on experience. The 
basal ganglia are important for quickly adjusting the 
postural set when conditions suddenly change. Both 
the spinocerebellum and the basal ganglia regulate 
muscle tone and force for voluntary postural adjust-
ments. They are not necessary, however, for triggering 
or constructing the basic postural patterns.
Patients with disorders of the spinocerebellum 
have difficulty modifying the magnitude of balance 
adjustments with practice, over the course of repeated 
trials, but can readily adapt postural responses imme-
diately after a change in conditions based on sensory 
feedback. For example, a patient standing on a movable 
platform scales the size of postural responses appro-
priately when platform velocity is increased with each 
trial. These postural adjustments rely on velocity infor-
mation, which is encoded by somatosensory inputs at 
the beginning of platform movement.
In contrast, patients with cerebellar disorders 
cannot scale the size of postural responses based on 
feedforward control using the anticipated amplitude 
of postural displacements. Because the amplitude of 
platform movement is not known until the platform 
has stopped moving, well after the initial postural 
response is complete, a subject cannot use feedback 
from the trial at hand to guide the response but must  
instead use his experience from previous trials to 
inform his response in a subsequent trial of the same 
amplitude. Whereas a healthy subject does this quite 
readily, a patient with spinocerebellar disorders is una-
ble to efficiently adapt his postural responses based on 
recent experience (Figure 36–14A).
A healthy subject standing on a moveable plat-
form is able to scale muscle activity during sudden 
backward motion of the platform to counteract the 
forward sway induced by the perturbation. A subject 
with spinocerebellar disease always overresponds, 
although the timing of muscle activation is normal 
(Figure 36–14B). As a result, this individual returns 
beyond the upright position and oscillates back and 
forth. Reminiscent of the hypermetria observed imme-
diately after labyrinthectomy, cerebellar hypermetria 
may also result from loss of Purkinje cell inhibition on 
spinal motor centers.
A patient with Parkinson disease can, with suffi-
cient practice, gradually modify his postural responses 
but has difficulty changing responses when conditions 
change suddenly. Such postural inflexibility is seen 
when initial posture changes. For example, when a 
normal subject switches from standing upright to sit-
ting on a stool on a movable platform, the pattern of 
his automatic postural response to backward move-
ment of the platform changes immediately. Because leg 
muscle activity is no longer necessary after the switch 
from standing to sitting, this component ceases to be 
recruited.
In contrast, a patient with Parkinson disease 
employs the same muscle activation pattern for both 
sitting and standing (Figure 36–15). l-DOPA replace-
ment therapy does not improve the patient’s ability 
to switch postural set. With repetition of trials in 
the seated posture, however, the leg muscle activity 
eventually disappears, showing that enough expe-
rience permits adaptation of postural responses. A 
patient with Parkinson disease also has difficulty 
when instructed to increase or decrease the magni-
tude of a postural response, a difficulty that is con-
sistent with the inability to change cognitive sets 
quickly.
Patients with Parkinson disease have problems 
with postural tone and force generation in addition to 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    903
Spinocerebellum
GAS
TIB
2
4
6
8
10
12
80
160
240
320
400
10
15
20
25
30
35
80
160
240
320
400
480
Translation velocity (cm/s)
Cerebellar
damage
Cerebellar
damage
Control
Control
Change in torque (nm/s)
Change in torque (nm/s)
Translation amplitude (cm)
Slope > 0
B  Postural responses to sudden disturbance
Predictable
amplitude
Random
amplitude
0
200
400
600
800
Time (ms)
0
200
400
600
800
Time (ms)
4 cm
Control
Cerebellar damage
Platform
position
GAS
TIB
Platform
position
GAS
TIB
A  Scaling of postural responses
1  Task requiring sensory input only
2  Task requiring adaptation
Figure 36–14  The spinocerebellum has a role in adapt-
ing postural responses to changing conditions and in 
scaling postural responses to anticipated postural distur-
bances. The spinocerebellum is important for adapting postural 
responses based on experience. Patients with a spinocerebellar 
disorder are able to use immediate sensory input, but not  
experience, to adjust automatic postural responses. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Horak and Diener 1994.)
A. 1. In this experiment, subjects stand on a platform that is 
moved horizontally; the velocity is increased on each trial. Main-
taining balance requires scaling responses to the velocity of 
the platform using sensory feedback. The adjustments in a sub-
ject with a spinocerebellar disorder have the same regression 
coefficient (slope) as those of a control subject, even though 
in each trial the responses are larger and more variable than 
those of the control subject. 2. When subjects are required 
to anticipate and adapt to platform translation, the postural 
adjustments in the spinocerebellar subject are compromised. 
When translation amplitude is random, responses are large, as 
if the subject expects a large translation. When trials with the 
same amplitude are repeated, a control subject learns to pre-
dict the amplitude of the disturbance and adjust his response. 
In contrast, a spinocerebellar subject shows no improvement in 
performance; he cannot use his experience in one trial to adjust 
his responses in subsequent trials. All responses are large, as if 
the subject always expects the large translation.
B. In this experiment, subjects stand on a platform that is 
moved backward (6 cm amplitude at 10 cm/s). In a control 
subject, the onset of movement evokes a small burst of activ-
ity in the gastrocnemius (GAS), an ankle extensor. In a subject 
with damage to the anterior lobe of the cerebellum, the muscle 
responses are overly large, with bursts of activity alternating 
between the gastrocnemius and its antagonist, the tibialis  
anterior (TIB).


===== Page 5 =====
904    Part V / Movement
PSP
ABD
HAM
QUAD
GAS
TIB
PSP
ABD
HAM
QUAD
GAS
TIB
Upright
Seated
Upright
Seated
A  Control
B  Parkinson disease
PSP
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
Time (ms)
0
100
200
300
400
HAM
GAS
TIB
QUAD
ABD
Figure 36–15  The basal ganglia are important for adapting 
postural responses to a sudden change in initial conditions.  
(Adapted, with permission, from Horak, Nutt, and Nashner 
1992.)
A. When a normal subject switches from upright stance to 
sitting, he immediately modifies his response to backward 
movement of the support platform. The postural response to 
movement while seated does not involve the leg muscles—
the gastrocnemius (GAS) and hamstrings (HAM)—but does 
activate the paraspinal muscles (PSP) and with shorter latency 
than in the response to movement while standing. (Abbre-
viations: ABD, abdominals; QUAD, quadriceps; TIB, tibialis 
anterior.)
B. A patient with Parkinson disease does not suppress the leg 
muscle response in the first trial after switching from standing 
to sitting. The postural response of this subject is similar for 
both initial positions: Antagonist muscles (purple) are activated 
along with agonists (pink).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    905
an inability to adapt to changing conditions. The dis-
ease’s bradykinesia (slowness of movement) is reflected 
in slow development of force in postural responses, 
and its rigidity is manifested in co-contraction. l-DOPA 
replacement greatly improves a patient’s ability to gen-
erate not only forceful voluntary movements but also 
the accompanying postural adjustments, such as rising 
onto the toes and gait. However, neither the automatic 
postural response to an unexpected disturbance nor 
postural adaptation is improved by l-DOPA, suggest-
ing that these functions involve the nondopaminergic 
pathways affected by Parkinson disease.
Cerebral Cortex Centers Contribute to  
Postural Control
Several areas of cerebral cortex influence postural ori-
entation and equilibrium, including both anticipatory 
and automatic postural responses. Most voluntary 
movements, which are initiated in the cerebral cortex, 
require postural adjustments that must be integrated 
with the primary goal of the movement in both tim-
ing and amplitude. Where this integration occurs is 
not clear.
The cerebral cortex is more involved in anticipa-
tory postural adjustments than in automatic postural 
reactions. However, recent electroencephalographic 
studies show that areas of cerebral cortex are activated 
by anticipation of a postural disturbance before an 
automatic postural response is initiated. This finding is 
consistent with the idea that the cortex optimizes bal-
ance control as part of motor planning.
The supplementary motor area and temporopa-
rietal cortex have both been implicated in postural 
control. The supplementary motor area, anterior to 
the motor cortex, is likely involved with anticipa-
tory postural adjustments that accompany voluntary 
movements. The temporoparietal cortex appears to 
integrate sensory information and may comprise inter-
nal models for perception of body verticality. Lesions 
of insular cortex can impair perception of the visual 
vertical, whereas lesions of superior parietal cortex 
impair perception of the postural vertical, and either 
of these defects may impair balance when standing on 
an unstable support.
Sensorimotor 
cortex 
receives 
somatosensory 
inputs signaling balance disturbances and postural 
responses. However, this region is not essential for 
automatic postural adjustments. Lesioning the motor 
cortex in cats impairs lifting of the forelimb in response 
to a light touch during stance but does not abolish the 
accompanying postural adjustment in the contralat-
eral forelimb. Although the sensorimotor cortex is not 
responsible for postural adjustments, it may have a 
role in the process.
Behavioral studies, too, have implicated cortical 
processes in postural control. Control of posture, like 
control of voluntary movement, requires attention. 
When subjects must press a button following a visual 
or auditory cue while also maintaining balance, their 
reaction time increases with the difficulty of the task 
(balancing on one foot versus sitting, for example). 
Moreover, when subjects try to perform a cognitive 
task while actively maintaining posture, the perfor-
mance of either or both can degrade. For example, 
when a subject is asked to count backward by threes 
while standing on one foot, both the cognitive task and 
postural adjustment deteriorate. The timing of auto-
matic postural responses to unexpected disturbances 
is little affected by cognitive interference.
Balance control is also influenced by emotional 
state, thus implicating the limbic system in posture con-
trol. Fear of falling, for example, can increase postural 
tone and stiffness, reduce sway area, increase sway 
velocity, and alter balancing strategies in response to 
disturbances.
Finally, balance control is also influenced by 
attentional ability and demands, thus implicating the 
frontoparietal attention network. There is evidence of 
competition for central processing resources in dual 
task conditions, where a person must maintain balance 
and perform a concurrent cognitive task. Both postural 
control and cognitive performance may be impaired 
in dual-task conditions as compared to single-task 
conditions assessing either postural or cognitive per-
formance in isolation. As cognitive demands increase, 
responses to postural perturbations are smaller in 
amplitude and occur at longer latency. However, when 
necessary, healthy individuals prioritize postural con-
trol over the cognitive task and demonstrate decreasing 
cognitive performance as postural demands increase. 
In contrast, individuals with nervous system disorders 
such as Parkinson disease may not prioritize postural 
control in dual-task situations and may be at increased 
risk for falls in dual-task situations.
Although the roles of specific areas of cerebral 
cortex in postural control are largely undefined, there 
is no doubt that the cortex is important for learning 
new, complex postural strategies. The cortex must be 
involved in the amazing improvement in balance and 
postural orientation of athletes and dancers who use 
cognitive information and advice from coaches. In fact, 
the cerebral cortex is involved in postural control each 
time we consciously maintain our balance while walk-
ing across a slippery floor, standing on a moving bus, 
or waiting tables on a rocking ship.


===== Page 7 =====
906    Part V / Movement
Highlights
1.	 The two goals of posture are balance and orienta-
tion. Balance control maintains the body in stable 
equilibrium to avoid falls. Postural orientation 
aligns the body segments with respect to each 
other and to the world, such as maintaining the 
head vertical.
2.	 A sudden displacement of the body center of mass 
while standing triggers ankle, hip, and/or step-
ping strategies to return the center of mass within 
the base of foot support.
3.	 Postural responses are fast and automatic, but 
adapt quickly to changes in environmental con-
text, intention, and conditions. Postural responses 
can also be improved with practice.
4.	 Activation of centrally organized muscle synergies 
is used to control balance. This synergy organiza-
tion simplifies the neural control so only a few 
central commands are required, instead of a sep-
arate command for each muscle, while allowing 
flexibility and adaptability for postural control.
5.	 Somatosensory, vestibular, and visual sensory 
modalities are integrated to form an internal rep-
resentation of the body that the nervous system 
uses for postural orientation and balance control. 
Somatosensory signals trigger the fastest, larg-
est postural responses and are most critical for 
control of postural sway in standing. Vestibular 
signals are particularly critical when standing 
on an unstable surface, when it is difficult to use 
somatosensory information for postural orienta-
tion. Visual inputs provide spatial orientation and 
motion information.
6.	 The body center of mass is often outside of the 
base of foot support during walking and running 
so balance is provided by adjusting foot placement 
and lateral trunk stability to control the center of 
mass with respect to the changing base of support.
7.	 The vestibulocerebellum and the spinocerebellum 
are interconnected with the vestibular nuclei and 
reticular formation of the brainstem for control of 
balance and postural orientation.
8.	 The basal ganglia are important for control of axial 
postural tone, adapting postural response strate-
gies based on initial conditions, and anticipatory 
postural control. The cerebellum is important for 
adapting the magnitude of balance responses with 
practice, over the course of repeated trials, and for 
scaling the size of postural responses.
9.	 Posture control involves many brain areas from 
the brainstem to the frontal cortex, but the spe-
cific circuits involved in different types of posture 
control (automatic postural responses, anticipa-
tory postural adjustments, body sway in stance, 
sensory integration for a body schema and verti-
cality) have yet to be determined.
 Fay B. Horak 
 Gammon M. Earhart 
Suggested Reading
Chiba R, Takakusaki K, Ota J, Yozu A, Haga N. 2016. Human 
upright posture control models based on multisen-
sory inputs; in fast and slow dynamics. Neurosci Res 
104:96–104.
Cullen KE. 2016. Physiology of central pathways. In: JM Furman, 
T Lempert (eds). Handbook of Clinical Neurology, vol 137, 
pp 17–40. New York: Elsevier.
Dietz V. 1992. Human neuronal control of automatic func-
tional movements—interaction between central programs 
and afferent input. Physiol Rev 72:33–69.
Horak FB. 2006. Postural orientation and equilibrium: what 
do we need to know about neural control of balance to 
prevent falls? Age Ageing 35(Suppl 2):ii7–ii11.
Horak FB, Macpherson JM. 1996. Postural orientation and 
equilibrium. In: LB Rowell, JT Shepherd (eds). Handbook 
of Physiology, Section 12, Exercise: Regulation and Integration 
of Multiple Systems, pp. 255–292. New York: Oxford Univ. 
Press.
Macpherson JM, Deliagina TG, Orlovsky GN. 1997. Con-
trol of body orientation and equilibrium in vertebrates. 
In: PSG Stein, S Grillner, AI Selverston, DG Stuart (eds). 
Neurons Networks and Motor Behavior, pp. 257–267.  
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Massion J. 1994. Postural control system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
4:877–887.
Woollacott M, Shumway-Cook A. 2002. Attention and the 
control of posture and gait: a review of an emerging area 
of research. Gait Posture 16:1–14.
References
Beristain X. 2016. Gait. In: Salardini A, Biller J (eds). The 
Hospital Neurology Book. Beijing, China: McGraw-Hill 
Education.
Brandt T, Paulus W, Straube A. 1986. Vision and posture. 
In: W Bles, T Brandt (eds). Disorders of Posture and Gait, 
pp. 157–175. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Cavallari P, Bolzoni F, Burttinit C, Esposti R. 2016. The organ-
ization and control of intra-limb anticipatory postural 
adjustments and their role in movement performance. 
Front Hum Neurosci 10:525.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 36 / Posture    907
Cordo PJ, Nashner LM. 1982. Properties of postural adjustments 
associated with rapid arm movements. J Neurophysiol 
47:287–302.
Darriot J, Mohsen J, Cullen K. 2015. Rapid adaptation of mul-
tisensory integration in vestibular pathways. Front Syst 
Neurosci 16:1–5.
De Havas J, Gomi H, Haggard P. 2017. Experimental investi-
gations of control principles of involuntary movement: a 
comprehensive review of the Kohnstamm phenomenon. 
Exp Brain Res 235:1953–1997.
Dunbar DC, Horak FB, Macpherson JM, Rushmer DS. 1986. 
Neural control of quadrupedal and bipedal stance: impli-
cations for the evolution of erect posture. Am J Phys 
Anthropol 69:93–105.
Gera G, Fling BW, Van Ooteghem K, Cameron M, Frank JS, 
Horak FB. 2016. Postural motor learning deficits in people 
with MS in spatial but not temporal control of center of 
mass. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 30:722–730.
Gurfinkel VS, Levick YS. 1991. Perceptual and automatic 
aspects of the postural body scheme. In: J Paillard (ed). 
Brain and Space, pp. 147–162. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Hof AL, Curtze C. 2016. A stricter condition for stand-
ing balance after unexpected perturbations. J Biomech 
49:580–585.
Horak FB, Diener HC. 1994. Cerebellar control of postural scal-
ing and central set in stance. J Neurophysiol 72:479–493.
Horak FB, Nashner LM. 1986. Central programming of pos-
tural movements: adaptation to altered support-surface 
configurations. J Neurophysiol 55:1369–1381.
Horak FB, Nutt J, Nashner LM. 1992. Postural inflexibility in 
parkinsonian subjects. J Neurol Sci 111:46–58.
Inglis JT, Horak FB, Shupert CL, Jones-Rycewicz C. 1994. The 
importance of somatosensory information in triggering 
and scaling automatic postural responses in humans. Exp 
Brain Res 101:159–164.
Jacobs JV, Horak FB. 2007. Cortical control of postural 
responses. J Neural Transm 114:1339–1348.
Jahn K, Deutschländer A, Stephan T, Strupp M, Wiesmann 
M, Brandt T. 2004. Brain activation patterns during imag-
ined stance and locomotion in functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging. Neuroimage 22:1722–1731.
Lee WA, Michaels CF, Pai YC. 1990. The organization of 
torque and EMG activity during bilateral handle pulls by 
standing humans. Exp Brain Res 82:304–314.
MacKinnon CD, Winter DA. 1993. Control of whole body 
balance in the frontal plane during human walking.  
J Biomech 26:633–644.
Macpherson JM. 1988. Strategies that simplify the control 
of quadrupedal stance. 2. Electromyographic activity.  
J Neurophysiol 60:218–231.
Macpherson JM, Everaert DG, Stapley PJ, Ting LH. 2007. 
Bilateral vestibular loss in cats leads to active destabilization 
of balance during pitch and roll rotations of the support 
surface. J Neurophysiol 97:4357–4367.
Macpherson JM, Fung J. 1999. Weight support and bal-
ance during perturbed stance in the chronic spinal cat. 
J Neurophysiol 82:3066–3081.
Maki BE, McIlroy WE. 1997. The role of limb movements 
in maintaining upright stance: the “change-in-support” 
strategy. Phys Ther 77:488–507.
Maurer C, Mergner T, Peterka RJ. 2006. Multisensory control 
of human upright stance. Exp Brain Res 171:231–250.
McMahon TA, Bonner JT. 1983. On Size and Life. New York: 
W.H. Freeman.
Mittelstaedt H. 1998. Origin and processing of postural infor-
mation. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 22:473–478.
Otten W. 1999. Balancing on a narrow ridge: biomechanics 
and control. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B 354:869–875.
Peterka RJ. 2002. Sensorimotor integration in human pos-
tural control. J Neurophysiol 88:1097–1118.
Peterson DS, Horak FB. 2016. Neural control of walking in 
people with Parkinsonism. Physiology 3:95–107.
Rousseaux M, Honore J, Saj A. 2014. Body representations 
and brain damage. Neurophysiol Clin 44:59–67.
Stapley PJ, Ting LH, Kuifu C, Everaert DG, Macpherson JM. 
2006. Bilateral vestibular loss leads to active destabiliza-
tion of balance during voluntary head turns in the stand-
ing cat. J Neurophysiol 95:3783–3797.
Takakusaki K. 2017. Functional neuroanatomy for posture 
and gait control. J Mov Disord 10:1–17.
Ting LH, Chiel HJ, Trumbower RD, et al. 2015. Neurome-
chanical principles underlying movement modularity 
and their implications for rehabilitation. Neuron 86:38–54.


===== Page 9 =====
37
The Cerebellum
The Cerebellum Is Necessary for Motor Learning in 
Several Different Movement Systems
Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum
Highlights
T
he cerebellum constitutes only 10%  of the 
total volume of the brain but contains more than 
one-half of its neurons. The cerebellar cortex 
comprises a series of highly regular, repeating units, 
each of which contains the same basic microcircuit. 
Different regions of the cerebellum receive projections 
from distinct brain and spinal structures and then pro-
ject back to the brain. The similarity of the architecture 
and physiology in all regions of the cerebellum implies 
that different regions of the cerebellum perform simi-
lar computational operations on different inputs.
The symptoms of cerebellar damage in humans 
and experimental animals provide compelling evi-
dence that the cerebellum participates in the control of 
movement. The symptoms, in addition to being diag-
nostic for clinicians, thus help define the possible roles 
of the cerebellum in controlling behavior.
Several fundamental principles define our under-
standing of the physiological function of the cerebel-
lum. First, the cerebellum acts in advance of sensory 
feedback arising from movement, thus providing feed-
forward control of muscular contractions. Second, to 
achieve such control, the cerebellum relies on internal 
models of the body to process and compare sensory 
inputs with copies of motor commands. Third, the cer-
ebellum plays a special role in motor and perceptual 
timing. Fourth, the cerebellum is critical for adapting 
Damage of the Cerebellum Causes Distinctive Symptoms  
and Signs
Damage Results in Characteristic Abnormalities of 
Movement and Posture
Damage Affects Specific Sensory and Cognitive Abilities
The Cerebellum Indirectly Controls Movement Through 
Other Brain Structures
The Cerebellum Is a Large Subcortical Brain Structure
The Cerebellum Connects With the Cerebral Cortex 
Through Recurrent Loops
Different Movements Are Controlled by Functional 
Longitudinal Zones
The Cerebellar Cortex Comprises Repeating Functional  
Units Having the Same Basic Microcircuit
The Cerebellar Cortex Is Organized Into Three 
Functionally Specialized Layers
The Climbing-Fiber and Mossy-Fiber Afferent Systems 
Encode and Process Information Differently
The Cerebellar Microcircuit Architecture Suggests a 
Canonical Computation
The Cerebellum Is Hypothesized to Perform Several  
General Computational Functions
The Cerebellum Contributes to Feedforward 
Sensorimotor Control
The Cerebellum  incorporates an Internal Model of the 
Motor Apparatus
The Cerebellum Integrates Sensory Inputs and  
Corollary Discharge
The Cerebellum Contributes to Timing Control
The Cerebellum Participates in Motor Skill Learning
Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic  
Efficacy of Parallel Fibers


