===== Page 1 =====
1012    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–1  (Left) Set points, settling points, and 
homeostasis.
A. The set point view was inspired by engineering principles. 
As with a thermostat, constancy is achieved by providing feed-
back on the existing level of a parameter, determining how it 
compares to an idealized set point, and then instituting correc-
tive measures to return the parameter to the set point. While 
popular for many years, it has fallen out of favor as years of 
research have failed to uncover molecular and neural bases for 
encoding set points and performing error detection.
B. The settling point model was inspired by observations that 
many systems achieve constancy in the absence of any feed-
back or error detection. In this example, the level of outflow 
of water from a lake is proportional to the depth of the lake. 
When it rains, the increase or decrease in the level of the lake 
causes more or less water to flow out of the lake. The level 
of the lake remains fairly constant without a set point or error 
detection. A related example is regulation of body weight. 
Increased food intake leads to increased body weight. As 
body weight increases, the energy cost of carrying and sus-
taining that increased weight goes up. Because of this, body 
weight too should have its settling point. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Speakman et al. 2011.)
C. In this model the concepts of feedback in part A and set-
tling point in part B are combined. The apparent set point is 
in fact the settling point, an emergent property of multiple 
feedback-informed afferent/efferent loops.
physiological “set points” help control key parameters 
like body temperature, blood osmolarity, blood pres-
sure, and body fat content.
Set point models are appealing because thermo-
stats are so effective in maintaining room temperature 
at a targeted set point and, by analogy, physiological 
variables like body temperature are likewise tightly 
controlled. In such models, a “set point” exists for a 
A  Set point model
B  Settling point model
C  Combined model: settling point of multiple afferent/efferent loops
X
Y
Set point
Error
detector
Sensor
Effectors
Too high
Too low
+
–
Detectors
1
2
3
4
Neurons
Parameters
Behavioral
Physiologic 1
Physiologic 2
Effectors
Hypothalamus
Depth at outﬂow
Rain
Parameter
parameter, 37°C in the case of body temperature, and 
at any given moment, the real level of the parameter 
is assessed and compared with the targeted set point 
through feedback and error detection (Figure 41–1A). 
Any deviation above or below triggers counteracting 
corrective responses—if too hot, cutaneous vasodila-
tation, sweating, and a dip in the pool; if too cold, 
vasoconstriction, thermogenesis, shivering, and the 
donning of a sweater. For regulation of body tempera-
ture, the set point and detection of error were histori-
cally seen as emergent properties of neurons in the 
preoptic area of the hypothalamus (POA).
Over time, the set point model required revision 
because intensive investigation failed to uncover any 
molecular or neuronal bases for encoding set points 
and performing error detection. In addition, “set 
point–like” regulation can, in principle, be achieved 
without a set point, feedback, or error detection—the 
so-called “settling point” model (Figure 41–1B). Con-
sider the changing level of a lake. When rainfall is 
excessive, its level rises; the rivers draining the lake 
rise and their flow increases. The converse is true when 
rainfall is low. The changing flow of the rivers draining 
the lake thus maintains its level near a settling point 
without requiring an idealized set point, feedback, 
or error detection. While aspects of the settling point 
model have appeal, it too is incomplete because home-
ostatic processes clearly receive important feedback 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1013
Table 41–1  The Hypothalamus Integrates Behavioral 
(Somatomotor), Autonomic, and Neuroendocrine 
Responses Involved in Six Vital Functions
1.  Blood pressure and electrolyte composition. The hypo-
thalamus regulates thirst, salt appetite, and drinking 
behavior; autonomic control of vasomotor tone; and the 
release of hormones such as vasopressin (via the para-
ventricular nucleus).
2.  Energy metabolism. The hypothalamus regulates hun-
ger and feeding behavior, the autonomic control of 
digestion, and the release of hormones such as gluco-
corticoids, growth hormone, and thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (via the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei).
3.  Reproductive (sexual and parental) behaviors. The hypothal-
amus controls autonomic modulation of the reproduc-
tive organs and endocrine regulation of the gonads (via 
the medial preoptic, ventromedial, and ventral premam-
millary nuclei).
4.  Body temperature. The hypothalamus influences ther-
moregulatory behavior (seeking a warmer or cooler 
environment), controls autonomic body heat conserva-
tion/loss mechanisms, and controls secretion of hor-
mones that influence metabolic rate (via the preoptic 
region).
5.  Defensive behavior. The hypothalamus regulates the 
stress response and fight-or-flight response to threats 
in the environment such as predators (via the paraven-
tricular, anterior hypothalamic, and dorsal premammil-
lary nuclei, and the lateral hypothalamic area).
6.  Sleep–wake cycle. The hypothalamus regulates the sleep–
wake cycle (via a circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus) and levels of arousal when awake (via the lat-
eral hypothalamic area and tuberomammillary nucleus).
regarding disturbances, and this feedback produces 
vital responses that hasten recovery. As we shall see, 
temperature, osmolarity, and body fat are directly or 
indirectly “sensed,” and this affects the activity of neu-
rons in the hypothalamus that generate counteracting 
responses.
Most physiologists today have adopted a “distrib-
uted settling point” model that incorporates strong 
feedback control of multiple sensory/effector loops 
(Figure 41–1C). With body temperature, for example, 
there is no single specific set point and no location 
in the brain where a single set point is encoded and 
error detection takes place; in short, there is no thermo-
stat. Instead, there are multiple temperature detectors 
located in different sites (skin, core, and brain), and 
each is coupled through neuronal pathways that trav-
erse the preoptic area on their way to different body 
temperature effectors (cutaneous blood vessels, sweat 
glands, brown fat metabolism, shivering and behav-
ioral pathways). When engaged, each of these effectors 
impact body temperature. The apparent set point for 
body temperature is in fact the emergent settling point 
that results from the combined activities of the multiple 
feedback-informed afferent/efferent loops. As we will 
see later, this nuanced model also applies to regulation 
of blood pressure, blood osmolarity, and body fat.
The Hypothalamus Coordinates  
Homeostatic Regulation
The hypothalamus integrates the status of physiologi-
cal parameters with outputs to behavioral, autonomic, 
and neuroendocrine motor systems and thereby regu-
lates six vital physiological functions (Table 41–1). The 
hypothalamus lies at the base of the brain immediately 
above the pituitary gland (Figure 41–2). It is bounded 
anteriorly (rostrally) by the diagonal band of Broca; 
dorsally by the anterior commissure, the bed nuclei 
of the stria terminalis, the zona incerta, and thalamus; 
and posteriorly (caudally) by the ventral tegmental 
area and interpeduncular nucleus.
The Hypothalamus Is Commonly Divided Into 
Three Rostrocaudal Regions
Regions of the hypothalamus are named according 
to their location and appearance in Nissl-stained sec-
tions. The hypothalamus is divided, rostral to cau-
dal, into three regions. (1) The preoptic hypothalamus 
lies above the optic chiasm and contains neurons that 
control water balance and thirst, temperature, sleep, 
sexual behavior, and circadian rhythms. (2) The tuberal 
hypothalamus lies above the pituitary and contains neu-
rons controlling pituitary hormone secretion, autonomic 
outflow, and various behaviors including hunger, sexual 
behavior, and aggression. (3) The posterior hypothalamus 
includes the posterior and mammillary nuclei, as well as 
histaminergic neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus 
that affect arousal. The functions of other neurons in the 
posterior hypothalamus areas are less well defined.
The lateral hypothalamic area (LHA) spans from the 
middle to the caudal hypothalamus. It is linked more 
closely to reward pathways and arousal than to main-
tenance of homeostasis and specific survival behav-
iors. Indeed, it is heavily connected with the nucleus 
accumbens and ventral tegmental area, two areas 
involved in reward (Chapter 43), and contains neurons 
that project extensively throughout the cortex. Lastly, 
LHA neurons expressing the neuropeptide orexin 
(hypocretin) play a critical role in stabilizing wakeful-
ness (Chapter 44).


===== Page 3 =====
1014    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion and Feeling
Figure 41–2  The structure of the hypothalamus.
A. Frontal view of the hypothalamus (section along plane A 
shown in the sagittal view of the brain, upper right). The third 
ventricle is in the midline; the paraventricular, dorsomedial, 
and arcuate nuclei adjacent to the ventricle form the neuroen-
docrine motor zone and periventricular region at this level. 
The ventromedial nucleus is part of the medial column of 
hypothalamic nuclei, and the lateral hypothalamic area is the 
lateral zone component represented in the part of the hypo-
thalamus shown here.
B. Sagittal (rostrocaudal) view of the medial column of hypotha-
lamic nuclei, showing the adjacent (caudal) substantia nigra and 
ventral tegmental area of the midbrain. The functional signifi-
cance of key hypothalamic nuclei is summarized in Table 41–1.
Dorsomedial
hypothalamic
nucleus
A  Frontal section
B  Sagittal section
Paraventricular
nucleus
Optic tract
Third
ventricle
Fornix
Lateral
hypothalamic
area
Supraoptic
nucleus
Amygdala
Arcuate
nucleus
Median
eminence
Ventromedial
hypothalamic
nucleus
Mammillothalamic tract
B
A
Plane of frontal section of ﬁgure A
Ventral tegmental
area
Mammillary body
Dorsal premammillary 
nucleus
Substantia nigra
Ventral 
premammillary 
nucleus
Pituitary
Infundibulum
(pituitary stalk)
Anterior commissure
Subfornical organ
Vascular organ of the
lamina terminalis
Medial preoptic nucleus
Anterior hypothalamic nucleus
Ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1015
Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Link 
Interoceptive Sensory Feedback With Outputs  
That Control Adaptive Behaviors and  
Physiological Responses
General principles of hypothalamic function have 
emerged over several decades. Neurons in the periph-
ery and brain respond when parameters under homeo-
static control are disturbed. Such neurons can respond 
directly to the stimulus or indirectly to changes in 
hormones and other factors that track the regulated 
parameter. This sensory information is then relayed 
to functionally appropriate regulatory neurons in a 
particular site (or sites) within the hypothalamus. 
Once the information is integrated by hypothalamic 
neurons, the results are then conveyed downstream 
to motor circuits that control specific behaviors and 
physiological responses. The result is a coordinated 
corrective response (eg, warmth-seeking plus heat pro-
duction and retention, thirst plus water retention by the 
kidney, or hunger plus decreased energy expenditure).
Our understanding of the functions of hypo-
thalamic neurons has been refined recently using 
optogenetic and chemogenetic techniques in active 
animals. By selectively activating subsets of hypo-
thalamic neurons, one can evoke specific behaviors 
and physiological responses, even when the need is 
totally absent. Key regulatory neurons for body tem-
perature are located in the median preoptic nucleus 
(MnPO). Water balance is regulated by neurons in 
three sites—the MnPO, the vascular organ of the 
lamina terminalis (OVLT), and the subfornical organ 
(SFO)—and energy balance by neurons in the arcuate 
nucleus (Figure 41–2A).
Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Also 
Receive Descending Feedforward Input Regarding 
Anticipated Homeostatic Challenges
In addition to input from sensory signals that provide 
important feedback regarding the status of the body, 
key regulatory neurons in the hypothalamus receive 
“top-down” feedforward inputs from neurons that 
anticipate future homeostatic challenges. For exam-
ple, when food-deprived animals detect cues that 
predict the availability of food, there is a rapid drop 
in the firing of hunger-promoting neurons in the 
arcuate nucleus even before food is ingested. Such 
top-down feedforward control prepares the body 
for anticipated homeostatic challenges. In addition, 
such rapid regulation, by countering an aversive 
state represented by high activity in deficiency-
driven neurons, could be important for motivating 
deficiency-based behaviors such as thirst and hun-
ger (discussed below).
Next, we examine two effectors arms of the hypo-
thalamus—the autonomic motor system and the neu-
roendocrine system.
The Autonomic System Links the Brain to 
Physiological Responses
Although the autonomic motor system implements 
many of the physiological responses initiated by the 
hypothalamus, the autonomic system is also regulated 
by circuits in the brain stem and spinal cord (Chapter 40). 
As a consequence, autonomic functions vary in their 
dependence on the hypothalamus. For example, mictu-
rition is largely independent of the hypothalamus, while 
blood pressure regulation depends heavily on circuits in 
the brain stem but can also be modulated by the hypo-
thalamus. In contrast, thermogenesis by brown adipose 
tissue is largely subservient to the hypothalamus.
Visceral Motor Neurons in the Autonomic System 
Are Organized Into Ganglia
Unlike the somatic motor system, in which motor neu-
rons are located in the ventral spinal cord and brain 
stem, the cell bodies of autonomic motor neurons are 
found in enlargements of peripheral nerves called 
ganglia.1 The autonomic motor neurons innervate 
secretory epithelial cells in glands, smooth and cardiac 
muscle, and adipose tissue.
Efforts to understand the principles of organiza-
tion of autonomic ganglia began in 1880 in England 
with the work of Walter Gaskell and were later contin-
ued by John N. Langley. They stimulated autonomic 
nerves and observed the responses of end organs (eg, 
vasoconstriction, piloerection, sweating, pupillary 
constriction). They used nicotine to block signals from 
individual ganglia to test interactions between ganglia. 
Langley proposed that specific chemical substances 
must be released by preganglionic neurons of the auto-
nomic ganglia and that these substances act by bind-
ing to receptors on the postganglionic neurons, which 
target the end organs. These ideas set the stage for the 
later investigations of chemical synaptic transmission. 
1The peripheral nerves also have sensory ganglia, located on the dor-
sal roots of the spinal cord and on five of the cranial nerves: trigemi-
nal (V), facial (VII), vestibulocochlear (VIII), glossopharyngeal (IX), 
and vagus (X) (Chapter 40).


===== Page 5 =====
1016    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–3  Distinct cell types in peripheral 
autonomic pathways selectively control target 
cells with different phenotypes. Autonomic 
motor neurons lie outside the central nervous 
system in ganglia controlled by preganglionic 
neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem. These 
downstream neurons within parasympathetic and 
sympathetic ganglia regulate three types of effec-
tor cells: smooth muscle, gland cells, and cardiac 
muscle. Additionally, downstream neurons found 
only in sympathetic ganglia selectively control 
brown adipocytes and immune cells in lymphoid 
tissue. This figure illustrates the three basic cell 
types—preganglionic neurons, downstream gangli-
onic neurons, and different target effector cells—
that control function.
Langley also distinguished the autonomic and somatic 
motor systems and in so doing, created much of our 
current nomenclature.
The autonomic system is divided into three divi-
sions: sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric. All 
neurons in sympathetic and parasympathetic gan-
glia are controlled by preganglionic neurons whose cell 
bodies are located in the spinal cord and brain stem. 
The preganglionic neurons synthesize and release 
the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh), which acts 
on nicotinic ACh receptors on postganglionic neurons, 
producing fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials and 
initiating action potentials that propagate to synapses 
with effector cells in end organs (Figure 41–3). The sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic systems are differenti-
ated by five criteria:
1.	 The segmental organization of their preganglionic 
neurons in the spinal cord and brain stem
2.	 The peripheral locations of their ganglia
3.	 The types and locations of end organs they innervate
4.	 The effects they produce on end organs
5.	 The neurotransmitters employed by their post-
ganglionic neurons
Preganglionic Neurons Are Localized in Three 
Regions Along the Brain Stem and Spinal Cord
The parasympathetic pathways arise from a cranial 
nerve zone in the brain stem and a second zone in 
sacral segments of the spinal cord (Figure 41–4). These 
parasympathetic zones surround a sympathetic zone 
that extends continuously in thoracic and lumbar seg-
ments of the cord.
Smooth 
muscle
cell
Gland 
cell
Cardiac 
muscle
cell
Brown
adipocytes
Brain stem and 
spinal cord
Preganglionic
neurons
Postganglionic
neurons
Sympathetic and
parasympathetic
ganglia
Effector cells
The cranial parasympathetic pathways arise from 
preganglionic neurons in the general visceral motor 
nuclei of four cranial nerves: the oculomotor (N. III) in 
the midbrain and the facial (N. VII), glossopharyngeal 
(N. IX), and vagus (N. X) in the medulla. The cranial 
parasympathetic nuclei are described in Chapter 40 
together with the mixed cranial nerves (eg, the facial, 
glossopharyngeal, and vagus). The spinal parasympa-
thetic pathway originates in preganglionic neurons in 
sacral segments S2–S4. Their cell bodies are located in 
intermediate regions of the gray matter, and their axons 
project in peripheral nerves through the ventral roots.
The sympathetic preganglionic cell column extends 
between the cervical and lumbosacral enlargements of 
the spinal cord, corresponding to the first thoracic seg-
ment and third lumbar segment (Figure 41–4). Most of 
the cell bodies of sympathetic preganglionic neurons 
are located in the intermediolateral cell column; others are 
found in the central autonomic area surrounding the 
central canal and in a band connecting the central area 
with the intermediolateral cell column. The axons of 
preganglionic sympathetic neurons project from the 
spinal cord through the nearest ventral root and then 
run with small connecting nerves known as rami com-
municantes before terminating on postganglionic cells 
in the paravertebral sympathetic chain (Figure 41–5).
Sympathetic Ganglia Project to Many Targets 
Throughout the Body
The sympathetic motor system regulates systemic 
physiological parameters such as blood pressure and 
body temperature by influencing target cells within vir-
tually every tissue throughout the body (Figure 41–4). 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1017
Figure 41–4  Sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions 
of the autonomic motor system.  The sympathetic ganglia lie 
close to the spinal column and supply virtually every tissue in 
the body. Some tissues, such as skeletal muscle, are regulated 
only indirectly through their arterial blood supply. The parasym-
pathetic ganglia are located near their targets, which do not 
include the skin or skeletal muscle.
Brown
adipose
tissue
Midbrain
Sympathetic division
Parasympathetic division
Superior cervical
ganglion
Ciliary ganglion
Otic ganglion
Esophagus
and lungs
Stomach
Pancreas
Small
intestine
Large intestine,
rectum
Bladder
Pelvic nerve
leading to
pelvic ganglia
Reproductive
organs
Adrenal medulla
Bronchi
Heart
Spleen,
Kidneys
Eye
Lacrimal and
salivary glands
Pterygopalatine and submaxillary ganglion
III
VII
IX
X
Superior
mesenteric
ganglion
Sympathetic
chain
Inferior
mesenteric
ganglion
Middle cervical
ganglion
Stellate
ganglion
Celiac
ganglion
Pons
Medulla
Piloerector
muscle
Skin
Arteries
in striated
muscle
Artery
Sweat
glands
Cervical
Cranial
nerves
Thoracic
Lumbar
Sacral
Liver
Gall bladder
This regulation depends on synaptic input from the 
spinal cord and from supraspinal structures that control 
the activity of the preganglionic neurons.
Important groups of supraspinal neurons that 
excite preganglionic sympathetic activity are located in 
the rostral ventrolateral medulla, the raphe pallidus in 
the brain stem, and the paraventricular nucleus in the 
hypothalamus. Preganglionic neurons integrate these 
descending inputs along with local segmental sensory 
inputs and form synapses with neurons in paraverte-
bral and prevertebral sympathetic ganglia (Figure 41–5).
Ganglionic neurons in turn form synapses with a 
variety of end organs, including blood vessels, heart, 
bronchial airways, piloerector muscles, brown fat, and 
salivary and sweat glands. Sympathetic neurons also 
regulate immune function through projections to pri-
mary lymphoid tissue in the bone marrow and thymus 
and to secondary lymphoid cells in the spleen. A sub-
set of preganglionic neurons synapse on chromaffin 
cells in the medulla of the adrenal gland (Figure 41–5), 
which secrete epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepi-
nephrine (noradrenaline) into the circulation as hor-
mones to act on distant targets.
The paravertebral and prevertebral sympathetic 
ganglia differ in both location and organization. 
Paravertebral ganglia are distributed segmentally, 


===== Page 7 =====
1018    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–5  The sympathetic outflow is organized into 
groups of paravertebral and prevertebral ganglia.  The 
axons of preganglionic cells in the spinal cord reach postgan-
glionic neurons by way of ventral roots and the paraverte-
bral sympathetic chain. The axons either form synapses on 
postganglionic neurons in paravertebral ganglia or project out 
of the chain into splanchnic nerves. Preganglionic axons in the 
splanchnic nerves form synapses with postganglionic neurons 
in prevertebral ganglia and with chromaffin cells in the adrenal 
medulla.
Chromafﬁn cells in
the adrenal medulla 
Prevertebral 
ganglion
Dorsal root 
ganglion
Ventral root
Dorsal root
Spinal Cord
Postganglionic ﬁbers 
to effector organs
Postganglionic ﬁbers 
to effector organs
Spinal 
nerve
Paravertebral 
ganglion
Intermediolateral
cell column 
Ramus 
communicantes
Central 
autonomic 
area
Splanchnic 
nerve
Paravertebral 
sympathetic chain
extending bilaterally as two chains from the first cer-
vical segment to the last sacral segment. The chains 
lie lateral to the vertebral column at its ventral mar-
gin and generally contain one ganglion per segment  
(Figures 41–4 and 41–5). Two important exceptions are 
the superior cervical and stellate ganglia. The supe-
rior cervical ganglion is a coalescence of several cer-
vical ganglia and supplies sympathetic innervation 
to the entire head, including the cerebral vasculature. 
The stellate ganglion, which innervates the heart and 
lungs, is a coalescence of ganglia from lower cervical 
segments and the first thoracic segment. These sympa-
thetic pathways have an orderly somatotopic relation 
to one another from their segmental origin in pregan-
glionic neurons to their terminus in peripheral targets.
The prevertebral ganglia are midline struc-
tures that lie close to the arteries for which they are 
named (Figures 41–4 and 41–5). In addition to sending 
sympathetic signals to visceral organs in the abdomen 
and pelvis, these ganglia also receive sensory feedback 
from their end organs.
Parasympathetic Ganglia Innervate Single Organs
In contrast to sympathetic ganglia, which regulate 
many targets and lie some distance from their targets 
close to the spinal cord, parasympathetic ganglia gen-
erally innervate single end organs and lie near to or 
within the end organs they regulate (Figure 41–4). In 
addition, the parasympathetic system does not influ-
ence lymphoid tissue, skin, or skeletal muscle except 
in the head, where it regulates vascular beds in the jaw, 
lip, and tongue.
The cranial and sacral parasympathetic ganglia 
innervate different targets. The cranial outflow includes 
four ganglia in the head (Chapter 40). The oculomotor 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1019
(III) nerve projects to the ciliary ganglion, which con-
trols pupillary size and focus by innervating the iris 
and ciliary muscles. The facial (VII) nerve and a small 
component of the glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve project 
to the pterygopalatine (or sphenopalatine) ganglion, 
which promotes production of tears by the lacrimal 
glands and mucus by the nasal and palatine glands. 
Cranial nerve IX and a small component of nerve VII 
project to the otic ganglion. Its postganglionic neurons 
innervate the parotid, the largest salivary gland. Nerve 
VII also projects to the submandibular ganglion, which 
controls secretion of saliva by the submaxillary and 
sublingual glands.
The vagus (X) nerve projects broadly to parasym-
pathetic ganglia in the heart, lungs, liver, gallbladder, 
and pancreas. It also projects to the stomach, small 
intestine, and more rostral segments of the gastroin-
testinal tract. The caudal parasympathetic outflow 
supplies the large intestine, rectum, bladder, and 
reproductive organs.
The Enteric Ganglia Regulate the  
Gastrointestinal Tract
The entire gastrointestinal tract, from the esopha-
gus to the rectum—and including the pancreas and  
gallbladder—is controlled by the system of enteric 
ganglia. This system, by far the largest and most com-
plex division of the autonomic nervous system, con-
tains as many as 100 million neurons.
The enteric system has been studied most exten-
sively in the small intestine of the guinea pig. Its activ-
ity is coordinated by two interconnected plexuses, 
small islands of interconnected neurons. The myen-
teric plexus controls smooth muscle movements of the 
gastrointestinal tract; the submucous plexus controls 
mucosal function (Figure 41–6). Working together, this 
distributed network of ganglia coordinates the orderly 
peristaltic propulsion of gastrointestinal contents and 
controls the secretions of the stomach and intestines 
and other components of digestion. In addition, the 
enteric system regulates local blood flow and also 
immune function in Peyer’s patches. The enteric sys-
tem is modulated by external inputs from sympathetic 
prevertebral ganglia and from parasympathetic com-
ponents of the vagus nerve.
Unlike the sympathetic and parasympathetic divi-
sions of the autonomic system, the enteric plexus con-
tains interneurons and sensory neurons in addition 
to motor neurons. This intrinsic neural circuitry can 
maintain the basic functions of the gut even after the 
splanchnic sympathetic and vagal parasympathetic 
pathways are cut. Through splanchnic nerves and the 
afferent portion of the vagus nerve, the gastrointes-
tinal tract also sends sensory information about the 
physiological status of the tract to the spinal cord 
and brain stem.
Acetylcholine and Norepinephrine Are the Principal 
Transmitters of Autonomic Motor Neurons
All preganglionic neurons in the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic systems use ACh as their excita-
tory neurotransmitter, activating ionotropic nicotinic 
ACh receptors on ganglionic neurons. These receptors 
resemble those at the neuromuscular junction in hav-
ing nonselective cation pores, but they are encoded by 
different genes.
Activation of the ganglionic neurons triggers 
action potentials that propagate to postganglionic 
synapses with end organs in the periphery. At these 
end organ synapses, parasympathetic neurons release 
ACh, which activates muscarinic G protein–coupled 
receptors; sympathetic neurons release norepineph-
rine, which activates α- and β-adrenergic G protein–
coupled receptors. The postsynaptic action can be 
either excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the type 
of target cell and its receptors (Table 41–2). Notable 
exceptions to this organization are the sympathetic 
postganglionic neurons that control sweat glands. 
They assume a cholinergic phenotype after birth.
In addition to acting on different receptors in dif-
ferent postsynaptic cells, one transmitter can activate 
different receptor types in the same postsynaptic cell. 
This principle was first discovered in sympathetic gan-
glia where ACh activates both nicotinic and muscarinic 
postsynaptic receptors to produce both a fast and slow 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (Figure 41–7A and 
Chapter 14). In some cases, one transmitter can acti-
vate both a postsynaptic receptor as well as a receptor 
on the presynaptic terminals from which the transmit-
ter was released. Such presynaptic responses can cause 
either presynaptic inhibition or presynaptic facilitation 
(Figure 41–7B and Chapter 15). This specialization of 
synaptic transmission in sympathetic and parasympa-
thetic neurons leads to functional diversity in the regu-
lation of end organ function.
Cholinergic and adrenergic synaptic transmission 
in the peripheral autonomic motor system is often 
modulated by the co-release of various neuropep-
tides, nitric oxide, or adenosine triphosphate, which 
by activating multiple receptor types further con-
tribute to functional diversity (Table 41–2 and Figure 
41–7C). The motor responses elicited in end organs 
depend on the identity of the postganglionic neuro-
transmitters and the pre- and postsynaptic receptors 


===== Page 9 =====
1020    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Submucosal
artery
Muscularis
mucosae
Mucosal
plexus
Mucosa
Longitudinal
plexus
Deep
muscular
plexus
Circular
smooth
muscle
Myenteric
plexus
B  Layers of wall
Myenteric
plexus
Submucous
plexus
C  Laminar distribution of neurons within the intestinal wall
To prevertebral 
sympathetic ganglia
Mucosa
Deep muscular plexus
Extrinsic sympathetic and 
parasympathetic afferents
ACh, ATP, NO, VIP
NO, VIP, ATP
ACh,  5-HT
ACh, VIP, 
CCK, ENK
ACh, Tk
(+)
(–)
ACh, Tk, ENK
ACh, Tk
ACh, Tk
Oral
Entero-endocrine cells
ACh, Tk
Gland
(–)
ACh, DYN
ACh, NPY, CCK, 
CGRP, SOM
Arteriole
(+)
VIP, PACAP, GAL
NO, VIP, ATP
ACh, SOM
Myenteric 
plexus
Circular 
smooth
muscle
Submucous 
plexus
Anal
Longitudinal 
smooth
muscle
Submucous
plexus
Motor 
neuron
Sensory 
neuron
Interneuron
Mucosa
A  Cross section of intestinal wall
Extrinsic efferent 
and afferent nerves 
and vasculature
Figure 41–6  Organization of the enteric plexuses in the 
guinea pig.  The myenteric plexus and submucous plexus lie 
between the layers of intestinal wall (A and B). At least 14 types 
of neurons have been identified within the enteric system based 
on morphology, chemical coding, and functional properties (C). 
Four sets of motor neurons provide excitatory (+) and inhibitory 
(–) inputs to two smooth muscle layers. Three additional groups 
of motor neurons control secretions from the mucosa and pro-
duce vasodilation. The network also includes two major classes 
of intrinsic sensory neurons. (Abbreviations: ACh, acetylcholine; 
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CCK, cholecystokinin; CGRP, 
calcitonin gene-related polypeptide; DYN, dynorphin; ENK, 
enkephalin; GAL, galanin; NO, nitric oxide; NPY, neuropeptide 
Y; PACAP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; SOM, 
somatostatin; Tk, tachykinin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide; 
5-HT, serotonin.) (Parts A and B adapted, with permission, from 
Furness and Costa 1980; part C reproduced, with permission, 
from Furness et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 Elsevier Ltd.)


