===== Page 1 =====
428    Part IV / Perception
20 sec
10 s
10 cells
n = 213
Temp
Stroke
LTMR (stroke with)
LTMR (stroke with) + temp
Weak LTMR + temp
HTMR
Poymodal nociceptor
Thermoreceptor
LTMR (stroke against)
Temp
Pull
Pull
Stroke
Against
With
Against
With
n = 74
n = 10
n = 30
n = 4
n = 39
n = 24
n = 34
A1
B1
B2
B3
A2
A3
Hair pull
Hair pull
Heat (>40°C)
Heat/hair pull


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    429
information from the same region of the body, as well 
as some tactile information.
Somatosensory information from the limbs and 
trunk reaches the central nervous system through the 
31 spinal nerves, which enter the spinal cord through 
openings between the vertebrae of the spine. Individ-
ual spinal nerves are named for the vertebrae below 
the foramen through which they pass in cervical nerves 
or for the foramen above their entry point in thoracic, 
lumbar, and sacral nerves.
Somatosensory information from the head and 
neck is transmitted through the trigeminal, facial, glos-
sopharyngeal, and vagus nerves, which enter through 
openings in the cranium. The trigeminal nerve conveys 
somatosensory information from the lips, mouth, cor-
nea, and skin on the anterior half of the head, as well 
as the muscles of mastication. The facial and glos-
sopharyngeal nerves innervate the taste buds of the 
tongue, the skin of the ear, and some of the skin of the 
tongue and pharynx. The glossopharyngeal and vagus 
nerves provide some cutaneous information, but their 
main sensory role is visceral. Vagal afferents regulating 
respiration and those regulating gastric motility project 
to distinct regions of the nucleus of the solitary tract.
Each spinal or cranial nerve receives sensory inputs 
from a particular region of the body called a dermatome 
(Figure 18–13); the muscles innervated by motor fib-
ers in the corresponding peripheral nerve constitute a 
myotome. These are the skin and muscle regions affected 
by damage to peripheral nerves. Because the dermato-
mes overlap, three adjacent spinal nerves often have 
to be blocked to anesthetize a particular area of skin. 
The distribution of spinal nerves in the body forms the 
anatomical basis of the topographic maps of sensory 
receptors in the brain that underlie our ability to local-
ize specific sensations.
Individual spinal or cranial nerve fibers terminate on 
neurons in specific zones of the spinal cord gray matter 
or the medullary dorsal horn (Figure 18–14). The spinal 
neurons that receive sensory input are either interneu-
rons, which terminate upon other spinal neurons within 
the same or neighboring segments, or projection neu-
rons, which serve as the cells of origin of major ascend-
ing pathways to higher centers in the brain.
The spinal gray matter is subdivided anatomi-
cally into 10 laminae (or layers), numbered I to X from 
dorsal to ventral, based on differences in cell and fiber 
composition. As a general rule, the largest fibers (Aα) 
terminate in or near the ventral horn, the medium-
size fibers (Aβ) from the skin and muscle terminate in 
intermediate layers of the dorsal horn, and the smallest 
fibers (Aδ and C) terminate in the most dorsal portion 
of the spinal gray matter.
Lamina I consists of a thin layer of neurons cap-
ping the dorsal horn of the spinal cord and pars cauda-
lis of the spinal trigeminal nucleus. Individual neurons 
of lamina I receive monosynaptic inputs from small 
myelinated fibers (Aδ) or unmyelinated C fibers of a 
Figure 18–12  (Opposite) The distribution of somatosensory 
modalities among trigeminal ganglion neurons that inner-
vate the hairy skin of the face. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Ghitani et al. 2017.)
A. In vivo epifluorescent imaging of a trigeminal ganglion in a 
TRPV1-GCaMP6f–expressing mouse. Calcium-sensitive dyes 
(GCaMP6f) fluoresce in response to Ca2+ entry through voltage-
gated channels in individual trigeminal ganglion neurons. A1. 
Anatomical positions of 213 GCaMP6f-expressing neurons in 
the trigeminal ganglion of a mouse. Scale bar = 500 μm. These 
neurons are widely distributed within the trigeminal ganglion. 
A2. Higher magnification images of calcium signals in a subset 
of neurons that respond to heat pulses >40°C or to hair pull; 
the color bar in the left image indicates the strength of the 
calcium signal in each neuron. The strongest activity is shown 
in white or red; the weakest response in blue. Scale bar = 
100 μm. A3. An overlay of the two population maps labeled in 
pseudocolor (red for heat, green for hair pulling) shows which 
neurons responded to each stimulus. These neurons were usu-
ally selective for heat or hair pull, but two responded to both 
modalities (yellow).
B. Quantification of the responses of all TRPV1-expressing 
neurons visualized in this trigeminal ganglion to various modes 
of tactile, noxious, and thermal stimuli. B1. Heatmap of the 
simultaneously recorded responses of all 213 labeled neurons 
to stroking the cheek, noxious mechanical (hair pull), and ther-
mal stimuli. Each row illustrates the response of an individual 
neuron to these stimuli; the pixel color indicates the strength 
of each neuron’s response (Δf/F). (Color range = 10%–60% 
Δf/F.) Neuronal responses are ordered vertically by the temporal 
onset of increased firing rates. The symbols above the heat 
map indicate the type and sequence of stimulation: stroking 
the cheek with or against the direction of hair growth, hair 
pull, and thermal stimuli ranging from 25°C to 47°C to 12°C. 
Although more than half of these neurons responded to 
gentle touch (stroking), they generally responded more vigor-
ously to noxious mechanical stimuli (hair pull) than to stroking 
the skin. The strongest responses were observed to noxious 
heat, but such neurons composed only 30% of the popula-
tion studied. At the end of the experiment, records from 
each neuron were sorted into one of the seven response 
categories identified in B2. B2. Averaged response amplitude 
and time course of Ca2+ signals for the seven categories of 
trigeminal sensory responses. Note the polymodal nature of 
responses using this objective mode of neuronal classifica-
tion. (Abbreviations: LTMR, low-threshold mechanoreceptor; 
HTMR, high-threshold nociceptor-mechanoreceptor.) B3.  
Pie charts illustrate the number and fraction of neurons in 
each category.


===== Page 3 =====
430    Part IV / Perception
Figure 18–13  The distribution of dermatomes in the 
spinal cord and brain stem. A dermatome is the area of 
skin and deeper tissues innervated by a single dorsal root 
or branch of the trigeminal nerve. The dermatomes of the 
31 pairs of dorsal root nerves are projected onto the surface 
of the body and labeled by the foramen through which each 
nerve enters the spinal cord. The 8 cervical (C), 12 thoracic 
(T), 5 lumbar (L), 5 sacral (S), and single coccygeal roots are 
numbered rostrocaudally for each division of the vertebral 
column. The facial skin, cornea, scalp, dura, and intraoral 
regions are innervated by the ophthalmic (I), maxillary (II), 
and mandibular (III) divisions of the trigeminal nerve  
(cranial nerve V). Level C1 has no dorsal root, only a ventral 
(or motor) root. Dermatome maps provide an important diag-
nostic tool for localizing the site of injury to the spinal cord 
and dorsal roots. However, the boundaries of the dermato-
mes are less distinct than shown here because the axons 
comprising a dorsal root originate from several different 
peripheral nerves, and each peripheral nerve contributes  
fibers to several adjacent dorsal roots.
Area innervated by
trigeminal nerve
Area innervated by
trigeminal nerve
I
II
III
S1
S1
S1
L5
L5
L4
L4
L3
L3
L2
L2
L1
L1
S3
S4
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
C4
C5
C5
C6
C7
C7
C6
C8
C8
T1
T1
C3
C3
C2
C2
C2
C3
C4
T2
C5
C5
C5
C6
C6
C6
C8
C8
C7
C7
T1
T1
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
S3
L3
L4
L4
S1
S1
L5
L5
S5
S4
S1
S1
S2
III
I
II
S1
L5
L5
L4
L4
L5
S2
S2
single type (Figure 18–14) and therefore transmit infor-
mation about noxious, thermal, or visceral stimuli. 
Inputs from warm, cold, itch, and pain receptors have 
been identified in lamina I, and some neurons have 
unique cellular morphologies that correlate with sen-
sory modalities. Lamina I neurons generally have 
small receptive fields localized to one dermatome.
Neurons in lamina II are interneurons that receive 
inputs from Aδ and C fibers and make excitatory or 
inhibitory connections to neurons in laminae I, IV, 
and V that project to higher brain centers. The more 
superficial portion of lamina II receives input from 
peptidergic nociceptors that release substance P or 
CGRP together with glutamate at their central syn-
apses. Fibers terminating in the deeper part of lamina II 
are purinergic; they release ATP at their central syn-
apses and express the lectin IB4. Co-transmitters such 
as ATP provide useful immunostaining markers for 
identifying specific classes of sensory nerve fibers 
(Figure 18–2C,D).


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    431
Neurons in laminae III to V are the main targets 
of LTMRs, particularly the large myelinated sensory 
(Aβ) fibers from cutaneous mechanoreceptors (Figure 
18–14). Spinal cord circuits of the dorsal horn have 
been characterized anatomically and functionally by 
Victoria Abraira and David Ginty. These local spi-
nal networks enable sensory integration of multiple 
modalities within a local zone of the body, enabling 
motoneuron pools to react rapidly to local sensory 
feedback. Large-diameter fibers mediating touch (Aβ) 
or proprioception (Aα) also send ascending branches 
to the medulla through the dorsal columns or dorso-
lateral funiculi.
Additionally, neurons of the cerebral cortex project 
to the dorsal horn, permitting direct cortical regulation 
of local sensorimotor circuits and thus coordinating 
purposeful behaviors. These higher-order, top-down 
pathways are supplemented by intraspinal circuits 
Aδ ﬁber
C ﬁber
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
To brain stem
and thalamus
To thalamus
Aβ ﬁber
(mechanoreceptor)
Figure 18–14  Touch and pain fiber projections to the spi-
nal cord dorsal horn. The spinal gray matter in the dorsal 
horn and intermediate zone of the spinal cord is divided into 
six layers of cells (laminae I–VI), each with functionally distinct 
populations of neurons. Neurons in the marginal zone (lamina I) 
and in lamina II receive nociceptive or thermal inputs from 
receptors innervated by Aδ or C fibers. The zone for inputs 
from low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMR) is located 
below lamina II and spans laminae III to V, with the smallest 
fibers (C-LTMRs) located dorsally, and the largest fibers  
(Aβ LTMRs) terminating ventrally. LTMRs innervating a 
particular patch of skin are aligned to form a narrow cell col-
umn in the spinal dorsal horn, terminating on spinal interneu-
rons or on projection neurons that send their axons to the 
brain stem. The medial-lateral arrangement of spinal nerves 
in the dorsal horn provides a somatotopic representation of 
adjacent skin areas in the body. The spinal nerve projections 
of Aβ LTMRs extend to multiple spinal segments along the 
rostrocaudal axis, whereas those of Aδ or C fibers are more 
localized to the immediate entry segment (not shown).  
Aβ LTMRs also send branches to the dorsal column nuclei in 
the brain stem (Chapters 19 and 20).
between dermatomes that enable coordinated move-
ments of different fingers or distal and proximal joints.
Neurons in lamina V typically respond to more 
than one modality—low-threshold mechanical stimuli, 
visceral stimuli, or noxious stimuli—and are therefore 
named wide-dynamic-range neurons.
Many of the dorsal horn circuits also transmit 
somatosensory information directly to higher struc-
tures in the brain stem, such as the dorsal column, 
parabrachial, and raphe nuclei, and to the cerebellum 
or various thalamic nuclei.
Afferent C fibers from the viscera have wide-
spread projections in the spinal cord that terminate 
ipsilaterally in laminae I, II, V, and X; some also cross 
the midline and terminate in lamina V and X of the 
contralateral gray matter. The extensive spinal distri-
bution of visceral C fibers appears to be responsible 
for the poor localization of visceral pain sensations. 


===== Page 5 =====
432    Part IV / Perception
Afferent fibers from the pelvic viscera make important 
connections to cells in the central gray matter (lamina X) 
of spinal segments L5 and S1. Lamina X neurons in 
turn project their axons along the midline of the dorsal 
columns to the nucleus gracilis in a postsynaptic dor-
sal column pathway for visceral pain.
Primary afferent fibers that terminate in the deep-
est laminae in the ventral horn provide sensory infor-
mation from proprioceptors (muscle spindles and 
Golgi tendon organs) that is required for somatic motor 
control, such as spinal reflexes (Chapter 32).
Somatosensory information is conveyed by several 
ascending pathways to higher centers in the brain, par-
ticularly the thalamus and cerebral cortex. The dorsal 
column–medial lemniscal system transmits tactile and 
proprioceptive information to the thalamus (Chapter 19), 
and the spinothalamic (anterolateral) tract conveys 
pain and thermal information to the midbrain parabra-
chial nucleus or to the thalamus (Chapter 20). A third 
pathway, the dorsolateral tract, conveys somatosen-
sory information from the lower half of the body to 
the cerebellum. The anatomical and functional roles of 
these networks are described in detail in later chapters.
Highlights
1.	 The bodily senses mediate a wide range of experi-
ences that are important for normal bodily func-
tion and for survival. Although diverse, they 
share common pathways and common princi-
ples of organization. The most important of those 
principles is specificity: Each of the bodily senses 
arises from specific types of receptors distributed 
throughout the body.
2.	 Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons are the sen-
sory receptor cells of the somatosensory system. 
The functional role of an individual DRG neuron 
is determined by the sensory receptor molecules 
expressed in its distal terminals in the body. 
Mechanoreceptors are sensitive to specific aspects 
of local tissue distortion, thermoreceptors to par-
ticular temperature ranges and shifts in tempera-
ture, and chemoreceptors to particular molecular 
structures. Recordings of physiological responses 
from these neurons reveal the cellular and molec-
ular mechanisms underlying the senses of touch, 
pain, temperature, and proprioception, as well as 
visceral senses.
3.	 Mechanosensation is mediated by Piezo2 proteins 
that form ion channels in the axon terminals of 
DRG fibers sensitive to compression or stretch. 
These include touch fibers that innervate hair 
follicles or specialized epithelia such as Merkel 
cells, Meissner and Pacinian corpuscles, or Ruffini 
endings. Muscle stretch is signaled by intramuscu-
lar spindle receptors and contractile force by Golgi 
tendon organs. These receptors transmit sensory 
information via rapidly conducting Aα and Aβ 
peripheral nerve fibers.
4.	 Thermoreceptors are excited by transient receptor 
potential (TRP) ion channels in the axon terminals 
that are gated in response to local temperature 
gradients and respond selectively to particular 
ranges of temperature: cold, cool, warm, or hot. 
Chemoreceptors change their conductance when 
binding specific chemicals, both natural and exog-
enous, giving rise to sensations of pain, itch, or 
visceral function. Thermosensory and chemosen-
sory information is conveyed centrally via Aδ and 
C fiber pathways.
5.	 Activation of somatosensory receptors produces 
local depolarization of the distal nerve termi-
nals, called the receptor potential, whose amplitude 
is proportional to the strength of the stimulus. 
Receptor potentials are converted near the dis-
tal nerve terminals to trains of action potentials 
whose frequency is linked to the strength of the 
stimulus, much as synaptic potentials at synapses 
produce complex firing patterns in postsynaptic 
neurons.
6.	 Individual DRG neurons have multiple sensory 
endings in the skin, muscle, or viscera, forming 
complex receptive fields with overlapping territo-
ries. The combination of divergent distal terminals 
and innervation of sense organs by multiple axons 
enables redundant, parallel pathways for informa-
tion transmission to the brain.
7.	 The information transmitted from each type of 
somatosensory receptor in a particular part of the 
body is conveyed in discrete pathways to the spi-
nal cord or brain stem by the axons of DRG neu-
rons with cell bodies that generally lie in ganglia 
close to the point of entry. The axons are gathered 
together in peripheral nerves. Axon diameter and 
myelination, both of which determine the speed 
of action potential conduction, vary in different 
sensory pathways according to the need for rapid 
signaling.
8.	 When DRG axons enter the central nervous sys-
tem, they separate to terminate in distinct lay-
ers of the spinal cord gray matter and/or project 
directly to higher centers in the brain stem. These 
circuits form the foundation of five separate sen-
sory pathways with different properties. In three 
of those systems (the medial lemniscal, lamina I 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    433
spinothalamic, and solitary tract systems), the 
pathways for submodalities appear to be segre-
gated until they reach the cerebral cortex.
9.	 Future studies of the peripheral nervous system 
will likely engage high-resolution optical methods 
for identification of specific receptor classes in the 
DRG that are labeled with genetic markers. Func-
tional studies of these neurons will also employ 
optical imaging of entire sensory ganglia labeled 
with voltage-sensitive or calcium-sensitive fluo-
rescent dyes that enable quantitative temporal 
monitoring of ensemble responses to specific 
somatosensory modalities. These receptor neu-
rons will thereby be studied as identified physi-
ological populations rather than one at a time in 
isolation.
 Esther P. Gardner 
Selected Reading
Abraira VE, Ginty DD. 2013. The sensory neurons of touch. 
Neuron 79:618–639.
Abraira VE, Kuehn ED, Chirila AM, et al. 2017. The cellular 
and synaptic architecture of the mechanosensory dorsal 
horn. Cell 168:295–310.
Bautista DM, Siemens J, Glazer JM, et al. 2007. The menthol 
receptor TRPM8 is the principal detector of environmen-
tal cold. Nature 448:204–208.
Delmas P, Hao J, Rodat-Despoix L. 2011. Molecular mecha-
nisms of mechanotransduction in mammalian sensory 
neurons. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:139–153.
Dhaka A, Viswanath V, Patapoutian A. 2006. TRP ion chan-
nels and temperature sensation. Annu Rev Neurosci 
29:135–161.
Iggo A, Andres KH. 1982. Morphology of cutaneous recep-
tors. Annu Rev Neurosci 5:1–31.
Julius D. 2013. TRP channels and pain. Annu Rev Cell Dev 
Biol 29:355–384.
Kaas JH, Gardner EP (eds). 2008. The Senses: A Comprehensive 
Reference, Vol. 6, Somatosensation. Oxford: Elsevier.
LaMotte RH, Dong X, Ringkamp M. 2014. Sensory neurons 
and circuits mediating itch. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:19–31.
Lechner SG, Lewin GR. 2013. Hairy sensation. Physiology 
28:142–150.
Li L, Rutlin M, Abraira VE, et al. 2011. The functional organi-
zation of cutaneous low-threshold mechanosensory neu-
rons. Cell 147:1615–1627.
Patapoutian A, Tate S, Woolf CJ. 2009. Transient receptor 
potential channels: targeting pain at the source. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov 8:55–68.
Ranade SS, Syeda R, Patapoutian A. 2015. Mechanically acti-
vated ion channels. Neuron 87:1162–1179.
Vallbo ÅB, Hagbarth KE, Torebjörk HE, Wallin BG. 1979. 
Somatosensory, proprioceptive, and sympathetic activity 
in human peripheral nerves. Physiol Rev 59:919–957.
Vallbo ÅB, Hagbarth KE, Wallin BG. 2004. Microneurography: 
how the technique developed and its role in the investiga-
tion of the sympathetic nervous system. J Appl Physiol 
96:1262–1269.
References
Bai L, Lehnert BP, Liu J, et al. 2015. Genetic identification of 
an expansive mechanoreceptor sensitive to skin stroking. 
Cell 163:1783–1795.
Bandell M, Macpherson LJ, Patapoutian A. 2007. From chills 
to chilis: mechanisms for thermosensation and chemes-
thesis via thermoTRPs. Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:490–497.
Bennett DL, Clark AJ, Huang J, Waxman SG, Dib-Hajj SD. 
2019. The role of voltage-gated sodium channels in pain 
signaling. Physiol Rev 99:1079–1151.
Boyd IA, Davey MR. 1968. Composition of Peripheral Nerves. 
Edinburgh: Livingston.
Cao E, Liao M, Cheng Y, Julius D. 2013. TRPV1 structures 
in distinct conformations reveal activation mechanisms. 
Nature 504:113–118.
Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Williams EK, Umans BD, Liberles 
SD. 2015. Vagal sensory neuron subtypes that differen-
tially control breathing. Cell 161:622–633.
Collins DF, Refshauge KM, Todd G, Gandevia SC. 2005. 
Cutaneous receptors contribute to kinesthesia at the index 
finger, elbow, and knee. J Neurophysiol 94:1699–1706.
Coste B, Xiao B, Santos JS, et al. 2012. Piezo proteins are pore-
forming subunits of mechanically activated channels. 
Nature 483:176–181.
Cox CD, Bae C, Ziegler L, et al. 2016. Removal of the mecha-
noprotective influence of the cytoskeleton reveals PIEZO1 
is gated by bilayer tension. Nat Commun 7:10366.
Darian-Smith I, Johnson KO, Dykes R. 1973. “Cold” fiber 
population innervating palmar and digital skin of the 
monkey: responses to cooling pulses. J Neurophysiol 
36:325–346.
Darian-Smith I, Johnson KO, LaMotte C, Shigenaga Y, 
Kenins P, Champness P. 1979. Warm fibers innervating 
palmar and digital skin of the monkey: responses to ther-
mal stimuli. J Neurophysiol 42:1297–1315.
Dib-Hajj SD, Cummins TR, Black JA, Waxman SG. 2010. 
Sodium channels in normal and pathological pain. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 33:325–347.
Edin BB, Vallbo AB. 1990. Dynamic response of human 
muscle spindle afferents to stretch. J Neurophysiol 
63:1297–1306.
Erlanger J, Gasser HS. 1938. Electrical Signs and Nervous Activity. 
Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press.


===== Page 7 =====
434    Part IV / Perception
Gandevia SC, McCloskey DI, Burke D. 1992. Kinaesthetic 
signals and muscle contraction. Trends Neurosci 15:62–65.
Gandevia SC, Smith JL, Crawford M, Proske U, Taylor JL. 
2006. Motor commands contribute to human position 
sense. J Physiol 571:703–710.
Ghitani N, Barik A, Szczot M, et al. 2017. Specialized mecha-
nosensory nociceptors mediating rapid responses to hair 
pull. Neuron 95:944–954.
Guharay F, Sachs F. 1984. Stretch-activated single ion channel 
currents in tissue-cultured embryonic chick skeletal mus-
cle. J Physiol 352:685–701.
Guo YR, MacKinnon R. 2017. Structure-based membrane dome 
mechanism for Piezo mechanosensitivity. Elife 6:e33660.
Johansson RS, Vallbo ÅB. 1983. Tactile sensory coding in 
the glabrous skin of the human hand. Trends Neurosci 
6:27–32.
Jordt S-E, McKemy DD, Julius D. 2003. Lessons from peppers 
and peppermint: the molecular logic of thermosensation. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 13:487–492.
Liao M, Cao E, Julius D, Cheng Y. 2013. Structure of the TRPV1 
ion channel determined by electron cryo-microscopy. 
Nature 504:107–112.
Lin S-Y, Corey DP. 2005. TRP channels in mechanosensation. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:350–357.
Macefield VG. 2005. Physiological characteristics of low-
threshold mechanoreceptors in joints, muscle and skin in 
human subjects. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 32:135–144.
Macefield G, Gandevia SC, Burke D. 1990. Perceptual 
responses to microstimulation of single afferents inner-
vating joints, muscles and skin of the human hand. J Physiol 
429:113–129.
Maksimovic S, Nakatani M, Baba Y, et al. 2014. Epidermal 
Merkel cells are mechanosensory cells that tune mamma-
lian touch receptors. Nature 509:617–621.
McGlone F, Wessberg J, Olausson H. 2014. Discriminative and 
affective touch: sensing and feeling. Neuron 82:737–755.
Murthy SE, Dubin AE, Patapoutian A. 2017. Piezos thrive 
under pressure: mechanically activated ion channels in 
health and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18:771–783.
Ochoa J, Torebjörk E. 1989. Sensations evoked by intraneu-
ral microstimulation of C nociceptor fibres in human skin 
nerves. J Physiol 415:583–599.
Ottoson D, Shepherd GM. 1971. Transducer properties and 
integrative mechanisms in the frog’s muscle spindle. In: 
WR Lowenstein (ed). Handbook of Sensory Physiology, 
Vol. 1 Principles of Receptor Physiology, pp. 442–499. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag.
Perl ER. 1968. Myelinated afferent fibers innervating the pri-
mate skin and their response to noxious stimuli. J Physiol 
(Lond) 197:593–615.
Perl ER. 1996. Cutaneous polymodal receptors: characteris-
tics and plasticity. Prog Brain Res 113:21–37.
Ranade SS, Woo SH, Dubin AE, et al. 2014. Piezo2 is the 
major transducer of mechanical forces for touch sensation 
in mice. Nature 516:121–125.
Sachs F. 1990. Stretch-sensitive ion channels. Sem Neurosci 
2:49–57.
Saotome K, Murthy SE, Kefauver JM, Whitwam T, Patapoutian 
A, Ward AB. 2018. Structure of the mechanically activated 
ion channel Piezo1. Nature 554:481–486.
Torebjörk HE, Vallbo ÅB, Ochoa JL. 1987. Intraneural micro-
stimulation in man. Its relation to specificity of tactile sen-
sations. Brain 110:1509–1529.
Wellnitz SA, Lesniak DR, Gerling GJ, Lumpkin EA. 2010. 
The regularity of sustained firing reveals two populations 
of slowly adapting touch receptors in mouse hairy skin.  
J Neurophysiol 103:3378–3388.
Wessberg J, Olausson H, Fernström KW, Vallbo ÅB. 2003. 
Receptive field properties of unmyelinated tactile affer-
ents in the human skin. J Neurophysiol 89:1567–1575.
Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BD, Lowell BB, 
Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and 
nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.
Wilson SR, Gerhold KA, Bifolck-Fisher A, et al. 2011. TRPA1 
is required for histamine-independent, Mas-related G 
protein-coupled receptor-mediated itch. Nat Neurosci 
14:595–602.
Wilson SR, Nelson AM, Batia L, et al. 2013. The ion chan-
nel TRPA1 is required for chronic itch. J Neurosci 
33:9283–9294.
Woo SH, Lukacs V, de Nooij JC, et al. 2015. Piezo2 is the prin-
cipal mechanotransduction channel for proprioception. 
Nat Neurosci 18:1756–1762.
Woo SH, Ranade S, Weyer AD, et al. 2014. Piezo2 is required 
for Merkel-cell mechanotransduction. Nature 509:622–626.
Zhao Q, Zhou H, Chi S, et al. 2018. Structure and mecha-
nogating mechanism of the Piezo1 channel. Nature 
554:487–492.
Zimmerman A, Bai L, Ginty DD. 2014. The gentle touch 
receptors of mammalian skin. Science 346:950–954.


===== Page 8 =====
19
Touch
object properties and in performance of skilled motor 
tasks. The human hand is one of evolution’s great crea-
tions. The fine manipulative capacity provided by our 
fingers is possible because of their fine sensory capac-
ity; if we lose tactile sensation in our fingers, we lose 
manual dexterity.
The softness and compliance of the glabrous skin 
play a major role in the sense of touch. When an object 
contacts the hand, the skin conforms to its contours, 
forming a mirror image of the object’s surface. The 
resultant displacement and indentation of the skin 
stretches the tissue, thereby stimulating the sensory 
endings of mechanoreceptors at or near the region of 
contact.
These receptors are highly sensitive and are con-
tinually active as we manipulate objects and explore 
the world with our hands. They provide information 
to the brain about the object’s position in the hand, its 
shape and surface texture, the amount of force applied 
at the contact points, and how these features change 
over time when the hand or the object moves. The fin-
gertips are among the most densely innervated parts 
of the body, providing extensive and redundant soma-
tosensory information about objects manipulated by 
the hand.
Moreover, the anatomical structure of the hand, 
with its multiple joints and apposable digits, enables 
humans to shape the hand in ways that mirror an 
object’s overall shape, providing a hand-centered pro-
prioceptive representation of the external world. This 
ability to internalize the shape of objects allows us to 
create tools that extend the abilities of our hands alone.
When we become skilled in the use of a tool, such 
as a scalpel or a pair of scissors, we feel conditions at 
Active and Passive Touch Have Distinct Goals
The Hand Has Four Types of Mechanoreceptors
A Cell’s Receptive Field Defines Its Zone of Tactile 
Sensitivity
Two-Point Discrimination Tests Measure Tactile Acuity
Slowly Adapting Fibers Detect Object Pressure and Form
Rapidly Adapting Fibers Detect Motion and Vibration
Both Slowly and Rapidly Adapting Fibers Are Important 
for Grip Control
Tactile Information Is Processed in the Central Touch System
Spinal, Brain Stem, and Thalamic Circuits Segregate 
Touch and Proprioception
The Somatosensory Cortex Is Organized Into 
Functionally Specialized Columns
Cortical Columns Are Organized Somatotopically
The Receptive Fields of Cortical Neurons Integrate 
Information From Neighboring Receptors
Touch Information Becomes Increasingly Abstract in 
Successive Central Synapses
Cognitive Touch Is Mediated by Neurons in the 
Secondary Somatosensory Cortex
Active Touch Engages Sensorimotor Circuits in the 
Posterior Parietal Cortex
Lesions in Somatosensory Areas of the Brain Produce 
Specific Tactile Deficits
Highlights
I
n this chapter on the sense of touch, we focus 
on the hand because of its importance for this 
modality, in particular its role in the appreciation of 


===== Page 9 =====
436    Part IV / Perception
the working surface of the tool as though our fingers 
were there because two groups of touch receptors 
monitor the vibrations and forces produced by those 
distant conditions. When we scan our fingers across a 
surface, we feel its form and texture because another 
group of mechanoreceptors has high spatial and tem-
poral acuity. A blind person uses this capacity to read 
Braille at a hundred words per minute. When we grip 
and manipulate an object, we do so delicately, with 
only as much force as needed, because specific mecha-
noreceptors continually monitor slip and adjust our 
grip appropriately.
We are also able to recognize objects placed in the 
hand from touch alone. When we are handed a base-
ball, we recognize it instantly without having to look 
at it because of its shape, size, weight, density, and 
texture. We do not have to think about the informa-
tion provided by each finger to deduce that the object 
must be a baseball; the information flows to memory 
and instantly matches previously stored representa-
tions of baseballs. Even if we have never previously 
handled a baseball, we perceive it as a single object, 
not as a collection of discrete features. The somatosen-
sory pathways of the brain have the daunting task of 
integrating information from thousands of sensors in 
each hand and transforming it to a form suitable for 
cognition and action.
Sensory information is extracted for the purpose of 
motor control as well as cognition, and different kinds 
of information are extracted for those purposes. We 
can, for example, shift our attention from the baseball’s 
shape to its location in the hand to readjust our grip for 
an effective throw or pitch. This selective attention to 
different aspects of the sensory information is brought 
about by cortical mechanisms.
Active and Passive Touch Have Distinct Goals
Touch is defined as direct contact between two physi-
cal bodies. In neuroscience, touch refers to the special 
sense by which contact with the body is perceived con-
sciously. Touch can be active, as when you move your 
hand or some other part of the body against another 
surface, or passive, as when someone or something 
else touches you. Active touch is fundamentally a top-
down process in which the subject has agency, seeks 
particular information, and controls what occurs. Sub-
jects select relevant salient features of objects to deter-
mine subsequent behaviors. They choose which object 
to grasp and the most efficient hand shape needed to 
acquire it, and decide how to manipulate it to achieve 
particular goals. During active touch, somatosensory 
information depicts the physical properties of objects 
as well as the motor actions of the subject’s hand 
and arm, and their relation to the task goals. Impor-
tantly, active manipulation of objects is based upon 
the concept of touch as a three-dimensional modal-
ity designed to capture the volumetric, topographic, 
and elastic properties of objects, as first proposed by 
Roberta Klatzky and Susan Lederman. These three-
dimensional qualities are best appreciated by active 
manipulation including grasping, rotation, and con-
tour tracing by the hand.
Passive touch engages a bottom-up process in 
which subjects react to external stimuli specified by 
the experimenter or clinician. The experimenter selects 
and controls the location, amplitude, force, timing, 
duration, and spatial spread of stimuli delivered to the 
skin. Subsequent behaviors are guided by instructions 
provided in the paradigm. Tactile stimuli are classified 
into experimenter-selected categories and/or rated 
along an intensive or hedonic scale. Subjects therefore 
need to analyze all of the transmitted somatosensory 
information and select specific features guided in part 
by the task instructions.
Active and passive modes of tactile stimulation 
excite the same population of receptors in the skin and 
evoke similar responses in afferent fibers. They differ 
somewhat in cognitive features that reflect attention 
and behavioral goals during the period of stimulation. 
Passive touch is tested by naming objects or describ-
ing sensations; active touch is used when the hand 
manipulates objects. The sensory and motor compo-
nents of touch are intimately connected anatomically 
in the brain and are important functionally in guiding 
motor behavior.
During active touch, descending fibers from motor 
centers of the cerebral cortex terminate on interneurons 
in the medial dorsal horn that receive tactile informa-
tion from the skin. Similar fibers from cortical motor 
areas terminate in the dorsal column nuclei, providing 
an efference copy (or corollary discharge) of the motor 
commands that generate behavior (Chapter 30). In this 
manner, tactile signals from the hand resulting from 
active hand movements may be distinguished cen-
trally from passively applied stimuli in the neurologi-
cal exam or in psychophysical tests.
The distinction between active and passive touch 
is important clinically when patients have deficits in 
hand use. Motor deficits such as weakness, stiffness, or 
clumsiness may result from sensory loss, which is why 
passive sensory testing is important in the neurologi-
cal examination. Common neurological tests for touch 
include measurements of detection thresholds, vibra-
tion sense, two-point or texture discrimination, and 


