===== Page 1 =====
756    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–16  A single muscle can 
influence the motion about many 
joints.
A. Muscles that cross one joint can 
accelerate an adjacent body seg-
ment. For example, at the beginning 
of the swing phase while running, 
the hip flexor muscles are activated 
to accelerate the thigh forward (red 
arrow). This action causes the lower 
leg to rotate backward (blue arrow) 
and the knee joint to flex. To control 
the knee joint flexion during the first 
part of the swing phase, the knee 
extensor muscles are activated and 
undergo a lengthening contraction to 
accelerate the lower leg forward (red 
arrow) while it continues to rotate 
backward (blue arrow).
B. Many muscles cross more than 
one joint to exert an effect on more 
than one body segment. For example, 
the hamstring muscles of the leg 
accelerate the hip in the direction of 
extension and the knee in the direc-
tion of flexion (red arrows). During 
running, at the end of the swing 
phase, the hamstring muscles are 
activated and undergo lengthening 
contractions to control the forward 
rotation of the leg (hip flexion and 
knee extension). This strategy is more 
economical than activating individual 
muscles at the hip and knee joints to 
control the forward rotation of the leg.
can be displaced linearly (eg, the scapula on the trunk), 
adding to the degrees of freedom about a joint.
The off-axis attachment of muscles enhances the 
flexibility of the skeletal motor system; the same move-
ment can be achieved by activating different combina-
tions of muscles. However, this additional flexibility 
requires the nervous system to control the unwanted 
actions. A solution used by the nervous system is to 
organize relations among selected muscles to produce 
specific actions. A particular sequence of muscle acti-
vations is known as a muscle synergy, and movement is 
produced through the coordinated activation of these 
synergies. For example, EMG recordings of human 
subjects suggest that variations of movements with the 
same general purpose, such as grasping various objects 
with the hand, reaching and pointing in different direc-
tions, or walking and running at several speeds, are con-
trolled by approximately five muscle synergies.
The number of muscles that participate in a move-
ment also varies with the speed of the movement. For 
example, slow lifting of a load requires only that the 
muscle torque slightly exceed the load torque (see Figure 
31–14), and thus, only the flexor muscle is activated. This 
strategy is used when lifting a handheld weight with the 
elbow flexor muscles. In contrast, to perform this move-
ment rapidly with an abrupt termination at an intended 
joint angle, both the flexor and extensor muscles must be 
activated. First, the flexor muscle is activated to acceler-
ate the limb in the direction of flexion, followed by acti-
vation of the extensor muscle to accelerate the limb in 
the direction of extension, and finally a burst of activity 
by the flexor muscle to increase the angular momentum 
of the limb and the handheld weight in the direction 
of flexion so that it arrives at the desired joint angle  
(Figure 31–15B). The amount of extensor muscle activity 
increases with the speed of the movement.
Increases in movement speed introduce another 
factor that the nervous system must control: unwanted 
accelerations in other body segments. Because body 
parts are connected to one another, motion in one part 
can induce motion in another. The induced motion is 
often controlled with lengthening contractions, such as 
A
B
Direction of force exerted by muscle
Direction of rotation of limb segment


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    757
those experienced by thigh muscles during the swing 
phase of running (Figure 31–16A).
Muscles that span more than one joint can be 
used to control these motion-dependent interactions 
between body parts. At the end of the swing phase in 
running, activation of the hamstring muscles causes 
both the thigh and lower leg to accelerate backward 
(Figure 31–16B). If a hip extensor muscle is used to 
accelerate the thigh backward instead of the hamstring 
muscles, the lower leg would accelerate forward, 
requiring activation of a knee flexor muscle to control 
the unwanted lower leg motion so that the foot could 
be placed on the ground. Use of the two-joint ham-
string muscles is a more economical strategy, but one 
that can subject the hamstrings to high stresses during 
fast movements, such as sprinting. The control of such 
motion-dependent interactions often involves length-
ening contractions, which maximize muscle stiffness 
and the ability of muscle to resist changes in length.
For most movements, the nervous system must 
establish rigid connections between some body parts 
for two reasons. First, as expressed in Newton’s law 
of action and reaction, a reaction force must provide 
a foundation for the acceleration of a body part. For 
example, in a reaching movement performed by a 
person standing upright, the ground must provide a 
reaction force against the feet. The muscle actions that 
produce the arm movement exert forces that are trans-
mitted through the body to the feet and are opposed 
by the ground. Different substrates provide different 
amounts of reaction force, which is why ice or sand can 
influence movement capabilities.
Figure 31–17  An initial phase of negative work augments 
subsequent positive work performed by the muscle. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Finni, Komi, and Lepola 2000. 
Copyright © 2000, Springer-Verlag; Gregor et al. 1988.)
A. The force in the Achilles tendon (orange) and patellar tendon 
(purple) vary during the ground-contact phase of two-legged 
hopping. The feet contact the ground at touchdown (TD) and 
leave the ground at toe-off (TO). For approximately the first half 
of the movement, the quadriceps and triceps surae muscles 
lengthen, performing negative work (negative velocity). The 
muscles perform positive work when they shorten (positive 
velocity). The sites of force transducer measurements are  
indicated by rectangles.
B. The force exerted by the soleus muscle of a cat running at 
moderate speed varies from the instant the paw touches the 
ground (TD) until it leaves the ground (TO). The force exerted by 
the muscle during the shortening contraction (positive  
velocity) is greater than the peak forces measured when the 
muscle contracts maximally against various constant loads  
(isotonic loading). Negative velocity reflects a lengthening 
contraction in the soleus muscle. The power produced by the 
soleus muscle of the cat during running is greater than that 
produced in an isolated-muscle experiment (dashed line). The 
phase of negative power corresponds to the lengthening con-
traction just after the paw is placed on the ground (TD), when 
the muscle performs negative work.
B
Velocity (mm/s)
Velocity (mm/s)
Time on
ground
TO
TO
TD
TD
Time
Time on
ground
Force (kN)
Force (N)
Power (W)
Isotonic
loading
Running
A
Extensors stretching
Extensors shortening
Muscle velocity (mm/s)
TD
TO
0
–250
–125
0
125
250
–250
–125
125
250
0.4
–0.2
0.2
–0.4
1
2
25
3
1
–1


===== Page 3 =====
758    Part V / Movement
Second, uncertain conditions are usually accom-
modated by stiffening the joints through concurrent 
activation of the muscles that produce force in oppo-
site directions. Coactivation of opposing muscles 
occurs often when a support surface is unsteady, when 
the body might experience an unexpected perturba-
tion, or when lifting a heavy load. Because coactiva-
tion increases the energetic cost of performing a task, 
one characteristic of skilled performance is the ability 
to accomplish a task with minimal activation of mus-
cles that produce opposing actions.
Muscle Work Depends on the Pattern of Activation
Limb muscles in healthy young adults are active 10% 
to 20% of the time during waking hours. For much 
of this time, the muscles perform constant-length 
(isometric) contractions to maintain a variety of static 
body postures. In contrast, muscle length has to 
change during a movement so that the muscle can 
perform work to displace body parts. A muscle per-
forms positive work and produces power during a 
shortening contraction, whereas it performs negative 
work and absorbs power during a lengthening con-
traction. The capacity of muscle to do positive work 
establishes performance capabilities, such as the max-
imal height that can be jumped.
The nervous system can augment the positive work 
capacity of muscle by commanding a brief period of 
negative work before performing positive work. This 
activation sequence, the stretch–shorten cycle, occurs in 
many movements. When a person jumps in place on 
two feet, for example, the support phase involves an 
initial stretch (lengthening) and subsequent shorten-
ing of the ankle extensor and knee extensor muscles 
(Figure 31–17A). The forces in the Achilles and patellar 
tendons increase during the stretch of the lengthening 
contraction and reach a maximum at the onset of the 
shortening phase. As a result, the muscles can perform 
more positive work and produce more power during 
the shortening contraction (Figure 31–17B).
Although negative work involves an increase in 
the length of the muscle, the length of the fascicles in 
the muscle often remains relatively constant, which 
indicates that the connective tissue structures are 
stretched prior to the shortening contraction. Thus, the 
capacity of the muscle to perform more positive work 
comes from strain energy that can be stored in the elastic 
elements of muscle and tendon during the stretch phase 
and released during the subsequent shortening phase. 
More strain energy can be stored in long tendons, but 
short tendons are more advantageous when the move-
ment requires the rapid release of strain energy.
Highlights
  1.  The basic functional unit for the control of move-
ment by the nervous system is the motor unit, 
which comprises a motor neuron and the muscle 
fibers it innervates.
  2.  The force exerted by a muscle depends in part 
on the number and properties of the motor 
units that are activated and the rates at which 
they discharge action potentials. The key motor 
unit properties include contraction speed, maxi-
mal force, and fatigability, all of which can be 
altered by physical activity. Motor unit proper-
ties vary continuously across the population 
that innervates each muscle; that is, there are not 
distinct types of motor units. Due to technologi-
cal advances, it is becoming possible to charac-
terize the adaptations exhibited by populations 
of motor units in response to different types of 
changes in physical activity.
  3.  Motor units tend to be activated in a stereotypical 
order that is highly correlated with motor neuron 
size. The rate at which motor units are recruited 
during a voluntary contraction increases with 
contraction speed.
  4.  The rate at which a motor unit discharges action 
potentials in response to a given synaptic input 
can be modulated by descending inputs from 
the brain stem. The modulatory input is likely 
critical for establishing the level of excitation in 
spinal pathways, but this has been difficult to 
demonstrate in humans.
  5.  Except at low muscle forces, variation in dis-
charge rate has a greater influence on muscle 
force than does the number of activated motor 
units. Moreover, the variability in discharge rate 
of the motor unit population influences the level 
of fine motor control.
  6.  The sarcomere is the smallest element of muscle to 
include a complete set of contractile proteins. A tran-
sient connection between the contractile proteins 
myosin and actin, known as the cross-bridge cycle, 
enables muscle to exert a force. The organization of 
the sarcomeres within a muscle varies substantially 
and, in addition to motor unit activity, has a major 
effect on the contractile properties of the muscle.
  7.  For a given arrangement of sarcomeres, the force 
a muscle can exert depends on the activation of 
the cross bridges by Ca2+, the amount of overlap 
between the thick and thin filaments, and the 
velocity of the moving filaments. Sarcomere force 
during lengthening contractions is augmented by 
a Ca2+-mediated increase in titin stiffness. The force 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    759
produced by activated sarcomeres depends on 
the interactions of three filaments: actin, myosin, 
and titin.
  8.  Most of the force generated by activated sarcomeres 
is transmitted laterally through a network of non-
contractile proteins that maintains the alignment 
of the thick and thin filaments.
  9.  The functional capability of a muscle depends on 
the torque that it can exert, which is influenced 
both by its contractile properties and by the loca-
tion of its attachments on the skeleton relative to 
the joint that it spans.
10.  To perform a movement, the nervous system acti-
vates multiple muscles and controls the torque 
exerted about the involved joints. The nervous 
system can vary the magnitude and direction of a 
movement by altering the amount of motor unit 
activity, and hence muscle torque, relative to the 
load acting on the body.
11.  Although muscle exerts only a pulling force on the 
skeleton, it can do so whether the activated mus-
cle shortens or is lengthened by a load torque that 
exceeds the muscle torque. The force capacity of 
muscle is greater during lengthening contractions. 
Motor unit activity differs during shortening and 
lengthening contractions, but little is known about 
how the synaptic inputs to motor neurons differ 
during these two types of contractions.
12.  Faster 
movements 
elicit 
motion-dependent 
interactions between body parts that produce 
unwanted accelerations. These actions must be 
controlled by the nervous system to produce an 
intended movement.
13.  The nervous system must coordinate the activity 
of multiple muscles to provide a mechanical link 
between moving body parts and the required sup-
port from the surroundings. The muscles engaged 
for each action, such as grasping, reaching, running, 
and walking, are organized into a few sets that 
exhibit a stereotypical pattern of activation, but it 
is not known why particular patterns are preferred.
14.  The patterns of muscle activity vary substantially 
between movements and often include strategies 
that augment the work capacity of muscles. The 
patterns can be modified by experience, but little 
is known about the locus of the adaptations other 
than that both spinal and supraspinal pathways 
are involved.
 Roger M. Enoka 
Selected Reading
Booth FW. 2015. Muscle adaptation to exercise: new Saltin’s 
paradigms. Scand J Med Sci Sports Suppl 4:49–52.
Duchateau J, Enoka RM. 2011. Human motor unit record-
ings: origins and insights into the integrated motor sys-
tem. Brain Res 1409:42–62.
Enoka RM. 2015. Neuromechanics of Human Movement. 5th ed. 
Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Farina D, Negro F, Muceli S, Enoka RM. 2016. Principles of 
motor unit physiology evolve with advances in technol-
ogy. Physiology 31:83–94.
Gordon AM, Regnier M, Homsher E. 2001. Skeletal and car-
diac muscle contractile activation: tropomyosin “rocks 
and rolls.” News Physiol Sci 16:49–55.
Heckman CJ, Enoka RM. 2012. Motor unit. Compr Physiol 
2:2629–2682.
Herzog W, Schappacher G, DuVall M, Leonard TR, Herzog 
JA. 2016. Residual force enhancement following eccentric 
contractions: a new mechanism involving titin. Physiol-
ogy 31:300–312.
Hunter SK, Pereira HM, Keenan KG. 2016. The aging neuro-
muscular system and motor performance. J Appl Physiol 
121:982–995.
Huxley AF. 2000. Mechanics and models of the myosin 
motor. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 355:433–440.
Lieber RL, Ward SR. 2011. Skeletal muscle design to meet 
functional demands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
366:1466–1476.
Merletti R, Muceli S. 2020. Tutorial. Surface EMG detection 
in space and time: best practices. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 
49:102363.
Narici M, Franchi M, Maganaris C. 2016. Muscle structural assem-
bly and functional consequences. J Exp Biol 219:276–284.
References
Alexander RM, Ker RF. 1990. The architecture of leg muscles. 
In: JM Winters, SL-Y Woo (eds). Multiple Muscle Systems: 
Biomechanics and Movement Organization, pp. 568–577. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Azizi E, Roberts TJ. 2012. Geared up to stretch: pennate muscle 
behavior during active lengthening. J Exp Biol 217:376–381.
Bloom W, Fawcett DW. 1975. A Textbook of Histology. 10th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.
Botterman BR, Iwamoto GA, Gonyea WJ. 1986. Gradation of 
isometric tension by different activation rates in motor units 
of cat flexor carpi radialis muscle. J Neurophysiol 56:494–506.
Bottinelli R, Canepari M, Pellegrino MA, Reggiani C. 1996. 
Force-velocity properties of human skeletal muscle fibres: 
myosin heavy chain isoform and temperature depend-
ence. J Physiol 495:573–586.
Del Vecchio A, Negro F, Felici F, Farina D. 2017. Associations 
between motor unit action potential parameters and sur-
face EMG features. J Appl Physiol 123:835–843.
Desmedt JE, Godaux E. 1977. Ballistic contractions in man: 
characteristic recruitment pattern of single motor units of 
the tibialis anterior muscle. J Physiol 264:673–693.


===== Page 5 =====
760    Part V / Movement
Duchateau J, Enoka RM. 2016. Neural control of lengthening 
contractions. J Exp Biol 219:197–204.
Enoka RM, Duchateau J. 2016. Translating muscle fatigue to 
human performance. Med Sci Sport Exerc 48:2228–2238.
Enoka RM, Duchateau J. 2017. Rate coding and the control 
of muscle force. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 27:1–12.
Enoka RM, Fuglevand AJ. 2001. Motor unit physiology: some 
unresolved issues. Muscle Nerve 24:4–17.
Erim Z, De Luca CJ, Mineo K, Aoki T. 1996. Rank-ordered 
regulation of motor units. Muscle Nerve 19:563–573.
Farina D, Merletti R, Enoka RM. 2014. The extraction of neu-
ral strategies from the surface EMG: an update. J Appl 
Physiol 117:1215–1230.
Finni T, Komi PV, Lepola V. 2000. In vivo human triceps surae 
and quadriceps muscle function in a squat jump and 
counter movement jump. Eur J Appl Physiol 83:416–426.
Fuglevand AJ, Macefield VG, Bigland-Ritchie B. 1999. Force-
frequency and fatigue properties of motor units in mus-
cles that control digits of the human hand. J Neurophysiol 
81:1718–1729.
Gordon AM, Regnier M, Homsher R. 2001. Skeletal and car-
diac muscle contractile activation: tropomyosin “rocks 
and rolls.” News Physiol Sci 16:49–55.
Gregor RJ, Roy RR, Whiting WC, Lovely RG, Hodgson JA, 
Edgerton VR. 1988. Mechanical output of the cat soleus 
during treadmill locomotion: in vivo vs in situ character-
istics. J Biomech 21:721–732.
Heckman CJ, Mottram C, Quinlan K, Theiss R, Schuster J. 
2009. Motoneuron excitability: the importance of neuro-
modulatory inputs. Clin Neurophysiol. 120:2040–2054.
Henneman E, Somjen G, Carpenter DO. 1965. Functional 
significance of cell size in spinal motoneurons. J Neuro-
physiol 28:560–580.
Hepple RT, Rice CL. 2016. Innervation and neuromuscular 
control in ageing skeletal muscle. J Physiol 594:1965–1978.
Huxley AF, Simmons RM. 1971. Proposed mechanism of 
force generation in striated muscle. Nature 233:533–538.
Kubo K, Miyazaki D, Shimoju S, Tsunoda N. 2015. Relation-
ship between elastic properties of tendon structures and 
performance in long distance runners. Eur J Appl Physiol 
115:1725–1733.
Lai A, Schache AG, Lin YC, Pandy MG. 2014. Tendon elastic 
strain energy in the human ankle plantar-flexors and its role 
with increased running speed. J Exp Biol 217:3159–3168.
Lieber RL, Fridén J. 2000. Functional and clinical significance of 
skeletal muscle architecture. Muscle Nerve 23:1647–1666.
Lieber RL, Ward SR. 2011. Skeletal muscle design to meet 
functional demands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
366:1466–1476.
Liddell EGT, Sherrington CS. 1925. Recruitment and some 
other factors of reflex inhibition. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 97:488–518.
Maas H, Finni T. 2018. Mechanical coupling between muscle-
tendon units reduces peak stresses. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 
46:26–33.
Macefield VG, Fuglevand AJ, Bigland-Ritchie B. 1996. Con-
tractile properties of single motor units in human toe 
extensors assessed by intraneural motor axon stimulation.  
J Neurophysiol 75:2509–2519.
Milner-Brown HS, Stein RB, Yemm R. 1973. The orderly 
recruitment of human motor units during voluntary iso-
metric contraction. J Physiol 230:359–370.
Moritz CT, Barry BK, Pascoe MA, Enoka RM. 2005. Discharge 
rate variability influences the variation in force fluctua-
tions across the working range of a hand muscle. J Neuro-
physiol 93:2449–2459.
O’Connor SM, Cheng EJ, Young KW, Ward SR, Lieber RL. 
2016. Quantification of sarcomere length distribution in 
whole muscle frozen sections. J Exp Biol 219:1432–1436.
Overduin SA, d’Avella A, Roh J, Carmena JM, Bizzi E. 2015. 
Representation of muscle synergies in the primate brain.  
J Neurosci 35:12615–12624.
Palmisano MG, Bremner SN, Homberger TA, et al. 2015. 
Skeletal muscle intermediate filaments form a stress-
transmitting and stress-signalling network. J Cell Sci 128: 
219–224.
Person RS, Kudina LP. 1972. Discharge frequency and dis-
charge pattern of human motor units during voluntary 
contraction of muscle. Electroencephalogr Clin Neuro-
physiol 32:471–483.
Sawicki GS, Robertson BD, Azizi E, Roberts TJ. 2015. Timing 
matters: tuning the mechanics of a muscle-tendon unit by 
adjusting stimulation phase during cyclic contractions.  
J Exp Biol 218:3150–3159.
Schache AG, Dorn TW, Williams GP, Brown NA, Pandy MG. 
2014. Lower-limb muscular strategies for increasing run-
ning speed. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 44:813–824.
Sherrington CS. 1925. Remarks on some aspects of reflex 
inhibition. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 97:519–545.
Trappe S, Costill D, Gallagher P, et al. 2009. Exercise in space: 
human skeletal muscle after 6 months aboard the Interna-
tional Space Station. J Appl Physiol 106:1159–1168.
Trappe S, Luden N, Minchev K, Raue U, Jemiolo B, Trappe 
TA. 2015. Skeletal muscle signature of a champion sprint 
runner. J Appl Physiol 118:1460–1466.
Van Cutsem M, Duchateau J, Hainaut K. 1998. Changes in 
single motor unit behaviour contribute to the increase 
in contraction speed after dynamic training in humans.  
J Physiol 513:295–305.
Van Cutsem M, Feiereisen P, Duchateau J, Hainaut K. 1997. 
Mechanical properties and behaviour of motor units in 
the tibialis anterior during voluntary contractions. Can  
J Appl Physiol 22:585–597.
Ward SR, Eng CM Smallwood LH, Lieber RL. 2009. Are current 
measurements of lower extremity muscle architecture 
accurate? Clin Orthop Rel Res 467:1074–1082.


===== Page 6 =====
32
Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord
Propriospinal Neurons in the C3–C4 Segments Mediate 
Part of the Corticospinal Command for Movement of  
the Upper Limb
Neurons in Spinal Reflex Pathways Are Activated  
Prior to Movement
Proprioceptive Reflexes Play an Important Role in Regulating 
Both Voluntary and Automatic Movements
Spinal Reflex Pathways Undergo Long-Term Changes
Damage to the Central Nervous System Produces 
Characteristic Alterations in Reflex Responses
Interruption of Descending Pathways to the Spinal Cord 
Frequently Produces Spasticity
Lesion of the Spinal Cord in Humans Leads to a Period 
of Spinal Shock Followed by Hyperreflexia
Highlights
D
uring purposeful movements the central nerv-
ous system uses information from a vast array 
of sensory receptors to ensure that the pattern 
of muscle activity suits the purpose. Without this sen-
sory information, movements tend to be imprecise, and 
tasks requiring fine coordination in the hands, such as 
buttoning one’s shirt, are difficult. The sensory-motor 
integration that makes the ongoing regulation of move-
ment possible takes place at many levels of the nervous 
system, but the spinal cord has a special role because 
of the close coupling in the cord between sensory input 
and the motor output to the muscles.
Charles Sherrington was among the first to recog-
nize the importance of sensory information in regu-
lating movements. In 1906, he proposed that simple 
Reflex Pathways in the Spinal Cord Produce Coordinated 
Patterns of Muscle Contraction
The Stretch Reflex Acts to Resist the Lengthening  
of a Muscle
Neuronal Networks in the Spinal Cord Contribute to the 
Coordination of Reflex Responses
The Stretch Reflex Involves a Monosynaptic Pathway
Gamma Motor Neurons Adjust the Sensitivity of  
Muscle Spindles
The Stretch Reflex Also Involves Polysynaptic Pathways
Golgi Tendon Organs Provide Force-Sensitive  
Feedback to the Spinal Cord
Cutaneous Reflexes Produce Complex Movements  
That Serve Protective and Postural Functions
Convergence of Sensory Inputs on Interneurons  
Increases the Flexibility of Reflex Contributions  
to Movement
Sensory Feedback and Descending Motor Commands  
Interact at Common Spinal Neurons to Produce  
Voluntary Movements
Muscle Spindle Sensory Afferent Activity Reinforces 
Central Commands for Movements Through the Ia 
Monosynaptic Reflex Pathway
Modulation of Ia inhibitory Interneurons and Renshaw 
Cells by Descending Inputs Coordinate Muscle  
Activity at Joints
Transmission in Reflex Pathways May Be Facilitated or 
Inhibited by Descending Motor Commands
Descending Inputs Modulate Sensory Input to the Spinal 
Cord by Changing the Synaptic Efficiency of Primary 
Sensory Fibers
Part of the Descending Command for Voluntary Movements 
Is Conveyed Through Spinal Interneurons


===== Page 7 =====
762    Part V / Movement
reflexes—stereotyped movements elicited by activa-
tion of receptors in skin or muscle—are the basic units 
for movement. He also emphasized that all parts of 
the nervous system are connected and that no part is 
ever capable of activation without affecting or being 
affected by other parts. In his words, the simple reflex 
is a convenient if not a probable fiction.
Laboratory studies of reflexes in animals from 
the 1950s and onward demonstrated that descend-
ing motor pathways and afferent sensory pathways 
converge on common interneurons in the spinal 
cord. Later research in intact animals and in humans 
engaged in normal behavior confirmed that the neu-
ral circuitries in the spinal cord take part in convey-
ing and shaping the motor command to the muscles 
by integrating descending motor commands and sen-
sory feedback signals. Nevertheless, the idea of simple 
reflexes is convenient for understanding the principles 
of organization of sensory-motor integration in the spi-
nal cord and of how sensory input to different spinal 
circuits contributes to movement control.
In this chapter, we explain the principles underly-
ing sensory-motor integration in the spinal cord and 
describe how this integration regulates movement. For 
this purpose, we must first have a thorough knowl-
edge of how reflex pathways in the spinal cord are 
organized.
Reflex Pathways in the Spinal Cord Produce 
Coordinated Patterns of Muscle Contraction
The sensory stimuli that activate spinal reflex path-
ways act outside the spinal cord, on receptors in mus-
cles, joints, and skin. By contrast, the neural circuitry 
responsible for the motor response is entirely con-
tained within the spinal cord. The interneurons in the 
reflex pathways and the resulting reflexes have tradi-
tionally been classified based on the sensory modality 
and type of sensory fiber that activates the interneu-
rons. As we shall see, this classification is inconsistent 
with the significant convergence of multiple modali-
ties on common interneurons, but as a starting point, 
it is still useful to distinguish reflex pathways based 
on whether the principal sensory input originates from 
muscle or skin.
The Stretch Reflex Acts to Resist the  
Lengthening of a Muscle
The simplest and certainly the most studied spinal 
reflex is the stretch reflex, a reflex muscle contraction 
elicited by lengthening of the muscle. Stretch reflexes 
were originally thought to be an intrinsic property of 
muscles. Early in the 20th century, however, Liddell 
and Sherrington showed that the stretch reflex could 
be abolished by cutting either the dorsal or ventral 
root, thus establishing that these reflexes require sen-
sory input from muscle to spinal cord and a return 
path to muscle (Figure 32–1A).
We now know that the receptor that senses the 
change of length is the muscle spindle (Box 32–1) 
and that the type Ia sensory axon from this receptor 
makes direct excitatory connections with motor neu-
rons. (The classification of sensory fibers from muscle 
is discussed in Box 32–2.) The afferent axon also con-
nects to interneurons that inhibit the motor neurons 
innervating antagonist muscles, an arrangement called 
reciprocal innervation. This inhibition prevents mus-
cle contractions that might otherwise resist the move-
ments produced by the stretch reflexes.
Sherrington developed an experimental model for 
investigating spinal circuitry that is especially valu-
able in the study of stretch reflexes. He conducted his 
experiments on cats whose brain stems had been surgi-
cally transected at the level of the midbrain, between 
the superior and inferior colliculi. This is referred to as 
a decerebrate preparation. The effect of this procedure is 
to disconnect the rest of the brain from the spinal cord, 
thus blocking sensations of pain as well as interrupting 
normal modulation of reflexes by higher brain cent-
ers. A decerebrate animal has stereotyped and usually 
heightened stretch reflexes, making it easier to exam-
ine the factors controlling their expression.
Without control by higher brain centers, descend-
ing pathways from the brain stem powerfully facilitate 
the neuronal circuits involved in the stretch reflexes of 
extensor muscles. This results in a dramatic increase in 
tone of the extensor muscle that sometimes can suffice 
to support the animal in a standing position. In normal 
animals and humans, owing to the balance between 
facilitation and inhibition, stretch reflexes are weaker 
and considerably more variable in strength than those 
in decerebrate animals.
Neuronal Networks in the Spinal Cord 
Contribute to the Coordination of Reflex 
Responses
The Stretch Reflex Involves a Monosynaptic Pathway
The neural circuit responsible for the stretch reflex 
was one of the first reflex pathways to be examined 
in detail. The physiological basis of this reflex was 
examined by measuring the latency of the response in 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    763
Figure 32–1  Spinal reflexes involve coordinated 
contractions of numerous muscles in the limbs.
A. In monosynaptic pathways, Ia sensory axons from 
muscle spindles make excitatory connections on two 
sets of motor neurons: alpha motor neurons that 
innervate the same (homonymous) muscle from which 
they arise and motor neurons that innervate synergist 
muscles. They also act through interneurons to inhibit 
the motor neurons that innervate antagonist muscles. 
When a muscle is stretched by a tendon tap with a 
reflex hammer, the firing rate in the sensory fiber from 
the spindle increases. This leads to contraction of the 
same muscle and its synergists and relaxation of the 
antagonist. The reflex therefore tends to counteract 
the stretch, enhancing the spring-like properties of the 
muscles.
   The records on the right demonstrate the reflex nature 
of contractions produced by muscle stretch in a decer-
ebrate cat. When an extensor muscle is stretched, it  
normally produces a large force, but it produces a very 
small force (dashed line) after the sensory afferents in the 
dorsal roots have been severed. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Liddell and Sherrington 1924.)
B. In polysynaptic pathways, one excitatory pathway 
activates motor neurons that innervate ipsilateral 
flexor muscles, which withdraw the limb from noxious 
stimuli, while another pathway simultaneously excites 
motor neurons that innervate contralateral extensor  
muscles, providing support during withdrawal of the 
limb. Inhibitory interneurons ensure that the motor  
neurons supplying antagonist muscles are inactive 
during the reflex response. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Schmidt 1983.)
0
1
1
Dorsal roots 
intact
Dorsal 
roots cut
Time (s)
Force (kg)
Muscle
 length
2
5
A  Monosynaptic pathways (stretch reﬂex)
Ia inhibitory
interneuron
Alpha motor
neuron
Antagonist
Synergist
Homonymous muscle
Spindle
Ia afferent
ﬁber
Cutaneous afferent
ﬁber from nociceptor (Aδ)
B  Polysynaptic pathways (ﬂexion reﬂex)
Extensor
muscle
Extensor
muscle
Flexor
muscle
Stimulated leg
withdraws
Opposite leg
supports
Inhibitory 
interneuron
Activated  
motor
neurons


===== Page 9 =====
764    Part V / Movement
Muscle spindles are small encapsulated sensory recep-
tors that have a spindle-like or fusiform shape and are 
located within the fleshy part of a muscle. Their main 
function is to signal changes in the length of the muscle 
within which they reside. Changes in length of muscles 
are closely associated with changes in the angles of the 
joints that the muscles cross. Thus, muscle spindles are 
used by the central nervous system to sense relative 
positions of the body segments.
Each spindle has three main components: (1) a 
group of specialized intrafusal muscle fibers with non-
contractile central regions; (2) sensory fibers that termi-
nate on the central regions of the intrafusal fibers; and 
(3) motor axons that terminate on the contractile polar 
regions of the intrafusal fibers (Figure 32–2A,B).
When the intrafusal fibers are stretched, often 
referred to as “loading the spindle,” the sensory axon 
endings are also stretched and increase their firing rate. 
Because muscle spindles are arranged in parallel with 
the extrafusal muscle fibers that make up the main body 
of the muscle, the intrafusal fibers change in length 
as the whole muscle changes. Thus, when a muscle is 
stretched, activity in the sensory axons of muscle spin-
dles increases. When a muscle shortens, the spindle is 
unloaded and the activity decreases.
The intrafusal muscle fibers are innervated by 
gamma motor neurons, which have small-diameter mye-
linated axons, whereas the extrafusal muscle fibers are 
innervated by alpha motor neurons, with large-diameter 
myelinated axons. Activation of gamma motor neurons 
causes shortening of the polar regions of the intrafusal 
fibers. This in turn stretches the central region from 
both ends, leading to an increase in firing rate of the 
sensory axons or to a greater likelihood that the axons 
will fire in response to stretch of the muscle. Thus, the 
gamma motor neurons adjust the sensitivity of the mus-
cle spindles. Contraction of the intrafusal muscle fibers 
does not contribute significantly to the force of muscle 
contraction.
The structure and functional behavior of muscle 
spindles is considerably more complex than this simple 
description depicts. As a muscle is stretched, the change 
in length has two phases: a dynamic phase, the period 
during which length is changing, and a static or steady-
state phase, when the muscle has stabilized at a new 
length. Structural specializations within each compo-
nent of the muscle spindle enable the sensory axons to 
signal aspects of each phase separately.
The intrafusal muscle fibers include nuclear bag fib-
ers and nuclear chain fibers. The bag fibers can be clas-
sified as dynamic or static. A typical spindle has two or 
three bag fibers and a variable number of chain fibers, 
usually about five. Furthermore, the intrafusal fibers 
receive two types of sensory endings. A single Ia (large 
diameter) axon spirals around the central region of all 
intrafusal muscle fibers and serves as the primary sensory 
ending (Figure 32–2B). A variable number of type II 
(medium diameter) axons spiral around the static bag 
and chain fibers near their central regions and serve as 
secondary sensory endings.
The gamma motor neurons can also be divided into 
two classes: Dynamic gamma motor neurons innervate 
the dynamic bag fibers, whereas the static gamma motor 
neurons innervate the static bag fibers and the chain fibers.
This duality of structure is reflected in a duality of 
function. The tonic discharge of both primary and sec-
ondary sensory endings signals the steady-state length 
of the muscle. The primary sensory endings are, in addi-
tion, highly sensitive to the velocity of stretch, allow-
ing them to provide information about the speed of 
movements. Because they are highly sensitive to small 
changes, the primary endings rapidly provide informa-
tion about sudden unexpected changes in length, which 
can be used to generate quick corrective reactions.
Increases in the firing rate of dynamic gamma 
motor neurons increase the dynamic sensitivity of pri-
mary sensory endings but have no influence on sec-
ondary sensory endings. Increases in the firing rate of 
static gamma motor neurons increase the tonic level of 
activity in both primary and secondary sensory endings, 
decrease the dynamic sensitivity of primary endings 
(Figure 32–2C), and can prevent the silencing of primary 
endings when a muscle is released from stretch. Thus, 
the central nervous system can independently adjust the 
dynamic and static sensitivity of the different sensory 
endings in muscle spindles.
Box 32–1  Muscle Spindles
ventral roots to electrical stimulation of dorsal roots. 
When the Ia sensory axons innervating the muscle 
spindles were selectively activated, the reflex latency 
through the spinal cord was less than 1 ms. This dem-
onstrated that the Ia fibers make direct connections on 
the alpha motor neurons because the delay at a single 
synapse is typically 0.5 ms to 0.9 ms (Figure 32–3B). In 
humans, an analog of the monosynaptic stretch reflex, 
the Hoffmann reflex, may be elicited by electrical stim-
ulation of peripheral nerves (Box 32–3).


