===== Page 1 =====
524    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–3  The retinal circuitry.
A. The circuitry for cone signals, showing the split into ON 
cell and OFF cell pathways (see Figure 22–10) as well as the 
pathway for lateral inhibition in the outer layer. Red arrows 
indicate sign-preserving connections through electrical or 
glutamatergic synapses. Gray arrows represent sign-inverting 
connections through GABAergic, glycinergic, or glutamatergic 
synapses.
B. Rod signals feed into the cone circuitry through AII amacrine 
cells, where the ON and OFF cell pathways diverge.
A  Cone signal circuitry
B  Rod signal circuitry
Lateral Inhibition
ON
Photoreceptors
Horizontal 
cells
Bipolar 
cells
Amacrine 
cells
Ganglion 
cells
OFF
ON
OFF
AII 
amacrine
cell
Rod 
bipolar
Cone
Cone
Cone
Rod
corresponds to a blind spot in the visual field of each 
eye. Because the disc lies nasal to the fovea of each eye, 
light coming from a single point never falls on both 
blind spots simultaneously, so that normally we are 
unaware of them. We can experience the blind spot by 
using only one eye (Figure 22–4). The blind spot dem-
onstrates what blind people experience—not black-
ness, but simply nothing. This explains why damage to 
the peripheral retina often goes unnoticed. It is usually 
through accidents, such as bumping into an unnoticed 
object, or through clinical testing that a deficit of sight 
is revealed.
The blind spot is a necessary consequence of the 
inside-out design of the retina, which has puzzled and 
amused biologists for generations. The purpose of this 
organization may be to enable the tight apposition of 
photoreceptors with the retinal pigment epithelium, 
which plays an essential role in the turnover of retinal 
pigment and recycles photoreceptor membranes by 
phagocytosis.
There Are Two Types of Photoreceptors:  
Rods and Cones
All photoreceptor cells have a common structure with 
four functional regions: the outer segment, located at 
the distal surface of the neural retina; the inner seg-
ment, located more proximally; the cell body; and the 
synaptic terminal (Figure 22–5A).
Most vertebrates have two types of photorecep-
tors, rods and cones, distinguished by their morphol-
ogy. A rod has a long, cylindrical outer segment within 
which the stacks of discs are separated from the plasma 
membrane, whereas a cone often has a shorter, tapered 
outer segment, and the discs are continuous with the 
outer membrane (Figure 22–5B).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    525
Figure 22–4  The blind spot of the human retina. Locate the 
blind spot in your left eye by shutting the right eye and fixating 
the cross with the left eye. Hold the book about 12 inches from 
your eye and move it slightly nearer or farther until the circle on 
the left disappears. Now place a pencil vertically on the page 
and sweep it sideways over the circle. Note the pencil appears 
unbroken, even though no light can reach your retina from 
the region of the circle. Next, move the pencil lengthwise and 
observe what happens when its tip enters the circle. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Hurvich 1981.)
Figure 22–5  Rod and cone photoreceptors have similar 
structures.
A. Both rod and cone cells have specialized regions called the 
outer and inner segments. The outer segment is attached to 
the inner segment by a cilium and contains the light-transducing 
apparatus. The inner segment holds mitochondria and much of 
the machinery for protein synthesis.
B. The outer segment consists of a stack of membranous discs 
that contain the light-absorbing photopigments. In both types of 
cells, these discs are formed by infolding of the plasma mem-
brane. In rods, however, the folds pinch off from the membrane 
so that the discs are free-floating within the outer segment, 
whereas in cones, the discs remain part of the plasma membrane. 
(Adapted, with permission, from O’Brien 1982. Copyright © 1982 
AAAS; Young 1970.)
A  Morphology of photoreceptors   
B  Outer segment of photoreceptors
Outer
segment
Inner 
segment
Axon and
synaptic
terminal
Cell body
Cilium
Mitochondria
Nucleus
Discs         
Cone
Rod
Free-ﬂoating
discs
Cytoplasmic 
space
Cone
Rod
Folding of
outer cell
membrane
Connecting
cilium
Folding of
outer cell
membrane
Rods and cones also differ in function, most impor-
tantly in their sensitivity to light. Rods can signal the 
absorption of a single photon and are responsible for 
vision under dim illumination such as moonlight. But 
as the light level increases toward dawn, the electri-
cal response of rods becomes saturated and the cells 
cease to respond to variations in intensity. Cones are 
much less sensitive to light; they make no contribution 
to night vision but are solely responsible for vision in 
daylight. Their response is considerably faster than 
that of rods. Primates have only one type of rod but 
three kinds of cone photoreceptors, distinguished by 
the range of wavelengths to which they respond: the 
L (long-wave), M (medium-wave), and S (short-wave) 
cones (Figure 22–6).
The human retina contains approximately 100 million  
rods and 5 million cones, but the two cell types are 
differently distributed. The central fovea contains no 
rods but is densely packed with small cones. A few 
millimeters outside the fovea, rods greatly outnum-
ber cones. All photoreceptors become larger and more 
widely spaced toward the periphery of the retina. 


===== Page 3 =====
526    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–6  Sensitivity spectra for the three types of cones 
and the rod. At each wavelength, the sensitivity is inversely 
proportional to the intensity of light required to elicit a criterion 
response in the sensory neuron. Sensitivity varies over a large 
range and thus is shown on a logarithmic scale. The different 
classes of photoreceptors are sensitive to broad and overlap-
ping ranges of wavelengths. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Schnapf et al. 1988.)
Figure 22–7  (Opposite) Phototransduction.
A. The rod cell responds to light. Rhodopsin molecules in the 
outer-segment discs absorb photons, which leads to the clo-
sure of cyclic guanosine 3′-5′ monophosphate (cGMP)-gated 
channels in the plasma membrane. This channel closure hyper-
polarizes the membrane and reduces the rate of release of the 
neurotransmitter glutamate. (Adapted from Alberts 2008.)
B. 1. Molecular processes in phototransduction. cGMP is 
produced by a guanylate cyclase (GC) from guanosine triphos-
phate (GTP) and hydrolyzed by a phosphodiesterase (PDE). 
In the dark, the phosphodiesterase activity is low, the cGMP 
concentration is high, and the cGMP-gated channels are open, 
allowing the influx of Na+ and Ca2+. In the light, rhodopsin (R) 
is excited by absorption of a photon, then activates transducin 
(T), which in turn activates the PDE; the cGMP level drops, the 
membrane channels close, and less Na+ and Ca2+ enter the cell. 
The transduction enzymes are all located in the internal mem-
brane discs, and the soluble ligand cGMP serves as a messen-
ger to the plasma membrane.  
2. Calcium ions have a negative feedback role in the reaction 
cascade in phototransduction. Stimulation of the network 
by light leads to the closure of the cGMP-gated channels. 
This causes a drop in the intracellular concentration of Ca2+. 
Because Ca2+ modulates the function of at least three com-
ponents of the cascade—rhodopsin, GC, and the cGMP-gated 
channel—the drop in Ca2+ counteracts the excitation caused by 
light.
C. Voltage response of a primate rod and cone to brief flashes 
of light of increasing intensity. Higher numbers on the traces 
indicate greater intensities of illumination (not all traces are 
labeled). For dim flashes, the response amplitude increases 
linearly with intensity. At high intensities, the receptor saturates 
and remains hyperpolarized steadily for some time after the 
flash; this leads to the afterimages that we perceive after a 
bright flash. Note that the response peaks earlier for brighter 
flashes and that cones respond faster than rods. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Schneeweis and Schnapf 1995. Copy-
right © 1995 AAAS.)
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
400
500
S cones
M cones
L cones
Rods
600
Wavelength (nm)
Log relative sensitivity
700
800 900
The S cones make up only 10% of all cones and are 
absent from the central fovea.
The retinal center of gaze is clearly specialized for 
daytime vision. The dense packing of cone photorecep-
tors in the fovea sets the limits of our visual acuity. In 
fact, the smallest letters we can read on a doctor’s eye 
chart have strokes whose images are just one to two 
cone diameters wide on the retina, a visual angle of 
about 1 minute of arc (Figure 22–1C). At night, the cen-
tral fovea is blind owing to the absence of rods. Astron-
omers know that one must look just to the side of a dim 
star to see it at all. During nighttime walks in the forest, 
we nonastronomers tend to follow our daytime reflex 
of looking straight at the source of a suspicious sound. 
Mysteriously, the object disappears, only to jump back 
into our peripheral field of view as we avert our gaze.
Phototransduction Links the Absorption of a 
Photon to a Change in Membrane Conductance
As in many other neurons, the membrane potential of 
a photoreceptor is regulated by the balance of mem-
brane conductances to Na+ and K+ ions, whose trans-
membrane gradients are maintained by metabolically 
active pumps (Chapter 9). In the dark, Na+ ions flow 
into the photoreceptor through nonselective cation 
channels that are activated by the second messenger 
cyclic guanosine 3′-5′ monophosphate (cGMP).
Absorption of a photon by the pigment protein 
sets in motion a biochemical cascade that ultimately 
lowers the concentration of cGMP, thus closing the 
cGMP-gated channels and moving the cell closer to the 
K+ equilibrium potential. In this way, light hyperpolar-
izes the photoreceptor (Figure 22–7). Here, we describe 
this sequence of events in detail. Most of this knowl-
edge derives from studies of rods, but the mechanism 
in cones is very similar.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    527
Dark
Light
Glutamate 
released
Cell
depolarized
Rhodopsin
inactive
Na+  
channels 
open
Glutamate 
release
reduced
Cell hyper-
polarized
Rhodopsin
active
Na+ 
channels 
closed
R
PDE
cGMP-gated
Na+ channel
cGMP
Ca2+
Na+
PDE
cGMP
Ca2+
Dark
Light
GMP
α
βγ
GTP
GC
R
T
GC
GTP
1
5
9
2
Time (s)
1
0
0
0.2
2
Light
Recovery
Dark
L cone
Photovoltage (mV)
Photovoltage (mV)
C  Voltage response to light
A  Phototransduction and neural signaling 
Increases activity or concentration
Decreases activity or concentration
PDE
Ca2+
R
Na+
cGMP
GC
α
βγ
Rod
T
T
1
2
0
0
–20
–8
B1  Molecular processes in phototransduction
B2  Reaction network in phototransduction
Na+


===== Page 5 =====
528    Part IV / Perception
Figure 22–8  Structure of the visual pigments.
A. The visual pigment in rod cells, rhodopsin, is the covalent 
complex of two components. Opsin is a large protein with 
348 amino acids and a molecular mass of approximately 
40,000 daltons. It loops back and forth seven times across 
the membrane of the rod disc. Retinal is a small light-
absorbing compound covalently attached to a side chain of 
lysine 296 in opsin’s seventh membrane-spanning region. 
Absorption of light by 11-cis retinal causes a rotation around 
the double bond. As retinal adopts the more stable all-trans 
configuration, it causes a conformational change in opsin 
that triggers the subsequent events of visual transduction. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Nathans and Hogness 
1984.)
B. The blue circles denote identical amino acids; black circles 
denote differences. The forms of opsin in the three types of cone 
cells (L, M, and S) resemble each other as well as the rhodopsin 
in rod cells, suggesting that all four evolved from a common 
precursor by duplication and divergence. The L and M opsins 
are most closely related, with 96% identity in their amino acid 
sequences. They are thought to have evolved from a gene-
duplication event approximately 30 million years ago, after Old 
World monkeys, which have three visual pigments, separated 
from New World monkeys, which generally have only two.
Light Activates Pigment Molecules in the 
Photoreceptors
Rhodopsin, the visual pigment in rod cells, has two 
components. The protein portion, opsin, is embedded 
in the disc membrane and does not by itself absorb vis-
ible light. The light-absorbing moiety, retinal, is a small 
molecule whose 11-cis isomer is covalently linked to a 
Cytoplasm
Outer segment
A  Visual pigment in rods
B  Visual pigment amino acid sequences
Disc
membrane
Residue 296
(attachment
site for retinal)
COOH
Visual pigment
(rhodopsin)
Disc interior
H2C
H2C
C
C
C
C
H
C
H
H2C
H3C
C
C
C
H
H
O
C
C
H
CH3
H3C
11-cis retinal (Mr = 268)
All-trans retinal
Light
CH3
CH3
H
C
C
H
H2C
H2C
NH2
C
C
C
C
H
C
H
H2C
C
H
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
H
C
C
H
C
C
H
CH3
C
O
H
C
M vs rhodopsin
Opsin
Retinal
COOH
COOH
M vs S
NH2
NH2
NH2
L vs M
COOH
Cytoplasm
Intradiscal 
space
Disc
membrane
Disc
interior
Cytoplasm
Disc
membrane
lysine residue of opsin (Figure 22–8A). Absorption of a 
photon by retinal causes it to flip from the 11-cis to the 
all-trans configuration. This reaction is the only light-
dependent step in vision.
The change in shape of the retinal molecule causes 
a conformational change in the opsin to an activated 
state called metarhodopsin II, thus triggering the second 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    529
Figure 22–9  Absorption spectrum of rhodopsin.  The 
absorption spectrum of human rhodopsin measured in a 
cuvette is compared with the spectral sensitivity of human 
observers to very dim light flashes. The psychophysical 
data have been corrected for absorption by the ocular 
media. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wald and 
Brown 1956. Copyright © 1956 Springer Nature.)
step of phototransduction. Metarhodopsin II is unsta-
ble and splits within minutes, yielding opsin and free 
all-trans retinal. The all-trans retinal is then trans-
ported from rods to pigment epithelial cells, where it 
is reduced to all-trans retinol (vitamin A), the precur-
sor of 11-cis retinal, which is subsequently transported 
back to rods.
All-trans retinal is thus a crucial compound in the 
visual system. Its precursors, such as vitamin A, can-
not be synthesized by humans and so must be a regu-
lar part of the diet. Deficiencies of vitamin A can lead 
to night blindness and, if untreated, to deterioration of 
receptor outer segments and eventually to blindness.
Each type of cone in the human retina produces a var-
iant of the opsin protein. These three cone pigments are 
distinguished by their absorption spectrum, the depend-
ence on wavelength of the efficiency of light absorption 
(see Figure 22–6). The spectrum is determined by the 
protein sequence through the interaction between reti-
nal and certain amino acid side chains near the binding 
pocket. Red light excites L cones more than the M cones, 
whereas green light excites the M cones more. Therefore, 
the relative degree of excitation in these cone types con-
tains information about the spectrum of the light, inde-
pendent of its intensity. The brain’s comparison of signals 
from different cone types is the basis for color vision.
In night vision, only the rods are active, so all 
functional photoreceptors have the same absorption 
spectrum. A green light consequently has exactly the 
same effect on the visual system as a red light of a 
greater intensity. Because a single-photoreceptor sys-
tem cannot distinguish the spectrum of a light from its 
intensity, “at night all cats are gray.” By comparing the 
sensitivity of a rod to different wavelengths of light, 
one obtains the absorption spectrum of rhodopsin. It is 
Rhodopsin absorption 
spectrum
Human dim-light
spectral sensitivity
Wavelength (nm)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Sensitivity
a remarkable fact that one can measure this molecu-
lar property accurately just by asking human sub-
jects about the appearance of various colored lights 
(Figure 22–9). The quantitative study of perception, 
or psychophysics, provides similar insights into other 
mechanisms of brain processing (Chapter 17).
Excited Rhodopsin Activates a Phosphodiesterase 
Through the G Protein Transducin
Activated rhodopsin in the form of metarhodopsin II 
diffuses within the disc membrane where it encounters 
transducin, a member of the G protein family (Chapter 14). 
As is the case for other G proteins, the inactive form of 
transducin binds a molecule of guanosine diphosphate 
(GDP). Interaction with metarhodopsin II promotes the 
exchange of GDP for guanosine triphosphate (GTP). 
This leads to dissociation of transducin’s subunits into 
an active α-subunit carrying the GTP (Tα-GTP) and the 
β- and γ-subunits (Tβγ). Metarhodopsin II can activate 
hundreds of additional transducin molecules, thus sig-
nificantly amplifying the cell’s response.
The active transducin subunit Tα-GTP forms a 
complex with a cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase, 
another protein associated with the disc membrane. 
This interaction greatly increases the rate at which the 
enzyme hydrolyzes cGMP to 5′-GMP. Each phosphodi-
esterase molecule can hydrolyze more than 1,000 mol-
ecules of cGMP per second, thus increasing the degree 
of amplification.
The concentration of cGMP controls the activity of 
the cGMP-gated channels in the plasma membrane of 
the outer segment. In darkness, when the cGMP con-
centration is high, a sizeable Na+ influx through the 
open channels maintains the cell at a depolarized level 


===== Page 7 =====
530    Part IV / Perception
of approximately –40 mV. As a consequence, the cell’s 
synaptic terminal continuously releases the transmit-
ter glutamate. The light-evoked decrease in cGMP 
results in the closure of the cGMP-gated channels, thus 
reducing the inward flux of Na+ ions and hyperpolar-
izing the cell (Figure 22–7B1). Hyperpolarization slows 
the release of neurotransmitter from the photoreceptor 
terminal, thereby initiating a neural signal.
Multiple Mechanisms Shut Off the Cascade
The photoreceptor’s response to a single photon must 
be terminated so that the cell can respond to another 
photon. Metarhodopsin II is inactivated through phos-
phorylation by a specific rhodopsin kinase followed by 
binding of the soluble protein arrestin, which blocks 
the interaction with transducin.
Active transducin (Tα-GTP) has an intrinsic GTPase 
activity, which eventually converts bound GTP to GDP. 
Tα-GDP then releases phosphodiesterase and recom-
bines with Tβγ, ready again for excitation by rhodopsin. 
Once the phosphodiesterase has been inactivated, the 
cGMP concentration is restored by a guanylate cyclase 
that produces cGMP from GTP. At this point, the mem-
brane channels open, the Na+ current resumes, and the 
photoreceptor depolarizes back to its dark potential.
In addition to these independent mechanisms that 
shut off individual elements of the cascade, an impor-
tant feedback mechanism ensures that large responses 
are terminated more quickly. This is mediated by a 
change in the Ca2+ concentration in the cell. Calcium 
ions enter the cell through the cGMP-gated channels 
and are extruded by rapid cation exchangers. In the 
dark, the intracellular Ca2+ concentration is high, but 
during the cell’s light response, when the cGMP-gated 
channels close, the Ca2+ level drops quickly to a few 
percent of the dark level.
This reduction in Ca2+ concentration modulates the 
biochemical reactions in three ways (Figure 22–7B2). 
Rhodopsin phosphorylation is accelerated through 
the action of the calcium-binding protein recoverin on 
rhodopsin kinase, thus reducing activation of trans-
ducin. The activity of guanylyl cyclase is accelerated 
by calcium-dependent guanylyl cyclase–activating 
proteins. Finally, the affinity of the cGMP-gated chan-
nel for cGMP is increased through the action of Ca2+-
calmodulin. All these effects promote the return of the 
photoreceptor to the dark state.
Defects in Phototransduction Cause Disease
Not surprisingly, defects in the phototransduction 
machinery have serious consequences. One prominent 
defect is color blindness, which results from loss or 
abnormality in the genes for cone pigments, as dis-
cussed later.
Stationary night blindness results when rod function 
has been lost but cone function remains intact. This 
disease is heritable, and mutations have been identi-
fied in many components of the phototransduction 
cascade: rhodopsin, rod transducin, rod phosphodies-
terase, rhodopsin kinase, and arrestin. In some cases, it 
appears that the rods are permanently activated, as if 
exposed to a constant blinding light.
Unfortunately, many defects in phototransduction 
lead to retinitis pigmentosa, a progressive degeneration 
of the retina that ultimately results in blindness. The 
disease has multiple forms, many of which have been 
associated with mutations that affect signal transduc-
tion in rods. Why these changes in function lead to 
death of the rods and subsequent degeneration of the 
cones is not understood.
Ganglion Cells Transmit Neural Images  
to the Brain
The photoreceptor layer produces a relatively simple 
neural representation of the visual scene: Neurons in 
bright regions are hyperpolarized, whereas those in 
dark regions are depolarized. Because the optic nerve 
has only about 1% as many axons as there are receptor 
cells, the retinal circuit must edit the information in the 
photoreceptors before it is conveyed to the brain.
This step constitutes low-level visual processing, the 
first stage in deriving visual percepts from the pattern 
of light falling on the retina. To understand this pro-
cess, we must first understand the organization of the 
retina’s output and how retinal ganglion cells respond 
to various patterns of light.
The Two Major Types of Ganglion Cells Are ON 
Cells and OFF Cells
Many retinal ganglion cells fire action potentials spon-
taneously even in darkness or constant illumination. 
If the light intensity is suddenly increased, so-called 
ON cells fire more rapidly. Other ganglion cells, the 
OFF cells, fire more slowly or cease firing altogether. 
When the intensity diminishes again, the ON cells fire 
less and OFF cells fire more. The retinal output thus 
includes two complementary representations that dif-
fer in the polarity of their response to light.
This arrangement serves to communicate rapidly 
both brightening and dimming in the visual scene. If 
the retina had only ON cells, a dark object would be 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    531
encoded by a decrease in firing rate. If the ganglion 
cell fired at a maintained rate of 10 spikes per second 
and then decreased its rate, it would take about 100 ms 
for the postsynaptic neuron to notice the change in fre-
quency of action potentials. In contrast, an increase in 
firing rate to 200 spikes per second is noticeable within 
only 5 ms.
Many Ganglion Cells Respond Strongly  
to Edges in the Image
To probe the responses of a ganglion cell in more detail, 
one can test how the cell’s firing varies with the loca-
tion and time course of a small spot of light focused on 
different portions of the retina.
A typical ganglion cell is sensitive to light in a 
compact region of the retina near the cell body called 
the cell’s receptive field. Within that area, one can often 
distinguish a center region and surround region where 
light produces opposite responses in the cell. An ON 
cell, for example, fires faster when a bright spot is 
focused in the cell’s receptive field center but decreases 
its firing when the spot is focused on the surround. 
If light covers both the center and the surround, the 
response is much weaker than for center-only illumi-
nation. A bright spot on the center combined with a 
dark annulus covering the surround elicits very strong 
firing. For an OFF cell, these relationships are reversed; 
the cell is strongly excited by a dark spot and a bright 
annulus (Figure 22–10).
The output produced by a population of retinal 
ganglion cells thus enhances regions of spatial contrast 
in the input, such as an edge between two areas of dif-
ferent intensity, and gives less emphasis to regions of 
homogeneous illumination.
The Output of Ganglion Cells Emphasizes Temporal 
Changes in Stimuli
When an effective light stimulus appears, a ganglion 
cell’s firing typically increases sharply from the rest-
ing level to a peak and then relaxes to an intermediate 
rate. When the stimulus turns off, the firing rate drops 
sharply then gradually recovers to the resting level.
The rapidity of decline from the peak to the rest-
ing level varies among ganglion cell types. Transient 
neurons produce a burst of spikes only at the onset of 
the stimulus, whereas sustained neurons maintain an 
almost steady firing rate for several seconds during 
stimulation (Figure 22–10).
In general, however, the output of ganglion cells 
favors temporal changes in visual input over periods 
of constant light intensity. In fact, when an image is 
stabilized on the retina with an eye-tracking device, it 
fades from view within seconds. Fortunately, this never 
happens in normal vision; even when we attempt to fix 
our gaze, small automatic eye movements (saccades) 
continually scan the image across the retina and pre-
vent the world from disappearing (Chapter 25).
Retinal Output Emphasizes Moving Objects
Based on these observations, we can understand more 
generally the response of ganglion cells to visual 
inputs. For example, the edges of a moving object elicit 
strong firing in the ganglion cell population because 
these are the only regions of spatial contrast and the 
only regions where the light intensity changes over 
time (Figure 22–11).
We can easily appreciate why the retina selectively 
responds to these features. The outline of an object is 
particularly useful for inferring its shape and identity. 
Similarly, objects that move or change suddenly are 
more worthy of immediate attention than those that 
do not. Retinal processing thus extracts low-level fea-
tures of the scene that are useful for guiding behavior 
and selectively transmits those to the brain. In fact, the 
rejection of features that are constant either in space or 
in time accounts for the spatiotemporal sensitivity of 
human perception (Box 22–1).
Several Ganglion Cell Types Project to the Brain 
Through Parallel Pathways
Several different types of ganglion cells have been iden-
tified on the basis of their morphology and responses to 
light. The ON and OFF cells occur in every vertebrate 
retina, and in the primate retina, two major classes of 
cells, the P-cells and M-cells, each include ON and OFF 
types (see Figure 22–2B). At any given distance from 
the fovea, the receptive fields of M-cells (Latin magno, 
large) are much larger than those of P-cells (Latin parvo, 
small). The M-cells also have faster and more transient 
responses than P-cells. Some ganglion cells are intrinsi-
cally light-sensitive owing to expression of the visual 
pigment melanopsin.
In total, more than 20 types of ganglion cells have 
been described. The population of each type covers 
the retina in a tiled fashion, such that any point on the 
retina lies within the receptive field center of at least 
one ganglion cell. One can envision that the signals 
from each population together send a distinct neural 
representation of the visual field to the brain. In this 
view, the optic nerve conveys 20 or more neural repre-
sentations that differ in polarity (ON or OFF), spatial 
resolution (fine or coarse), temporal responsiveness 


===== Page 9 =====
532    Part IV / Perception
Stimulus pattern
Firing rate
2
1
0
Time (s)
2
1
0
Time (s)
Stimulus
OFF cells
ON cells
4  Center and
 
surround
 
opposite
3  Center and
 
surround 
 
uniform
2  Surround
 
only
1  Center
 
only
Transient cells
Sustained cells
Stimuli
On area
Off area
Figure 22–10  Responses of retinal ganglion cells with 
center-surround receptive fields. In these idealized experi-
ments, the stimulus changes from a uniform gray field to the 
pattern of bright (yellow) and dark (black) regions indicated 
on the left. This leads to the firing rate responses shown 
on the right. 1. ON cells are excited by a bright spot in the 
receptive field center, OFF cells by a dark spot. In  
sustained cells, the excitation persists throughout 
stimulation, whereas in transient cells, a brief burst of spikes 
occurs just after the onset of stimulation. 2. If the same 
stimulus that excites the center is applied to the surround, 
firing is suppressed. 3. Uniform stimulation of both center 
and surround elicits a response like that of the center, but 
much smaller in amplitude. 4. Stimulation of the center com-
bined with the opposite stimulus in the surround produces 
the strongest response.


