===== Page 1 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 2 =====
Part III


===== Page 3 =====
Preceding Page
A mechanosensory neuron (center, green) sends its axon to form excitatory synaptic 
connections with two motor neurons (red, orange) in cell culture, recapitulating the 
connections in the living animal. The neurons were isolated from the marine snail  
Aplysia californica. (Reproduced, with permission, from Harshad Vishwasrao  
and Eric R. Kandel.)


===== Page 4 =====
Synaptic Transmission
III
I
n Part II, we examined how electrical signals are initiated and 
propagated within an individual neuron. We now turn to synap-
tic transmission, the process by which one nerve cell communi-
cates with another. 
With some exceptions, the synapse consists of three components: 
(1) the terminals of the presynaptic axon, (2) a target on the postsyn-
aptic cell, and (3) a zone of apposition. Based on the structure of the 
apposition, synapses are categorized into two major groups: electrical 
and chemical. At electrical synapses, the presynaptic terminal and the 
postsynaptic cell are in very close apposition at regions termed gap 
junctions. The current generated by an action potential in the presyn-
aptic neuron directly enters the postsynaptic cell through specialized 
bridging channels called gap junction channels, which physically connect 
the cytoplasm of the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. At chemical 
synapses, a cleft separates the two cells, and the cells do not commu-
nicate through bridging channels. Rather, an action potential in the 
presynaptic cell leads to the release of a chemical transmitter from the 
nerve terminal. The transmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft and 
binds to receptor molecules on the postsynaptic membrane, which reg-
ulates the opening and closing of ion channels in the postsynaptic cell. 
This leads to changes in the membrane potential of the postsynaptic 
neuron that can either excite or inhibit the firing of an action potential.
Receptors for transmitters can be classified into two major 
groups depending on how they control ion channels in the postsyn-
aptic cell. One type, the ionotropic receptor, is an ion channel that 
opens when the transmitter binds. The second type, the metabo-
tropic receptor, acts indirectly on ion channels by activating a bio-
chemical second-messenger cascade within the postsynaptic cell. 
Both types of receptors can result in excitation or inhibition. The sign 
of the signal depends not on the identity of the transmitter but on the 
properties of the receptor with which the transmitter interacts. Most 
transmitters are low-molecular-weight molecules, but certain pep-
tides also can act as messengers at synapses. The methods of electro-
physiology, biochemistry, and molecular biology have been used to 
characterize the receptors in postsynaptic cells that respond to these 
various chemical messengers. These methods have also clarified 
how second-messenger pathways transduce signals within cells.


===== Page 5 =====
In this part of the book, we consider synaptic transmission in its 
most elementary forms. We first compare and contrast the two major 
classes of synapses, chemical and electrical (see Chapter 11). We then 
focus on a model chemical synapse in the peripheral nervous system, 
the neuromuscular junction between a presynaptic motor neuron and 
a postsynaptic skeletal muscle fiber (see Chapter 12). Next we exam-
ine chemical synapses between neurons in the central nervous system, 
focusing on the postsynaptic cell and its integration of synaptic signals 
from multiple presynaptic inputs acting on both ionotropic receptors 
(see Chapter 13) and metabotropic receptors (see Chapter 14). We 
then turn to the presynaptic terminal and consider the mechanisms by 
which neurons release transmitter from their presynaptic terminals, 
how transmitter release can be regulated by neural activity (see 
Chapter 15), and the chemical nature of the neurotransmitters (see 
Chapter 16). Because the molecular architecture of chemical synapses 
is complex, many inherited and acquired diseases can affect chemical 
synaptic transmission, which we consider in detail later in Chapter 57. 
One key theme running throughout the chapters of this section, 
and indeed throughout the book, is the concept of plasticity. At all 
synapses, the strength of a synaptic connection is not fixed but can be 
modified in various ways by behavioral context or experience, through 
a variety of mechanisms referred to as synaptic plasticity. Some modi-
fications result from the activity of the synapse itself (homosynaptic 
plasticity). Other modifications depend on extrinsic factors, often due 
to the release of a modulatory transmitter (heterosynaptic plasticity). 
In Chapters 53 and 54, we will see how such modifications provide a 
cellular substrate for different forms of memory storage that range in 
duration from seconds to a lifetime. In the chapters of Part IX, we will 
see how dysfunction in synaptic plasticity can contribute to a variety 
of neurological and psychiatric disorders. 
Part Editor: Steven A. Siegelbaum
Part III
Chapter 11	
Overview of Synaptic Transmission
Chapter 12	
Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle 
Synapse
Chapter 13	
Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System
Chapter 14	
Modulation of Synaptic Transmission and 
Neuronal Excitability: Second Messengers
Chapter 15	
Transmitter Release
Chapter 16	
Neurotransmitters


===== Page 6 =====
11
Overview of Synaptic Transmission
neuron. Whereas the Purkinje cell of the cerebellum 
receives up to 100,000 synaptic inputs, the neighboring 
granule neurons, the most numerous class of neurons 
in the brain, receive only around four excitatory inputs. 
Although many of the synaptic connections in the central 
and peripheral nervous systems are highly specialized, 
all neurons make use of one of the two basic forms of 
synaptic transmission: electrical or chemical. Moreover, 
the strength of both forms of synaptic transmission is 
not fixed, but can be enhanced or diminished by neu-
ronal activity. This synaptic plasticity is crucial for mem-
ory and for other higher brain functions.
Electrical synapses are employed primarily to send 
rapid and stereotyped depolarizing signals. In contrast, 
chemical synapses are capable of more variable signaling 
and thus can produce more complex interactions. They 
can produce either excitatory or inhibitory actions in post-
synaptic cells and initiate changes in the postsynaptic cell 
that last from milliseconds to hours. Chemical synapses 
also serve to amplify neuronal signals, so even a small 
presynaptic nerve terminal can alter the response of large 
postsynaptic cells. Because chemical synaptic transmis-
sion is so central to understanding brain and behavior, it 
is examined in detail in the next four chapters.
Synapses Are Predominantly Electrical or 
Chemical
The term synapse was introduced at the beginning  
of the 20th century by Charles Sherrington to describe 
the specialized zone of contact at which one neuron 
communicates with another. This site had first been 
Synapses Are Predominantly Electrical or Chemical
Electrical Synapses Provide Rapid Signal Transmission
Cells at an Electrical Synapse Are Connected by  
Gap-Junction Channels
Electrical Transmission Allows Rapid and Synchronous 
Firing of Interconnected Cells
Gap Junctions Have a Role in Glial Function and Disease
Chemical Synapses Can Amplify Signals
The Action of a Neurotransmitter Depends on the 
Properties of the Postsynaptic Receptor
Activation of Postsynaptic Receptors Gates Ion Channels 
Either Directly or Indirectly
Electrical and Chemical Synapses Can Coexist and Interact
Highlights
W
hat gives nerve cells their special ability to 
communicate with one another rapidly and 
with such great precision? We have already 
seen how signals are propagated within a neuron, from 
its dendrites and cell body to its axonal terminals. With 
this chapter, we begin to consider the signaling between 
neurons through the process of synaptic transmission. 
Synaptic transmission is fundamental to the neural 
functions we consider in this book, such as perception, 
voluntary movement, and learning.
Neurons communicate with one another at a spe-
cialized site called a synapse. The average neuron forms 
several thousand synaptic connections and receives 
a similar number of inputs. However, this number 
can vary widely depending on the particular type of 


===== Page 7 =====
242    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
described histologically at the level of light microscopy 
by Ramón y Cajal in the late 19th century.
All synapses were initially thought to operate by 
means of electrical transmission. In the 1920s, however, 
Otto Loewi discovered that a chemical compound, 
most likely acetylcholine (ACh), conveys signals from 
the vagus nerve to slow the beating heart. Loewi’s dis-
covery provoked considerable debate in the 1930s over 
whether chemical signaling existed at the fast synapses 
between motor nerve and skeletal muscle as well as 
synapses in the brain.
Two schools of thought emerged, one physiologi-
cal and the other pharmacological. Each championed a 
single mechanism for all synaptic transmission. Led by 
John Eccles (Sherrington’s student), the physiologists 
argued that synaptic transmission is electrical, that the 
action potential in the presynaptic neuron generates a 
current that flows passively into the postsynaptic cell. 
The pharmacologists, led by Henry Dale, argued that 
transmission is chemical, that the action potential in 
the presynaptic neuron leads to the release of a chemi-
cal substance that in turn initiates current in the post-
synaptic cell. When physiological and ultrastructural 
techniques improved in the 1950s and 1960s, it became 
clear that both forms of transmission exist. While most 
neurons initiate electrical signaling with a chemical 
transmitter, many others produce an electrical signal 
directly in the postsynaptic cell.
Once the fine structure of synapses was made vis-
ible with the electron microscope, chemical and electri-
cal synapses were found to have different structures. 
At chemical synapses, the presynaptic and postsynap-
tic neurons are completely separated by a small space, 
the synaptic cleft; there is no continuity between the 
cytoplasm of one cell and the next. In contrast, at elec-
trical synapses, the pre- and postsynaptic cells commu-
nicate through special channels that directly connect 
the cytoplasm of the two cells.
Table 11–1  Distinguishing Properties of Electrical and Chemical Synapses
Type of 
synapse
Distance 
between pre- and 
postsynaptic cell 
membranes
Cytoplasmic 
continuity 
between pre- and 
postsynaptic cells
Ultrastructural 
components
Agent of 
transmission
Synaptic  
delay
Direction of 
transmission
Electrical
4 nm
Yes
Gap-junction 
channels
Ion current
Virtually  
absent
Usually 
bidirectional
Chemical
20–40 nm
No
Presynaptic ves-
icles and active 
zones; postsyn-
aptic receptors
Chemical 
transmitter
Significant: at 
least 0.3 ms, 
usually 1–5 ms 
or longer
Unidirectional
The main functional properties of the two types of 
synapses are summarized in Table 11–1. The most impor-
tant difference can be observed by injecting a positive 
current into the presynaptic cell to elicit a depolarization. 
At both types of synapses, outward current across the 
presynaptic cell membrane deposits positive charge on 
the inside of its membrane, thereby depolarizing the cell 
(Chapter 9). At electrical synapses, some of the current 
will enter the postsynaptic cell through the gap-junction 
channels, depositing a positive charge on the inside of 
the membrane and depolarizing it. The current leaves the 
postsynaptic cell across the membrane through resting 
channels (Figure 11–1A). If the depolarization exceeds 
threshold, voltage-gated ion channels in the postsynaptic 
cell open and generate an action potential. By contrast, at 
chemical synapses, there is no direct low-resistance path-
way between the pre- and postsynaptic cells. Instead, the 
action potential in the presynaptic neuron initiates the 
release of a chemical transmitter, which diffuses across 
the synaptic cleft and binds with receptors on the mem-
brane of the postsynaptic cell (Figure 11–1B).
Electrical Synapses Provide Rapid Signal 
Transmission
During excitatory synaptic transmission at an electrical 
synapse, voltage-gated ion channels in the presynaptic 
cell generate the current that depolarizes the postsyn-
aptic cell. Thus, these channels not only depolarize 
the presynaptic cell above the threshold for an action 
potential but also generate sufficient ionic current to 
produce a change in potential in the postsynaptic cell. 
To generate such a large current, the presynaptic ter-
minal must be big enough for its membrane to contain 
many ion channels. At the same time, the postsynaptic 
cell must be relatively small. This is because a small 
cell has a higher input resistance (Rin) than a large cell 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 11 / Overview of Synaptic Transmission    243
Figure 11–1  Functional properties of electrical and chemical 
synapses.
A. At an electrical synapse, some current injected into the 
presynaptic cell escapes through resting (nongated) ion channels 
in the cell membrane. However, some current also enters the 
postsynaptic cell through gap-junction channels that connect the 
cytoplasm of the pre- and postsynaptic cells and that provide a 
low-resistance (high-conductance) pathway for electrical current.
B. At chemical synapses, all current injected into the  
presynaptic cell escapes into the extracellular fluid.  
However, the resulting depolarization of the presynaptic  
cell membrane can produce an action potential that causes 
the release of neurotransmitter molecules that bind recep-
tors on the postsynaptic cell. This binding opens ion chan-
nels that initiate a change in membrane potential in the 
postsynaptic cell.
+
+
–
–
A  Current pathways at electrical synapses
Postsynaptic
Presynaptic
Presynaptic
B  Current pathways at chemical synapses
Postsynaptic
and, according to Ohm’s law (ΔV = I × Rin), undergoes 
a greater voltage change (ΔV) in response to a given 
presynaptic current (I).
Electrical synaptic transmission was first described 
by Edwin Furshpan and David Potter in the giant 
motor synapse of the crayfish, where the presynaptic 
fiber is much larger than the postsynaptic fiber (Figure 
11–2A). An action potential generated in the presynap-
tic fiber produces a depolarizing postsynaptic poten-
tial that often exceeds the threshold to fire an action 
Figure 11–2  Electrical synaptic transmission was first  
demonstrated at the giant motor synapse in the  
crayfish. (Adapted, with permission, from Furshpan and Potter 
1957 and 1959.)
A. The lateral giant fiber running down the nerve cord is the 
presynaptic neuron. The giant motor fiber, which projects from 
the cell body in the ganglion to the periphery, is the postsynaptic 
neuron. Electrodes for passing current and for recording voltage 
are placed within the pre- and postsynaptic cells.
B. Transmission at an electrical synapse is virtually instantaneous—
the postsynaptic response follows presynaptic stimulation in 
a fraction of a millisecond. The dashed line shows how the 
responses of the two cells correspond in time. At chemical  
synapses, there is a delay (the synaptic delay) between the  
pre- and postsynaptic potentials (see Figure 11–8).
B  Electrical synaptic transmission
mV
50
50
100
0
25
0
Postsynaptic
potential
Current pulse
to presynaptic
ﬁber
0
1
2
3
4  ms
Current
injection
Postsynaptic
electrode
Presynaptic
electrode
Current
injection
A  Experimental setup
Postsynaptic
neuron:
giant motor
ﬁber
Electrical
synapse
Presynaptic neuron:
lateral giant ﬁber
Presynaptic
potential
Pre
Post


===== Page 9 =====
244    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
potential. At electrical synapses, the synaptic delay—
the time between the presynaptic spike and the post-
synaptic potential—is remarkably short (Figure 11–2B).
Such a short latency is not possible with chemi-
cal transmission, which requires several biochemical 
steps: release of a transmitter from the presynaptic 
neuron, diffusion of transmitter molecules across the 
synaptic cleft to the postsynaptic cell, binding of trans-
mitter to a specific receptor, and subsequent gating of 
ion channels (all described in this and the next chapter). 
Only current passing directly from one cell to another 
can produce the near-instantaneous transmission 
observed at the giant motor electrical synapse.
Another feature of electrical transmission is that 
the change in potential of the postsynaptic cell is 
directly related to the size and shape of the change in 
potential of the presynaptic cell. Even when a weak 
subthreshold depolarizing current is injected into the 
presynaptic neuron, some current enters the postsyn-
aptic cell and depolarizes it (Figure 11–3). In contrast, 
at a chemical synapse, the current in the presynaptic 
cell must reach the threshold for an action potential 
before it can release transmitter and elicit a response in 
the postsynaptic cell.
Most electrical synapses can transmit both depolar-
izing and hyperpolarizing currents. A presynaptic action 
potential with a large hyperpolarizing afterpotential 
produces a biphasic (depolarizing-hyperpolarizing) 
change in potential in the postsynaptic cell. Signal trans-
mission at electrical synapses is similar to the passive 
propagation of subthreshold electrical signals along 
axons (Chapter 9) and therefore is also referred to as 
electrotonic transmission. At some specialized gap junc-
tions, the channels have voltage-dependent gates that 
permit them to conduct depolarizing current in only 
Figure 11–3  Electrical transmission is graded. It occurs 
even when the current in the presynaptic cell is below the 
threshold for an action potential. As demonstrated by single-
cell recordings, a subthreshold depolarizing stimulus causes a 
passive depolarization in the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. 
(Depolarizing or outward current is indicated by an upward 
deflection.)
Current pulse to
presynaptic cell
Voltage recorded
in presynaptic cell
Voltage recorded
in postsynaptic cell
one direction, from the presynaptic cell to the postsyn-
aptic cell. These junctions are called rectifying synapses. 
(The crayfish giant motor synapse is an example.)
Cells at an Electrical Synapse Are Connected by 
Gap-Junction Channels
At an electrical synapse, the pre- and postsynaptic 
components are apposed at the gap junction, where 
the separation between the two neurons (4 nm) is 
much less than the normal nonsynaptic space between 
neurons (20 nm). This narrow gap is bridged by  
gap-junction channels, specialized protein structures 
that conduct ionic current directly from the presynap-
tic to the postsynaptic cell.
A gap-junction channel consists of a pair of 
hemichannels, or connexons, one in the presynaptic and 
the other in the postsynaptic cell membrane. These 
hemichannels thus form a continuous bridge between 
the two cells (Figure 11–4). The pore of the channel 
has a large diameter of approximately 1.5 nm, much 
larger than the 0.3- to 0.5-nm diameter of ion-selective 
ligand-gated or voltage-gated channels. The large pore 
of gap-junction channels does not discriminate among 
inorganic ions and is even wide enough to permit 
small organic molecules and experimental markers 
such as fluorescent dyes to pass between the two cells.
Each connexon is composed of six identical subu-
nits, called connexins. Connexins in different tissues are 
encoded by a large family of 21 separate but related 
genes. In mammals, the most common connexon in 
neurons is formed from the product of connexin 36. 
Connexin genes are named for their predicted molec-
ular weight, in kilodaltons, based on their primary 
amino acid sequence. All connexin subunits have an 
intracellular N- and C-terminus with four interposed 
α-helixes that span the cell membrane (Figure 11–4C).
Many gap-junction channels in different cell 
types are formed by the products of different con-
nexin genes and thus respond differently to modu-
latory factors that control their opening and closing. 
For example, although most gap-junction channels 
close in response to lowered cytoplasmic pH or ele-
vated cytoplasmic Ca2+, the sensitivity of different 
channel isoforms to these factors varies widely. The 
closing of gap-junction channels in response to pH 
and Ca2+ plays an important role in the decoupling 
of damaged cells from healthy cells, as damaged cells 
contain elevated Ca2+ levels and a high concentration 
of protons. Finally, neurotransmitters released from 
nearby chemical synapses can modulate the opening 
of gap-junction channels through intracellular meta-
bolic reactions (Chapter 14).


