===== Page 1 =====
1532    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
development from birth until 6 to 18 months of age, 
when they regress, losing speech and hand skills that 
they had acquired. Rett syndrome is progressive, and 
initial symptoms are followed by repetitive hand 
movements, loss of motor control, and intellectual 
disability. Often young girls will display symptoms 
indistinguishable from ASD early in the course of the 
syndrome, although social communication frequently 
improves later in childhood. Its prevalence is approxi-
mately 1 in 10,000 live female births.
Rett syndrome is an X-linked inherited disease 
caused by loss-of-function mutations in the MECP2 
gene, which encodes a transcriptional regulator that 
binds to methylated cytosine bases in DNA, regulating 
gene expression and chromatin remodeling. The gene 
product was initially thought to act predominantly as a 
transcriptional repressor, but studies of both the mouse 
model and human induced pluripotent stem cells have 
shown that overall gene expression is reduced when 
the gene is knocked out. Among the genes that have 
reduced expression in neurons is BDNF, encoding brain-
derived neurotrophic factor. Studies in mouse models of 
Rett have found that overexpression of BDNF improves 
the knock-out phenotype. Other growth factors that 
increase gene expression but have more favorable 
neuropharmacological profiles, including insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), have also improved aspects of 
the mouse phenotype, leading to optimism about clini-
cal trials of related compounds. Phase II human trials 
with both molecules are currently underway.
One might think that such a global abnormality in 
gene expression would lead to a very severe phenotype, 
but because females are mosaic, with approximately 
half of their brain cells expressing one normal copy of 
MECP2 (due to random X-inactivation), they are viable 
but manifest the devastating Rett phenotype. Boys, who 
have a single X chromosome and thus a single copy of 
MECP2, typically die soon after birth or in infancy if 
they carry a loss-of-function mutation in MECP2.
The role of X-inactivation in the survival of female 
mutation carriers and the observation that favorable 
skewing (a shift toward preferential silencing of the 
mutant X) leads to a less severe clinical course have gener-
ated considerable interest in therapeutic strategies aimed 
at reactivating the normal but silenced X chromosomes in 
females with Rett syndrome. Although one can imagine 
considerable challenges resulting from the reactivation 
of many genes on a normally silenced chromosome, a 
recent study has reported a mouse mutation that leads to 
both alleles expressing MeCP2 without wholesale activa-
tion of genes on the X chromosome.
Interestingly, in 2005, duplications spanning 
MECP2 were identified in males with severe intellectual 
disability. This condition, called MECP2 duplication 
syndrome (MDS), includes autistic features, hypoto-
nia, epilepsy, gait abnormalities, and recurrent infec-
tions. Like Rett syndrome, it has also been productively 
modeled in rodents. However, unlike Rett, the major-
ity of identified cases are familial and not sporadic in 
nature. In these cases, female carriers are often healthy 
enough (due to favorable X-inactivation) to reproduce 
and transmit the duplication to boys with only a single 
X chromosome.
Williams Syndrome
Williams syndrome is caused by a segmental deletion 
of about 27 genes on the long arm of chromosome 7 
and is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual 
disability, connective tissue abnormalities, cardiovas-
cular defects, distinctive facies, and a behavioral phe-
notype characterized by increased sociability, preserved 
language abilities, affinity for music, and impaired 
visuospatial capabilities. The disorder occurs in 1 in 
10,000 live births. The connective tissue and key car-
diovascular symptoms have been attributed to the loss 
of the gene ELN (elastin), although no specific genes 
within the deleted interval have yet been definitively 
shown to result in the behavioral phenotype. Nonethe-
less, the social cognitive features of Williams syndrome 
are particularly intriguing: The degree of interest in 
social interaction is striking, leading to a nearly univer-
sal loss of reticence with strangers in children with the 
syndrome. In contrast to the almost complete absence 
of social anxiety, individuals with Williams syndrome 
have a high degree of general anxiety and isolated 
phobias. Finally, the affinity for and interest in music 
among a very large percentage of 7q11.23 deletion car-
riers, although less well characterized, are striking.
Conversely, duplication of the identical region of 
chromosome 7, including the same 26 to 28 genes, is a 
significant risk factor for ASD and other neurodevel-
opmental syndromes apart from Williams syndrome. 
The observation of contrasting social phenotypes 
depending on whether there is loss or gain of a small 
region of the genome is fascinating. Whether social 
functioning in William syndrome is truly the opposite 
of that seen in ASD, as is sometimes argued, seems 
less interesting than the conclusion that this region 
of the genome must contain one or more genes that 
modulate social affiliation. Consequently, the molec-
ular characterization of these deletion and duplica-
tion syndromes and intensive investigation of their 
impact on the development of molecular, cellular, 
and circuit properties in the central nervous system 
are particularly important.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1533
Figure 62–7  Imprinting in Prader-Willi and Angelman syn-
dromes. Approximately 70% of Prader-Willi and Angelman 
syndrome patients inherit chromosome 15 from one parent 
with spontaneous (noninherited) deletions of the q11-13 
interval. This interval contains imprinted genes with alleles 
that are either expressed or not depending on whether the 
chromosome was inherited from the father or mother. If the 
chromosome with the deletion is from the father, Prader-Willi 
syndrome occurs because maternally imprinted genes on the 
corresponding interval of the intact maternal chromosome 
(gene B, for example) are not expressed. If the chromosome 
with the deletion is from the mother, the gene for ubiquitin 
ligase (UBE3A) will not be expressed in offspring because of 
its normal inactivation on the paternal chromosome caused by 
imprinting; loss of expression of this gene leads to Angelman 
syndrome.
Angelman Syndrome and Prader-Willi Syndrome
Angelman and Prader-Willi syndromes are paradig-
matic examples of genetic syndromes that result from 
mutations in genes subject to parental imprinting. To 
understand these conditions, one must not only know 
the associated DNA lesion but also its parental origin.
For example, both syndromes most often result 
from the loss of the identical region of chromosome 15 
(15q11-q13) but have readily distinguishable pheno-
types. Angelman syndrome is characterized by severe 
intellectual disability, epilepsy, absence of speech, 
hyperactivity, and inappropriate laughter. In contrast, 
Prader-Willi is characterized by infantile hypotonia, 
mild to moderate intellectual disability, obesity, highly 
perseverative behavior, social disability, and dimin-
ished or absent satiety.
How these contrasting phenotypes result from the 
loss of the identical set of genes confounded medical 
geneticists until about the year 2000. The mystery was 
Mother’s
alleles
Father’s 
alleles
Prader-Willi syndrome
Son
Son
B  Spontaneous 15q11-13 deletion
Imprinted genes (15q11-13) 
Paternal deletion
Maternal deletion
Nonimprinted genes
Alleles for both genes 
from each parent expressed
A  Normal
Gene B not expressed
Angelman syndrome
Gene A not expressed
Normal development
15q11-13
deletion
B ON
A OFF
B OFF
A ON
Mother’s
alleles
Father’s 
alleles
15q11-13
deletion
A
B
Maternal A ON 
(paternally 
imprinted)
Paternal B ON
(maternally
imprinted)
Genes A and B expressed
solved by the discovery that the chromosomal interval 
is imprinted. Specifically, within this region, multiple 
genes are expressed only on the paternally inherited 
chromosome (maternal imprinting), whereas at least 
two genes, UBE3A and ATP10C, are expressed only 
on the maternally inherited chromosome (paternal 
imprinting) (Figure 62–7).
This discovery, along with a series of studies that 
allowed for fine mapping of the interval, provided a 
parsimonious explanation for the clinical observations. 
If the deletion of proximal chromosome 15 involved 
the maternal chromosome, the patient would suffer the 
loss of the protein product of UBE3A, a ubiquitin-protein 
ligase that stimulates the degradation and turnover of 
other proteins, leading to Angelman syndrome. Alter-
natively, if the paternal chromosome carried the dele-
tion, UBE3A would be expressed normally, but a series 
of other genes, including several strongly implicated 
in Prader-Willi syndrome, would be lost.


===== Page 3 =====
1534    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
The solution to the phenotypic complexity seen in 
15q11-13 deletion also led to a series of observations 
that revealed other previously unappreciated genetic 
mechanisms of behavioral pathology. For example, 
deletions on the maternal chromosome not directly 
involving the UBE3A gene were also observed in rare 
patients with Angelman syndrome, contributing to 
the identification of an Angelman syndrome imprinting 
control region mapping some distance from UBE3A 
but within the deletion interval. Similarly, the discov-
ery of both Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes in 
patients without deletions of any kind led to the recog-
nition that in a small percentage of both conditions two 
copies of a chromosome from the same parent were 
present (with no representation from the other parent), 
a phenomenon called uniparental disomy.
Both syndromes have complex behavioral pheno-
types. Social disability is characteristic of Prader-Willi; 
with Angelman syndrome, the overlap with ASD has 
been more difficult to establish because of the marked 
intellectual disability associated with the syndrome. 
Differentiating intellectual disability from ASD in indi-
viduals with very low IQ can be quite challenging. 
Nonetheless, there are multiple clear molecular and 
behavioral links with ASD. For example, duplications 
of the 15q11-13 region are a well-established risk fac-
tor for nonsyndromic ASD (see below), and functional 
de novo missense mutations in the gene UBE3A have 
been found in individuals with ASD without all of the 
features of Angelman syndrome.
Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide Insight 
Into the Mechanisms of Social Cognition
Although the fragile X, Rett, Williams, Angelman, and 
Prader-Willi syndromes collectively account for a small 
fraction of the burden of social disability in the popu-
lation, studies of these disorders have contributed to 
major advances in the understanding of normal brain 
development, neurodevelopmental syndromes in gen-
eral, and the mechanisms underlying social disability 
in particular. A number of biological processes iden-
tified in the study of these disorders—including the 
contribution of epigenetic mechanisms and chromatin 
dynamics, synaptic dysfunction, and the role of aber-
rant local protein synthesis—have all turned out to be 
important initial clues to the biological and develop-
mental mechanisms underlying nonsyndromic forms 
of ASD. Moreover, characterization of the genetics 
underlying certain neurodevelopmental syndromes 
provided some of the earliest examples of a phenom-
enon that is now well accepted in ASD—either losses 
or gains of identical risk genes or regions may lead to 
neurodevelopmental disorders, sometimes with over-
lapping and sometimes contrasting phenotypes.
Importantly, in addition to the first clues regard-
ing molecular mechanisms, recent studies of a number 
of Mendelian syndromes have challenged conven-
tional wisdom by highlighting, in model systems, the 
potential reversibility of developmental phenotypes, 
even into adulthood. These observations, particu-
larly with regard to Rett, Angelman, MDS, and frag-
ile X syndromes, defied the long and generally held 
belief that the deficits associated with these types of 
severe syndromes are unchangeable. Moreover, the 
relevant studies have underscored the fact that a range 
of manipulations—from genetic, to pharmacologi-
cal, to the more recent use of antisense oligonucleo-
tides (in the case of MEC2 duplication and Angelman 
syndromes)—have all been successful in reversing 
phenotype.
These findings provide not only an avenue forward 
for the development of rational therapies in humans 
but also a critical antidote to the penchant for nihilistic 
views of therapeutics development in neurodevelop-
mental disorders. In short, these findings have collec-
tively, and now repeatedly, reinforced the notion that 
rationally designed therapies may reverse key symp-
toms long after initial pathology has begun to unfold 
in brain development. The question of how much of 
the core symptomatology seen in nonsyndromic ASD 
is a consequence of ongoing functional derangements, 
versus what would more traditionally be considered 
developmental pathology, remains to be clarified. One 
should note, however, that even with the limited treat-
ments available, the observation that some children 
improve years after the onset of symptoms suggests 
that aspects of ASD pathology are not entirely static 
and may ultimately yield to the development of novel 
biologically driven treatment approaches.
The Complex Genetics of Common Forms of 
Autism Spectrum Disorder Are Being Clarified
The recent discovery of genes causing idiopathic 
ASD—once a scientific quagmire—has been among 
the most dramatic success stories in the field of 
human genetics. The combination of high-throughput 
genomic technologies—including the ability to assay 
common and rare variations in both the sequence and 
structure of DNA—the consolidation of large patient 
cohorts, and considerable investment in ASD research 
has transformed the field.
Initial breakthroughs can be traced to studies of 
the genes encoding the family of neuroligins—cell 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 62 / Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism Spectrum Disorder     1535
adhesion molecules found at postsynaptic densities of 
glutaminergic synapses (Chapter 48). At the beginning 
of this century, the group led by Thomas Bourgeron, 
a geneticist at the Pasteur Institute, first identified 
putatively deleterious coding mutations in the genes 
coding for neuroligin 4X (loss-of-function) and neu-
roligin 3X (missense). About 6 months after the initial 
report on the loss-of-function mutation in NLGN4X, a 
nearly identical loss-of-function mutation in the same 
gene was found linked to both intellectual disability 
and ASD in a large pedigree. The relevance of the neu-
roligin 3X mutation to ASD has taken longer to clarify. 
Contemporary studies provide statistical evidence that 
NLGN3X is a probable, but not yet definitive, ASD risk 
gene. Additional studies of large cohorts will clarify 
this question.
In retrospect, these findings were prescient. The 
two papers on neuroligins pointed to the importance 
of loss-of-function heterozygous mutations leading not 
only to ASD but to a wide range of neurodevelopmen-
tal phenotypes and highlighted a role for synaptic pro-
teins at the excitatory synapse. Moreover, in addition 
to being a harbinger of the contributions of both rare 
and de novo mutations (Chapter 2), the reported find-
ings from Bourgeron’s group also hinted, in retrospect, 
at a female protective effect as well as a paternal origin 
of de novo point mutations. In the initial report, the 
unaffected mother carried a de novo loss-of-function 
mutation on her paternally inherited X chromosome, 
which she passed to two affected sons.
Several years later, two key findings further ush-
ered in the modern age of reliable and reproducible 
genetic studies in ASD. First, papers in 2006 and 2007 
reported on the observation of rare de novo heterozy-
gous copy number variations (Chapter 2) in children 
with ASD and intellectual disability. These studies 
focused specifically on idiopathic, nonsyndromic ASD 
and on families with only a single affected individual 
(simplex families). Both papers reported high rates of 
relatively large copy number variations among indi-
viduals with both intellectual and social disability. 
Second, it was not clear if individuals with ASD sim-
ply had more chromosomal abnormalities than those 
without. However, this question was soon answered 
by studies from multiple laboratories. De novo copy 
number variations did not appear to be distributed 
randomly throughout the genome but tended to clus-
ter in distinct regions of the genome, suggesting that 
the increased rate in such cases was a consequence 
of an accumulation of specific risk events. Moreover,  
as higher-resolution genomic assays began to be 
applied, similar results emerged: Only certain subsets 
of mutations (eg, point mutations that disrupt gene 
function) proved to be elevated in individuals with 
autism, pointing to the aggregation of causal muta-
tions in affected individuals, not hypermutability, as 
an explanation for the excess rate(s) of de novo events 
in affected individuals.
A considerable investment in studying copy num-
ber variations in simplex families has resulted in a 
steadily expanding list of copy number variations that 
clearly and dramatically increase the risk for ASD. 
At present, about a dozen genomic intervals reach 
genome-wide significance based on genome-wide 
screening of cases for de novo mutations (Figure 62–8). 
As a result, the American College of Medical Genetics 
now considers screening for copy number variations 
the standard of care for an individual presenting with 
ASD of unknown etiology.
Studies of de novo mutations have advanced 
throughout the second decade of this millennium, 
leading to the discovery that, similar to de novo copy 
number variations, de novo changes in the sequence of 
DNA—both single nucleotide variants and insertions 
or deletions (indels)—also contribute to ASD risk and 
can similarly be used to identify specific risk genes. 
Recent reports have now leveraged this approach to 
include more than 100 genes carrying large-effect single 
nucleotide variants and indel mutations that disrupt 
the function of the encoded protein (ie, likely gene-
disruptive [LGD] mutations) (Chapter 2).
Several associated findings deserve mention here. 
First, although the contribution of de novo mutations 
to the risk for ASD in the total population is quite small 
(in the neighborhood of 3%), the proportion of individ-
uals with large-effect de novo mutations who are seen 
in clinical settings and recruited for genetic studies is 
quite significant, as high as 40% of girls. The reason for 
this apparent contradiction is that most of the risk to the 
population writ large is carried in small-effect common 
variations that in most individuals are not sufficient to 
result in them crossing a diagnostic threshold for ASD. 
In short, most individuals carrying some degree of risk 
in the population never show overt social impairment 
and do not come to clinical attention. Conversely, indi-
viduals with large-effect de novo copy number varia-
tions, single nucleotide variants, and indels are much 
more likely to have significant clinical manifestations 
and seek medical attention.
Second, studies of de novo single nucleotide vari-
ants and indels in ASD using exome sequencing have 
found that the rate of de novo mutations increases 
with the father’s age. Consistent with this observation 
is the finding that the vast majority of deleterious de 
novo sequence mutations in ASD cases are present on 
the paternally inherited chromosome. Although the 


===== Page 5 =====
1536    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
X
6
5
4
3
2
1
Y
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
11
10
9
8
7
12
CHD8
SCN2A
NRXN1
DYRK1A
CHD2
KDM5B
ADNP
POGZ
TBR1
DSCAM
TRIP12
SETD5
ASH1L
CUL3
NCKAP1
RANBP17
KDM6B
ILF2
DNMT3A
WDFY3
SPAST
KAT2B
MYT1L
SLC6A1
ZNF559
BCL11A
FOXP1
GABRB3
MIB1
P2RX5
TRIO
ETFB
NINL
INTS6
USP45
CAPN12
DIP2A
NAA15
APH1A
IRF2BPL
NLGN3
MBD5
PTK7
ERBB2IP
NF1
TSC2
KMT2C
ARID1B
SYNGAP1
ANK2
SHANK3
TNRC6B
KATNAL2
SUV420H1
SHANK2
GRIN2B
PTEN
TCF7L2
WAC
GIGYF1
PHF2
MFRP
KMT2E
CTTNBP2
OR52M1
AKAP9
ACHE
TSC1
FMR1
MECP2
1q21.1
2p16.3
22q13.33
3q29
15q11.2-13
16p11.2
22q11.2
7q11.23
Figure 62–8  Multiple genes and copy number variations that 
have been strongly associated with idiopathic risk for autism 
spectrum disorders (ASDs).  The figure identifies 71 genes and 
copy number variations (CNVs) associated with risk for ASDs 
based predominantly on the recurrence of de novo mutations. 
Abbreviations in blue shading denote genes with a false discov-
ery rate (FDR) less than 0.01; abbreviations in yellow shading 
denote an FDR between 0.01 and 0.05; and abbreviations with 
no shading denote an FDR greater than 0.05 and less than 0.1. 
Green bars identify CNVs with an FDR less than 0.05. Data from 
Sanders et al. 2015. Statistical analysis was performed using the 
methods described in Sanders et al. 2015. Five additional genes 
with names underlined cause the syndromic forms of ASD 
discussed in the chapter text. Gene identification in ASD is con-
tinuing at a rapid pace.  Up-to-date lists of associated genes and 
genomic regions can be found at https://gene.sfari.org.
absolute increase in risk with age is small, this observa-
tion nonetheless provides a conceptual framework for 
understanding secular increases in ASD prevalence. It 
also sets the stage for further studies of the impact of 
environmental factors in increasing de novo mutations 
and thereby potentially increasing the true incidence 
of clinical ASD cases.
The relationship of de novo large-effect mutations 
to intellectual disability has been the subject of consid-
erable discussion, with some contending that de novo 


