===== Page 1 =====
the tetracycline transactivator (tTA), which recognizes 
and binds to the tetO promoter. Expression of tTA can 
be placed under the control of a promoter in the mouse 
genome that normally drives gene transcription in only 
specific classes of neurons or specific brain regions.
When the two lines of mice are mated, some of the 
offspring will carry both transgenes. In these mice, the 
tTA binds to the tetO promoter and activates the down-
stream transgene. What makes the tTA transcription fac-
tor particularly useful is that it becomes inactivated when 
it binds certain antibiotics, such as tetracycline, allow-
ing transgene expression to be regulated by administer-
ing antibiotics to mice. One can also generate mice that 
express a mutant form of tTA called reverse tTA (rtTA). 
This transactivator will not bind to tetO unless the animal 
is fed doxycycline. In this case, the transgene is always 
turned off unless the drug is given (Figure 2–9).
Altering Gene Function by RNA Interference 
and CRISPR
Finally, genes can be inactivated by targeting them 
with modern molecular tools. One such method is 
RNA interference, which takes advantage of the fact 
that most double-stranded RNAs in eukaryotic cells 
are routinely destroyed; the whole RNA is destroyed 
even if only part of it is double-stranded. By introduc-
ing a short RNA sequence that artificially causes a 
selected mRNA to become double-stranded, research-
ers can activate this process to reduce the mRNA levels 
for specific genes.
Another experimental tool is CRISPR, a method 
in which components of a bacterial immune system 
are deployed in nonbacterial cells to directly attack a 
selected DNA sequence. To target a gene with CRISPR, 
Box 2–2  Generating Mutations in Experimental Animals (continued)
ES cells growing
in tissue culture
A
B
Test for the rare 
colony in which the 
DNA fragment has 
replaced one copy of 
the normal gene 
ES cells with one copy of target 
gene replaced by mutant gene
Introduce a DNA 
fragment containing 
altered gene into 
many cells
Let each cell grow to 
form a colony
Altered version of 
target gene 
constructed by 
genetic engineering
Remove early embryo
from pregnant mouse
Inject ES cells 
into early
embryo
Birth
Test somatic cells of offspring
for presence of altered gene 
and breed selected mice to test 
for gene in germ-line cells
Transgenic mouse with 
one copy of target gene 
replaced by altered gene
in germ line
Implant embryo formed 
partly with ES cells 
into foster mother
Figure 2–7  Creating mutant mice strains. 
(Adapted from Alberts et al. 2002.)
A. Creating mouse stem cells with specific  
targeted mutations.
B. Using altered embryonic stem (ES) cells to  
create genetically modified mice.


===== Page 2 =====
Figure 2–8  The Cre/loxP system for gene knockout in 
selective regions.
A. A line of mice is bred in which the gene encoding the 
NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor has been flanked by loxP 
genetic elements (transgenic mouse line 1). These so-called 
“floxed NR1” mice are then crossed with a second line of 
mice in which a transgene coding for Cre recombinase is 
placed under the control of a transcriptional promoter spe-
cific to a cell type or a tissue type (transgenic mouse line 2).  
In this example, the promoter from the CaMKIIa gene is 
used to drive expression of the Cre gene. In progeny that 
are homozygous for the floxed gene and that carry the Cre 
recombinase transgene, the floxed gene will be deleted by 
Cre-mediated loxP recombination only in cell type(s) in which 
the promoter driving Cre expression is active.
B. In situ hybridization is used to detect mRNA for the NR1 
subunit in hippocampal slices from wild-type and mutant 
mice that contain two floxed NR1 alleles and express Cre 
recombinase under the control of the CaMKIIa promoter. 
In the mutant mice, expression of the mRNA for NR1 (dark 
staining) is greatly reduced in the CA1 region of the hip-
pocampus but remains normal in CA3 and the dentate gyrus 
(DG). (Reproduced, with permission, from Tsien, Huerta, and 
Tonegawa 1996.)
A  Regional restriction of gene expression
B  Action of Cre recombinase is restricted to CA1 region
CA1
loxP
In the CA1 region Cre recombinase 
removes genes ﬂanked by lox sites
Progeny
loxP NR1 subunit loxP
loxP NR1 subunit loxP
Transgenic mouse line 1:
Homozygous for ﬂoxed gene 
encoding the NR1 subunit of 
the NMDA glutamate receptors
Normal
NMDA 
receptors
No NMDA
receptors
Recombination does not occur in the 
cells of the rest of the mouse because 
Cre recombinase is not expressed
loxP NR1 subunit
Wild type
Mutant
loxP
loxP NR1 subunit loxP
CA1 neuron
CA3 neuron
CA3
CA1
DG
Cre
recombinase
CaMKII  p
Transgenic mouse line 2:
Cre is controlled by the CaMKIIα promoter;
Cre recombinase is expressed at sufﬁcient
levels selectively in CA1 cells 
CA1
CA3
CA1
CA3
CA3


===== Page 3 =====
Transgenic mouse line 1:
tTA is expressed in
forebrain neurons
Transgenic mouse line 2:
mutant form of CaMKII is under 
control of tetO promoter, which is
inactive without bound tTA
CaMKII promoter
tTA
CaMKII-Asp286
CaMKII-Asp286
CaMKII-Asp286
Progeny:
tTA protein is made and activates
tetO promoter, leading to transcription 
of mutant CaMKII-Asp286
Mouse is fed doxycycline:
binding of doxycycline to tTA blocks
activation of tetO promoter by tTA
and transcription of mutant 
CaMKII-Asp286 is shut off
Doxycycline
tTA
Doxycycline
tetO
tetO
Temporal restriction of gene expression
tetO
tTA
CaMKII-Asp286
Abnormal LTP
LTP returns to normal
Figure 2–9  The tetracycline system for temporal and 
spatial regulation of transgene expression. Two independ-
ent lines of transgenic mice are bred. One line expresses, 
under the control of the CaMKIIa promoter, the tetracycline 
transactivator (tTA), an engineered protein incorporating a 
bacterial transcription factor that recognizes the bacterial 
tetO operon. The second line contains a transgene of  
interest—here encoding a constitutively active form of 
CaMKII (CaMKII–Asp286) that makes the kinase persistently 
active in the absence of Ca2+—whose expression is under 
control of tetO. When these two lines are mated,  
the offspring express the tTA protein in a pattern 
restricted to the forebrain. When the tTA protein binds 
to tetO, it will activate transcription of the downstream 
gene of interest. Tetracycline (or doxycycline) given to the 
offspring binds to the tTA protein and causes a conforma-
tional change that leads to the unbinding of the protein 
from tetO, blocking transgene expression. In this manner, 
mice will express CaMKII–Asp286 in the forebrain, and 
this expression can be turned off by administering  
doxycycline to the mice. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Mayford et al. 1996.)
a bacterial protein (typically but not always a protein 
called CAS9) is produced together with an engineered 
guide RNA that has sequence similarity with the tar-
get gene. The CAS9-guide RNA complex seeks out and 
cleaves the target sequence in the genome of the cell of 
interest. That initial cleavage can induce point mutations, 
insertions, and deletions at that site, and can also facili-
tate desired recombination or genetic replacement events. 
CRISPR tools are increasing in their sophistication and 
precision to the extent that they are now being considered 
for repair of hereditary mutations in people with severe 
inherited genetic diseases.
RNA interference and CRISPR have great potential 
to increase the power of genetic analysis because they 
can be used on any species in which DNA or RNA can 
be delivered to cells, including animals that are not now 
used in classical genetic analysis, such as long-lived 
birds, fish, and even primates.
Box 2–2  Generating Mutations in Experimental Animals (continued)


===== Page 4 =====
Genes can be experimentally introduced in mice by 
injecting DNA into the nucleus of newly fertilized eggs 
(Figure 2–10). In some of the injected eggs, the new gene, 
or transgene, is incorporated into a random site on one 
of the chromosomes. Because the embryo is at the one-
cell stage, the incorporated gene is replicated and ends 
up in all (or nearly all) of the animal’s cells, including 
the germline.
Gene incorporation is illustrated with a coat color 
marker gene rescued by injecting a gene for pigment 
production into an egg obtained from an albino strain. 
Mice with patches of pigmented fur indicate successful 
expression of DNA. The transgene’s presence is con-
firmed by testing a sample of DNA from the injected 
animals.
A similar approach is used in flies. The DNA 
to be injected is cloned into a transposable element  
(P element). When injected into the embryo, the DNA 
becomes inserted into the DNA of germ cell nuclei.  
P elements can be engineered to express genes at specific 
times and in specific cells. Transgenes may be wild-type 
genes that restore function to a mutant or designer genes 
that alter the expression of other genes or code for a spe-
cifically altered protein.
Box 2–3  Introducing Transgenes in Flies and Mice
Figure 2–10  Generating transgenic mice 
and flies. Here the gene injected into 
the mouse causes a change in coat color, 
while the gene injected into the fly causes 
a change in eye color. In some transgenic 
animals of both species, the DNA is 
inserted at different chromosomal sites in 
different cells (see illustration at bottom). 
(Adapted from Alberts et al. 2002.)
Fertilized egg
50 µm
500 µm
gene gene gene gene
Tandemly arranged copies of the gene
are inserted randomly into one
chromosome in each cell 
Tandem array of genes
gene
Single copy of the gene is inserted
randomly into one chromosome
in each cell 
Transposable element DNA ends
Microinject the gene of
interest as linear DNA
into pronucleus
Introduce several
such embryos into
a pseudopregnant
mouse
Birth
Mice expressing the
gene are bred to test for
the gene in germ cells
Microinject the gene of
interest ﬂanked by
transposable element
DNA sequences 
into posterior pole 
Some of the ﬂies that
develop from these embryos
carry the gene of interest
in their germ cells
Flies are bred to test
for the gene in germ cells
Early embryo
Embryo
Embryo
Transgenic mouse
Transgenic Drosophila
Mouse
Drosophila
Primordial germ cells


===== Page 5 =====
40    Part I / Overall Perspective
We have a particularly complete picture of the 
genetic basis of the circadian control of behavior. An 
animal’s circadian rhythm couples certain behaviors 
to a 24-hour cycle linked to the rising and setting of 
the sun. The core of circadian regulation is an intrin-
sic biological clock that oscillates over a 24-hour cycle. 
Because of the intrinsic periodicity of the clock, circa-
dian behavior persists even in the absence of light or 
other environmental influences.
The circadian clock can be reset, such that changes 
in the day-night cycle eventually result in a matching 
shift in the intrinsic oscillator, a phenomenon famil-
iar to any traveler recovering from jet lag. The clock 
is reset by light-driven signals transmitted by the eye 
to the brain. Finally, the clock drives effector pathways 
for specific behaviors, such as sleep and locomotion.
Benzer’s group searched through thousands of 
mutant flies to look for rare flies that failed to fol-
low circadian rhythms because of mutations in the 
genes that direct circadian oscillation. From this work 
emerged the first insight into the molecular machinery 
of the circadian clock. Mutations in the period, or per, 
gene affected all circadian behaviors generated by the 
fly’s internal clock.
Interestingly, per mutations could change the cir-
cadian clock in several ways (Figure 2–11). Arrhythmic 
per mutant flies, which exhibited no discernible intrin-
sic rhythms in any behavior, lacked all function of the 
per gene, so per is essential for rhythmic behavior. Per 
mutations that maintained some function of the gene 
resulted in abnormal rhythms. Long-day alleles produced 
28-hour behavioral cycles, whereas short-day alleles pro-
duced a 19-hour cycle. Thus per is not just an essential 
piece of the clock, it is actually a timekeeper whose activ-
ity can change the rate at which the clock runs.
The per mutant has no major adverse effects other 
than the change in circadian behavior. This observa-
tion is important because prior to the discovery of per 
many had questioned whether there could be true 
“behavior genes” that were not required for the physi-
ological needs of an animal. Per does seem to be such a 
“behavior gene.”
How does per keep time? The protein product PER 
is a transcriptional regulator that affects the expression 
of other genes. Levels of PER are regulated throughout 
the day. Early in the morning, PER and its mRNA are 
low. Over the course of the day, the PER mRNA and 
protein accumulate, reaching peak levels after dusk 
and during the night. The levels then decrease, fall-
ing before the next dawn. These observations provide 
an answer to the circadian rhythm puzzle—a central 
regulator appears and disappears throughout the day. 
But they are also unsatisfying because they only push 
the question back one step—what makes PER cycle? 
The answer to this question required the discovery of 
additional clock genes, which were discovered in flies 
and also in mice.
Emboldened by the success of the fly circadian 
rhythm screens, Joseph Takahashi began similar but 
far more labor-intensive genetic screens in mice in 
the 1990s. He screened hundreds of mutant mice for 
the rare individuals with alterations in their circadian 
locomotion period and found a single gene mutation 
that he called clock. When mice homozygous for the 
clock mutation are transferred to darkness, they initially 
experience extremely long circadian periods and later 
a complete loss of circadian rhythmicity (Figure 2–12). 
The clock gene therefore appears to regulate two funda-
mental properties of the circadian rhythm: the length 
of the circadian period and the persistence of rhyth-
micity in the absence of sensory input. These proper-
ties are conceptually identical to the properties of the 
per gene in flies.
The mouse clock gene, like the per gene in flies, 
encodes a transcriptional regulator whose activity 
oscillates through the day. The mouse CLOCK and 
fly PER proteins also shared a domain called a PAS 
domain, characteristic of a subset of transcriptional 
regulators. This observation suggests that the same 
molecular mechanism—oscillation of PAS-domain 
transcriptional regulation—controls circadian rhythm 
in flies and mice.
More significantly, parallel studies of flies and 
mice showed that similar groups of transcriptional 
regulators affect the circadian clock in both animals. 
After the mouse clock gene was cloned, a fly circadian 
rhythm gene was cloned and found to be even more 
closely related to mouse clock, than was per. In a differ-
ent study, a mouse gene similar to fly per was identified 
and inactivated by reverse genetics. The mutant mouse 
had a circadian rhythm defect, like fly per mutants. In 
other words, both flies and mice use both clock and per 
genes to control their circadian rhythms. A group of 
genes, not one gene, are conserved regulators of the 
circadian clock.
Characterization of these genes has led to an 
understanding of the molecular mechanisms of circa-
dian rhythm and a dramatic demonstration of the sim-
ilarity of these mechanisms in flies and mice. In both 
flies and mice, the CLOCK protein is a transcriptional 
activator. Together with a partner protein, it controls 
the transcription of genes that determine behaviors 
such as locomotor activity levels. CLOCK and its 
partner also stimulate the transcription of the per 
gene. However, PER protein represses CLOCK’s abil-
ity to stimulate per gene expression, so as PER protein 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    41
B
Flies emerging from pupal cases per hour
20
30
10
0
Normal
20
30
10
00
1
2
Days
3
4
0
1
2
Days
3
4
Arrhythmic
20
30
10
0
Long-day
40
60
20
0
Short-day
A
Normal
Short-day mutant
Long-day mutant
Arrhythmic mutant
24 hours
19 hours
28 hours
accumulates, per transcription falls (Figure 2–13). The 
24-hour cycle comes about because the accumulation 
and activation of PER protein is delayed by many 
hours after the transcription of per, a result of PER 
phosphorylation, PER instability, and interactions 
with other cycling proteins.
The molecular properties of per, clock, and related genes 
generate all properties essential for circadian rhythm.
1.	 The transcription of circadian rhythm genes var-
ies with the 24-hour cycle: PER activity is high at 
night; CLOCK activity is high during the day.
Figure 2–11  A single gene governs the circadian rhythms of 
behaviors in Drosophila. Mutations in the period, or per, gene 
affect all circadian behaviors regulated by the fly’s internal clock. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Konopka and Benzer 1971.)
A. Locomotor rhythms in normal Drosophila and three strains 
of per mutants: short-day, long-day, and arrhythmic. Flies were 
shifted from a cycle of 12 hours of light and 12 hours of dark 
into continuous darkness, and activity was then monitored 
under infrared light. Thick segments in the record indicate 
activity.
B. Normal adult fly populations emerge from their pupal 
cases in cyclic fashion, even in constant darkness. The 
plots show the number of flies (in each of four populations) 
emerging per hour over a 4-day period of constant darkness. 
The arrhythmic mutant population emerges without any  
discernible rhythm.


===== Page 7 =====
42    Part I / Overall Perspective
0
18
30
12
42
36
24
6
Day
40
0
Day
40
0
Day
40
0
L/D
L/D
L/D
Clock / +
Wild-type
Clock / clock
D
D
D
D
D
D
48
Time (hours)
LP
LP
LP
Figure 2–12  Circadian rhythm regulation by the clock gene 
in mice. The records show periods of locomotor activity by 
three animals: wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous. All 
animals were kept on a light-dark (L/D) cycle of 12 hours for 
the first 7 days, then transferred to constant darkness (D). They 
later were exposed to a 6-hour light period (LP) to reset the 
rhythm. The circadian rhythm for the wild-type mouse has a 
period of 23.1 hours. The period for the heterozygous  
clock/+ mouse is 24.9 hours. The homozygous clock/clock mice 
experience a complete loss of circadian rhythmicity on transfer 
to constant darkness and transiently express a rhythm of  
28.4 hours after the light period. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Takahashi, Pinto, and Vitaterna. 1994. Copyright © 1994 AAAS.)
2.	 The circadian rhythm genes are transcription 
factors that affect each other’s mRNA level, gen-
erating the oscillations. CLOCK activates per tran-
scription and PER represses CLOCK function.
3.	 The circadian rhythm genes also control the tran-
scription of other genes that in turn affect many 
downstream responses. For example, in flies, the 
neuropeptide gene pdf controls locomotor activity 
levels.
4.	 The oscillation of these genes can be reset by 
light.
The detailed elucidation of this molecular clock 
mechanism was recognized by the 2017 Nobel Prize 
in Physiology or Medicine, awarded to Jeffrey Hall, 
Michael Rosbash, and Michael Young.
The same genetic network controls circadian rhythm 
in humans. People with advanced sleep-phase syndrome 
have short 20-day cycles and an extreme early-to-bed, 
early-to-rise “morning lark” phenotype. Louis Ptácˇek 
and Ying-hui Fu found that these individuals have muta-
tions in a human per gene. These results demonstrate that 
genes for behavior are conserved from insects to humans. 
Advanced sleep-phase syndrome is discussed in the 
chapter on sleep (Chapter 44).
Natural Variation in a Protein Kinase Regulates 
Activity in Flies and Honeybees
In the genetic studies of circadian rhythm described 
earlier, random mutagenesis was used to identify 
genes of interest in a biological process. All normal 
individuals have functional copies of per, clock, and the 
related genes; only after mutagenesis were different 
alleles generated. Another, more subtle question about 
the role of genes in behavior is to ask which genetic 
changes may be responsible for behavioral variation 
among normal individuals. Work by Marla Sokolowski 
and her colleagues led to the identification of the first 
gene associated with variation in behavior among nor-
mal individuals in a species.
Larvae of Drosophila vary in activity level and loco-
motion. Some larvae, called rovers, move over long dis-
tances (Figure 2–14). Others, called sitters, are relatively 
stationary. Drosophila larvae isolated from the wild can 
be either rovers or sitters, indicating that these are natu-
ral variations and not laboratory-induced mutations. 
These traits are heritable; rover parents have rover off-
spring and sitter parents have sitter offspring.
Sokolowski used crosses between different wild 
flies to investigate the genetic differences between 
rover and sitter larvae. These crosses showed that 
the difference between rover and sitter larvae lies in 
a single major gene, the for (forager) locus. The for 
gene encodes a signal transduction enzyme, a pro-
tein kinase activated by the cellular metabolite cGMP 
(cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate). Thus this nat-
ural variation in behavior arises from altered regula-
tion of signal transduction pathways. Many neuronal 
functions are regulated by protein kinases such as 
the cGMP-dependent kinase encoded by the for gene. 
Molecules such as protein kinases are particularly 
significant at transforming short-term neural signals 
into long-term changes in the property of a neuron or 
circuit.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    43
Figure 2–13  Molecular events that drive circadian rhythm. 
The genes that control the circadian clock are regulated by two 
nuclear proteins, PER and TIM. These proteins slowly accumu-
late and then bind to one another to form dimers. Once they 
form dimers, they enter the nucleus and shut off the expres-
sion of circadian genes including their own. They do so by inhib-
iting CLOCK and CYCLE, which stimulate the transcription of 
per and tim genes.
PER protein is highly unstable; most of it is degraded so quickly 
that it never has a chance to repress CLOCK-dependent per 
transcription. The degradation of PER is regulated by at least 
two different phosphorylation events by different protein 
kinases. When PER binds to TIM, PER is protected from deg-
radation. As CLOCK drives more and more per and tim expres-
sion, enough PER and TIM eventually accumulate that the two 
can bind and stabilize each other, at which point they enter 
the nucleus where their own transcription is repressed. As a 
result, per and tim mRNA levels fall; thereafter, PER and TIM 
protein levels fall and CLOCK can (once again) drive expression 
of per and tim mRNA. During daylight, TIM protein is degraded 
by signaling pathways that are regulated by light (including 
cryptochrome), so PER/TIM complexes form only at night. The 
CLOCK protein induces PER and TIM expression but is inhib-
ited by PER and TIM proteins.
0
12
Dusk
Dawn
6
Light
Dark
18
PER/TIM dimers
enter the nucleus 
and repress 
transcription of 
per and tim genes
PER proteins are 
unstable, but PER/TIM 
complexes are stable
Repression by
PER/TIM 
complexes 
is lost
Without stabilization 
provided by TIM,
PER is degraded
Transcription of
per and tim genes
resumes
PER
PER/TIM
complex
TIM
PER
TIM
Ribosome
Cryptochrome
(inactive, active)
CYC/CLOCK
Light activates cryptochrome,
which destroys TIM protein
Gene and 
promoter
mRNA
Protein
PER and TIM proteins are
synthesized in the cytoplasm


===== Page 9 =====
44    Part I / Overall Perspective
Why would variability in signaling enzymes be 
preserved in wild populations of Drosophila, which 
typically include both rovers and sitters? The answer is 
that variations in the environment create pressure for 
balanced selection for alternative behaviors. Crowded 
environments favor the rover larva, which is more 
effective at moving to new, unexploited food sources 
in advance of competitors, whereas sparse environ-
ments favor the sitter larva, which exploits the current 
source more thoroughly.
The for gene is also found in honeybees. Honey-
bees exhibit different behaviors at different stages of 
their life; in general, young bees are nurses, while older 
bees become foragers that leave the hive. The for gene 
is expressed at high levels in the brains of active forag-
ing honeybees and at low levels in the younger and 
more stationary nurse bees. Activation of cGMP sign-
aling in young bees can cause them to enter the forager 
stage prematurely; this change could be induced by an 
environmental stimulus or the bee’s advancing age.
Thus the same gene controls variation in a behav-
ior in two different insects, but in different ways. In 
the fruit fly, variations in the behavior are expressed 
in different individuals, whereas in the honeybee, they 
are expressed in one individual at different ages. The 
Sitters
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
Number of individuals
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
70
Rovers
Sitters
Rovers
Yeast
Agar
Yeast
Agar
A  
Within-patch foraging
B
Sitters
Rovers
Foraging trail length (cm) 
Between-patch foraging
Figure 2–14  Foraging behavior of Drosophila melanogaster 
rover and sitter larvae differs while feasting on patches of 
yeast. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sokolowski. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
A. Rover-type larvae move from patch to patch, whereas sitter-
type larvae stay put on a single patch for a long time. When 
foraging within a single patch, rover larvae move about more 
than sitter larvae. On agar alone, rover and sitter larvae move 
about equally.
B. While foraging within a patch of food, rovers have longer trail 
lengths than sitters (trail lengths were measured over a period 
of 5 minutes).
This difference in foraging behavior maps to a single protein 
kinase gene, for, which varies in activity in different fly larvae.
difference illustrates how an important regulatory 
gene can be recruited to different behavioral strategies 
in different species.
Neuropeptide Receptors Regulate the Social 
Behaviors of Several Species
Many aspects of behavior are associated with an animal’s 
social interactions with other animals. Social behaviors 
are highly variable between species, yet have a large 
innate component within a species that is controlled 
genetically. A simple form of social behavior has been 
analyzed in the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. 
These animals live in soil and eat bacteria.
Different wild-type strains exhibit profound differ-
ences in feeding behavior. Animals from the standard 
laboratory strain are solitary, dispersing across a lawn 
of bacterial food and failing to interact with each other. 
Other strains have a social feeding pattern, joining 
large feeding groups of dozens or hundreds of animals 
(Figure 2–15). The difference between these strains is 
genetic, as both feeding patterns are stably inherited.
The difference between social and solitary worms 
is caused by a single amino acid substitution in a single 
gene, a member of a large family of genes involved in 


