===== Page 1 =====
1244    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–7  Myelin inhibits regeneration of central 
axons. (Adapted, with permission, from Schwegler, Schwab, 
and Kapfhammer 1995.)
A. Sensory fibers normally extend rostrally in a myelin-rich  
spinal cord.
B. Right dorsal root fibers were sectioned in 2-week-old normal 
rats. Regeneration of the fibers was assessed histochemically 
20 days later. The central branches of the sectioned axons 
degenerated, leaving a portion of the spinal cord denervated. 
Little regeneration occurred in the myelin-rich cord.
C. Some littermates received local x-irradiation to block myeli-
nation. In these animals, sensory fibers that entered the cord 
through neighboring uninjured roots sprouted new collaterals 
following denervation.
distal nerve stumps begin to produce neurotrophins 
and other trophic molecules of the sort described in 
Chapter 46. Together, these molecules nourish neurons 
and guide growing axons in the embryonic nervous 
system, so it makes sense that they also promote the 
regrowth of axons. By contrast, central neuronal tis-
sue is a poor source of these molecules, containing lit-
tle laminin and low levels of trophic molecules. Thus, 
in the embryo, both central and peripheral nervous 
systems provide environments that promote axon out-
growth. But only the peripheral environment retains 
this capacity in adulthood or is able to regain it effec-
tively following injury.
The practical implications of this view are that 
supplementing the central environment with growth-
promoting molecules might improve regeneration. To 
this end, investigators have infused neurotrophins 
into areas of injury or inserted fibers rich in extracel-
lular matrix molecules such as laminin to serve as scaf-
fold for axonal growth. In some attempts, Schwann 
cells themselves, or cells engineered to secrete trophic 
factors, have been grafted into sites of injury. In many 
of these cases, injured axons grow more extensively 
than they do under control conditions. Yet regenera-
tion remains limited, with axons generally failing to 
extend long distances. More important, functional 
recovery is minimal.
Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth
What accounts for such disappointingly limited regen-
eration? One part of the explanation is that the envi-
ronment encountered by severed central axons is not 
only poor in growth-promoting factors but also rich in 
growth-inhibiting factors, some of which are derived 
from myelin. In culture, fragments of central but not 
peripheral myelin potently inhibit neurite outgrowth 
from co-cultured central or peripheral neurons. Con-
versely, sprouting of spinal axon collaterals following 
injury is enhanced in rats treated to prevent myelin 
formation in the spinal cord (Figure 50–7).
These findings implied that although both central 
and peripheral environments might contain a supply 
of growth-promoting elements, central nerves also 
contain inhibitory components. The fact that myelin 
inhibits neurite growth may seem peculiar, but not if 
we consider that myelination normally occurs postna-
tally, after axon extension is largely complete.
Searches for the inhibitory components of central 
myelin turned up an embarrassment of riches. Several 
classes of molecules that occur at higher levels in cen-
tral myelin compared to peripheral myelin are able to 
inhibit neurite outgrowth when presented to cultured 
neurons. The first to be discovered was identified when 
an antibody generated against myelin proteins proved 
A  Normal
B  Limited regeneration 
 
in myelin-rich cord
C  Regeneration in 
 
myelin-free cord
Myelin
Myelin free
Sensory 
ﬁbers


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1245
Figure 50–8  Myelin and glial scar com-
ponents that inhibit regeneration of 
central axons. (Adapted from Yiu and He 
2006.)
   Left: Myelin contains the proteins Nogo-
A, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein 
(OMgp), and myelin-associated glycopro-
tein (MAG). All three proteins are exposed 
when myelin breaks down. They can bind 
to the receptor protein NogoR, which can 
associate with the neurotrophin receptor 
p75, as well as an immunoglobulin-like 
receptor protein PirB. Inactivation of PirB 
results in a modest enhancement of  
corticospinal axon regeneration. Right: 
Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans 
(CSPG) are major components of the glial 
scar and are thought to suppress axon 
regeneration through interaction with the 
receptor tyrosine phosphatase PTP-sigma, 
which activates intracellular mediators 
such as Rho and ROCK.
to be capable of partially neutralizing myelin’s ability 
to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Use of this antibody to 
isolate the corresponding antigen yielded the protein 
now called Nogo. Two other proteins, myelin-associated 
glycoprotein (MAG) and oligodendrocyte-myelin 
glycoprotein (OMgp), initially isolated as major com-
ponents of myelin, have also been found to inhibit the 
growth of some neuronal types.
Intriguingly, Nogo, MAG, and OMgp bind to 
common membrane receptors, NogoR and PirB 
(Figure 50–8). NogoR, as well as related receptors 
such as LINGO that have been implicated in growth 
inhibition, all interact with the neurotrophin receptor 
p75 (Chapter 46). This interaction converts p75 from 
a growth-promoting to a growth-inhibiting receptor. 
Perhaps because there are so many growth inhibitory 
factors and receptors, regeneration of central axons is 
not greatly enhanced in mutant mice lacking any one 
of them. However, many of the inhibitory compo-
nents trigger the same intracellular signaling pathway 
in which RhoA is activated, thereby stimulating Rho 
kinase (ROCK); ROCK in turn leads to the collapse of 
growth cones and blocks actin and tubulin polymeri-
zation required for neurite growth. Current studies are 
p75
NogoR
PirB
CSPG
ROCK
Rho
Inhibition of
axon growth
Reactive
astrocyte
Damaged
oligodendrocyte
PTP-Sigma
MAG
OMgp
Nogo-A


===== Page 3 =====
1246    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
exploring whether interference with that shared path-
way might neutralize the impact of many inhibitors in 
one fell swoop.
Injury-Induced Scarring Hinders Axonal 
Regeneration
Myelin debris is not the only source of growth-inhibiting 
material in the injured brain or spinal cord. As noted 
earlier, astrocytes become activated and proliferate fol-
lowing injury, acquiring features of reactive astrocytes 
that generate scar tissue at sites of injury. Scarring is 
an adaptive response that helps to limit the size of the 
injury, reestablish the blood-brain barrier, and reduce 
inflammation.
But the scar itself hinders regeneration in two 
ways: through mechanical interference with axon 
growth and through growth-inhibiting effects of pro-
teins produced by cells within the scar. Chief among 
these inhibitors are a class of chondroitin sulfate pro-
teoglycans (CSPG) that are produced in abundance by 
reactive astrocytes and directly inhibit axon extension 
by interaction with tyrosine phosphatase receptors on 
axons (Figure 50–8). Attention has therefore focused 
on ways of dissolving the glial scar by infusion of an 
enzyme called chondroitinase, which breaks down the 
sugar chains on CSPG. This treatment promotes axon 
regeneration and functional recovery in animals. Drugs 
that reduce inflammation and decrease scarring, nota-
bly prednisolone, are also beneficial if administered 
shortly after injury, before the scar forms.
An Intrinsic Growth Program Promotes 
Regeneration
So far, we have emphasized differences between the 
local environments of peripheral and central axons. 
However, environmental differences cannot com-
pletely account for the poor regeneration of central 
axons. Even though they can regenerate in peripheral 
nerves, central axons grow much less well than periph-
eral axons when navigating the same path. Thus, adult 
central axons may be less capable than peripheral 
axons of regeneration.
In support of this idea, experiments in tissue cul-
ture have shown that the growth potential of central 
neurons decreases with age, whereas mature periph-
eral neurons extend axons robustly in a favorable envi-
ronment. One potential explanation for this difference 
is variation in the expression of proteins thought to 
be critical for optimal axon elongation. One example 
is the 43 kDa growth-associated protein, or GAP-43. 
This protein is expressed at high levels in embryonic 
central and peripheral neurons. In peripheral neurons, 
the level remains high in maturity and increases even 
more following axotomy, whereas in central neurons, 
its expression decreases as development proceeds. 
Transcription factors required to coordinate axonal 
growth programs are also expressed at high levels 
during development, and then are downregulated in 
maturity.
Is this reduced ability of central axons to regener-
ate reversible? Hope is provided by two sets of stud-
ies. One involves what has been called a “conditioning 
lesion.” Recall that primary sensory neurons in dorsal 
root ganglia have a bifurcated axon, with a peripheral 
branch that extends to skin, muscle, or other targets, 
and a central branch that enters the spinal cord. The 
peripheral branch regenerates well following injury, 
whereas the central branch regenerates poorly. How-
ever, the central branch will regenerate successfully if 
the peripheral branch is damaged several days before 
the central branch is damaged (Figure 50–9). Some-
how, prior injury or conditioning lesion activates an 
axonal growth program.
One component of the growth program respon-
sible for regeneration of the central branch appears 
to be cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). This 
second-messenger molecule activates enzymes that in 
turn promote neurite outgrowth. Levels of cAMP are 
high when neurons initially form circuits; they decline 
postnatally in central but not peripheral neurons. In 
some instances, increased supplies of cAMP or pro-
teins normally activated by cAMP can promote regen-
eration of central axons following injury. Accordingly, 
drugs that increase cAMP levels or activate targets of 
cAMP are being actively considered as therapeutic 
agents to be administered following spinal cord injury.
A second group of investigations has manipulated 
developmentally regulated intrinsic factors to restore 
regenerative ability in adults. For example, injury 
sometimes leads to formation of cytokines such as cili-
ary neurotrophic factors (CNTFs) that promote growth 
by activating a signaling pathway involving molecules 
called JAK and STAT that travel to the nucleus and 
regulate a growth program. In adults, however, the 
pathway is inhibited by a protein called suppressor of 
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3). Deletion of the SOCS3 
gene in mice relieves the inhibition and augments the 
ability of cytokines to promote regeneration of injured 
axons (Figure 50–10A).
Similarly, a signaling pathway involving the kinase 
mammalian target or rapamycin (mTOR) regulates 
energy metabolism, promoting an anabolic growth-
promoting state required for axon regeneration. How-
ever, mTOR is downregulated as central neurons 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1247
Figure 50–9  A conditioning lesion promotes regeneration 
of the central branch of a primary sensory neuron axon.  
After lesions of the spinal cord, there is little regeneration 
of the central branch beyond the injury site. However, if the 
peripheral branch of the axon is sectioned before the central 
branch is damaged, the latter will grow beyond the lesion site. 
The impact of such a “conditioning lesion” can be mimicked by 
elevating levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
or of the growth-associated protein GAP-43 in the peripheral 
branch.
mature and is further inhibited by a phosphatase called 
PTEN. Analogous to SOCS3 and JAK/STAT signaling, 
deletion of the PTEN gene in mice promotes axonal 
regrowth following injury to the optic nerve or spinal 
cord (Figure 50–10B). Moreover, loss of SOCS3 and 
PTEN stimulates regeneration significantly more than 
loss of either one. Although their multiple roles make 
it unlikely that either SOCS3 or PTEN is a useful target 
for therapy, the signaling pathways they regulate pro-
vide multiple starting points for designing drugs that 
could augment regeneration.
Formation of New Connections by Intact Axons Can 
Lead to Recovery of Function Following Injury
So far, we have discussed interventions designed to 
enhance the limited regenerative capacity of injured 
central axons. An alternative strategy focuses on the 
significant, although incomplete, functional recovery 
that can occur following injury even without appreci-
able regeneration of cut axons. If the basis for this lim-
ited recovery of function can be understood, it may be 
possible to enhance it.
A rearrangement of existing connections in 
response to injury may contribute to recovery of func-
tion. We have learned that axotomy leads to changes in 
both the inputs to and the targets of the injured neuron. 
Although many of these changes are detrimental to 
function, some are beneficial. In particular, the central 
nervous system can, following injury, spontaneously 
undergo adaptive reorganization that helps it regain 
function. For example, after transection of the descend-
ing corticospinal pathway, which occurs with many 
traumatic injuries of the spinal cord, the cortex can no 
longer transmit commands to motor neurons below 
the site of the lesion. Over several weeks, however, 
intact corticospinal axons rostral to the lesion begin to 
sprout new terminal branches and form synapses on 
spinal interneurons whose axons extend around the 
lesion, thereby forming an intraspinal detour that con-
tributes to limited recovery of function (Figure 50–11).
Similar instances of functional reorganization have 
been demonstrated in the motor cortex and brain stem. 
These compensatory responses attest to the latent plas-
ticity of the nervous system. The ability of the nervous 
system to rewire itself is most vigorous during the crit-
ical periods of early postnatal life but can be revived by 
traumatic events in adulthood (Chapter 49).
How can the rewiring ability of the central nerv-
ous system be improved? It is possible that some of 
the beneficial effects of grafts in experimental animals 
reflect reorganization of intact axons rather than regen-
eration of transected axons. As the nervous system’s 
Central 
axon
Peripheral 
axon
Sensory
neuron
A  Intact
B  Central lesion
Regeneration
zone
Lesion site
No
regeneration
Prior
peripheral  
lesion
promotes 
regeneration
promotes 
regeneration
cAMP
GAP-43


===== Page 5 =====
1248    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–10  Signaling pathways that regulate axon regen-
eration in the optic nerve.
A. The regeneration of retinal ganglion cell axons in the optic 
nerve is normally constrained by neuronal expression of several 
genes. One encodes SOCS3, which blocks the ability of ciliary 
neurotrophic factor (CNTF) to bind its receptor GP130 and thus 
blocks CNTF from promoting regeneration. In SOCS3 mutant 
mice, ambient levels of CNTF are sufficient to improve optic 
nerve regeneration. Elimination of GP130 as well as SOCS3 
blocks the capacity for regeneration. Addition of extra  
CNTF enhances the capacity for regeneration in SOCS3  
mutant mice.
B. Another gene encodes PTEN, which blocks signaling through 
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, which 
regulates energy metabolism. Accordingly, regeneration is 
enhanced in PTEN mutant mice.
C. Because SOCS3 and PTEN regulate different growth- 
promoting signals, mutant mice lacking both genes exhibit 
greater regenerative ability than either single mutant. (Adapted 
from Smith et al. 2009.)
plasticity becomes better understood, therapeutic 
strategies that promote specific changes in circuitry 
may become possible. Perhaps most promising is an 
approach in which cellular or molecular interventions 
that promote growth are combined with behavioral 
therapies that result in circuit rewiring.
Neurons in the Injured Brain Die but New 
Ones Can Be Born
The failure to grow a new axon is by no means the 
worst fate that can befall an injured neuron. For many 
neurons, axotomy leads to the death of the cell. Efforts 
Wild type
A
Retinal ganglion cells
SOCS3 mutant
PTEN mutant
PTEN/SOCS3
double mutant
CNTF
SOCS3
GP130
CNTF
No
regeneration
SOCS3
JAK/STAT
Regeneration
Wild type
B
C
PTEN
mTOR
No
regeneration
PTEN
mTOR
Regeneration
mTOR
CNTF
PTEN
SOCS3
JAK/STAT
Enhanced
regeneration


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1249
Figure 50–11  Function can be recovered after spinal cord 
injury through reorganization of spinal circuits. Severed cor-
ticospinal axons can reestablish connections with motor neu-
rons by sprouting axon collaterals that innervate propriospinal 
interneurons whose axons bypass the lesion and contact motor 
neurons located caudal to the lesion site. (Adapted from Bareyre 
et al. 2004.)
to improve recovery following injury therefore need 
to consider survival of neurons and not simply the 
regrowth of axons. Since neuronal death is a frequent 
consequence of other neural insults, such as stroke and 
neurodegenerative disease, improved ways of retain-
ing or replacing neurons would have broad utility.
The loss of cells following injury is not unique to 
the nervous system, although in other tissues, new cells 
are often effective at repairing damage. This regenera-
tive capacity is most dramatic in the hematopoietic sys-
tem, where a few stem cells can repopulate the entire 
adaptive immune system. In contrast, it has long been 
believed that the generation of neurons is complete by 
birth. Because of this, approaches to regeneration have 
often focused on finding ways to spare neurons that 
would otherwise die.
This traditional view has changed, prompted ini-
tially by Joseph Altman’s discovery in the 1960s that 
neurogenesis continues into adulthood in some parts 
of the mammalian brain. Since this finding challenged 
fundamental tenets of prevailing dogma, the idea that 
new neurons could form in postnatal rodents was met 
with skepticism for three decades.
Eventually, however, the application of better cell 
labeling technologies amply supported Altman’s con-
clusion and showed that it also applies to nonhuman 
primates and even, in a limited way, to humans. We 
are now confident that new neurons are added to the 
dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and to the olfac-
tory bulb throughout life, although the rate of addition 
declines with age. Some of the newborn cells in the 
dentate gyrus of the adult hippocampus die soon after 
they are born and others become glial cells, but a sub-
stantial minority differentiate into granule cells that 
are indistinguishable from those born at embryonic 
stages (Figure 50–12). New neurons are also added to 
the adult olfactory bulb. They are generated near the 
surface of the lateral ventricles, far from the bulb itself, 
and then migrate to their destination (Figure 50–13). 
In both cases, the new neurons extend processes, 
form synapses, and become integrated into functional 
circuits. Thus, neurons born at embryonic stages are 
gradually replaced by later-born neurons, so that the 
total number of neurons in these regions of the brain 
is maintained.
The properties of neurons born in mature ani-
mals are not completely understood, but they appear 
able to recapitulate many of the properties of neurons 
that arise in the embryo. When the generation of new 
neurons in the adult is prevented, certain behaviors 
mediated by the olfactory bulb and hippocampus are 
degraded. Conversely, some behavioral alterations are 
accompanied by alterations in the tempo of adult neu-
rogenesis. Adult neurogenesis can be decreased in ani-
mal models of depression and chronic stress, whereas 
enrichment of the habitat of an animal or an increase 
in the physical activity of otherwise sedentary rodents 
can increase the generation of new neurons.
What cells give rise to adult-born neurons? The 
principle that embryonic neurons and glia arise from 
multipotential progenitors also applies to neurons 
born in adults. Stem cells are the source of neurons in 
the adult as well as the embryo. They are likely derived 
from radial glia, which also serve as a source of 
Interneurons
Motor 
neurons
Lesion site


===== Page 7 =====
1250    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–12  Neurons born in the germinal zone of the 
dentate gyrus in adult rodents are integrated into hip-
pocampal circuits.  The diagrams on the left show the path-
ways of neuronal differentiation and integration into dentate 
gyrus circuits. The images on the right show newly generated 
neurons and their dendritic arbors labeled with a virus express-
ing green fluorescence protein. (Micrographs reproduced, with 
permission, from F. Gage.)
neurons during embryonic development (Chapter 46). 
A subset of these cells exit the cell cycle during gesta-
tion, become quiescent, and take up residence near the 
ventricular surface. In adulthood, they are activated, 
reenter the cell cycle, and give rise to neurons.
Although so far adult neurogenesis has not been 
directly linked to repair of damaged tissue, its discov-
ery has influenced research on recovery from injury in 
two important ways. First, the findings that endoge-
nously generated neurons can differentiate and extend 
processes through the thicket of adult neuropil, and 
can be integrated into functional circuits, led research-
ers to test the idea that the same could be true for trans-
planted neurons or precursors. Second, since neural 
precursors can be induced to divide and differenti-
ate, strategies designed to augment this innate ability 
are now being considered, with the goal of producing 
neurons in large enough numbers to replace those lost 
to injury or neurodegenerative disease. As we describe 
below, these ideas have progressed over the past few 
decades from science fiction to efforts that are tantaliz-
ingly close to clinical tests.
Therapeutic Interventions May Retain or 
Replace Injured Central Neurons
Transplantation of Neurons or Their Progenitors 
Can Replace Lost Neurons
For many years, neurologists have transplanted devel-
oping neurons into experimental animals to see if the 
new neurons could reverse the effects of injury or dis-
ease. These attempts have had promising results in a 
few cases.
Proliferation
Integration
Differentiation
CA3
Mossy ﬁber 
pathway
Schaffer collateral
pathway 
Dentate 
region
Perforant 
pathway
CA1


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 50 / Repairing the Damaged Brain    1251
Figure 50–13  The origin and fate of neurons born  
in the adult ventricular zone. (Adapted from Tavazoie et al. 
2008.)
A. Neuroblasts develop in an orderly progression from astro-
cytic stem cells via a population of cells within a local niche 
close to blood vessels in the subventricular zone. (Abbreviation: 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.)
B. Neuroblasts differentiate into immature neurons that migrate 
to the olfactory bulb using astrocytes as guides. They crawl 
along each other in a process called chain migration.
C. On arrival in the olfactory bulb, immature neurons  
differentiate into granule cells and periglomerular cells, two 
classes of olfactory bulb interneurons. (Image reproduced, with 
permission, from A. Mizrahi.)
Neuroblast
Transit-
amplifying 
cell
Stem cell
astrocyte
B  Migration
C  Integration  
CSF
Blood vessel
Ependymal cell
C
Olfactory
bulb
Dentate
gyrus
B
A
Rostral 
migratory 
stream
A  Neurogenesis
Subventricular 
zone
Astrocyte
Immature 
neuron
Granule
cell
Periglomerular 
cells


===== Page 9 =====
1252    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 50–14  Loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in  
Parkinson disease can be treated by grafting embryonic 
cells into the putamen.
A. In the healthy brain, dopaminergic projections from the sub-
stantia nigra (SN) innervate the putamen, which in turn activates 
neurons in the globus pallidus (GP). Pallidal outputs to the brain 
and spinal cord facilitate movement. The image below shows 
melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in human substantia nigra.
B. In Parkinson disease, the loss of dopaminergic neurons in 
the substantia nigra deprives the putamen–globus pallidus 
pathways of their drive. The image beneath the diagram shows 
the virtual absence of melanin-rich dopaminergic neurons in the 
substantia nigra of an individual with Parkinson disease.
C. Direct injection of embryonic dopaminergic neurons into the 
putamen reactivates the globus pallidus output pathways. The 
image below shows tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the cell 
bodies and axons of embryonic mesencephalic dopaminergic 
neurons grafted into the putamen of a human patient. (Image 
reproduced, with permission, from Kordower and  
Sortwell 2000. Copyright © 2000. Published by Elsevier B.V.)
One is to replace dopaminergic cells that die in 
Parkinson disease. When transplanted into the stria-
tum, these neurons release dopamine onto their tar-
gets without the need to grow long axons or form 
elaborate synapses (Figure 50–14). Another is to 
transplant immature inhibitory interneurons from 
the ganglionic eminences in which they are pro-
duced (Chapter 46) to the cortex, where they mature 
and form synapses. By enhancing inhibition, these 
neurons attenuate the manifestations of disorders in 
which insufficient inhibitory drive plays a role, such 
as epilepsy and anxiety.
Unfortunately, application of these methods to 
human patients has been fraught with difficulties. One 
is the difficulty of obtaining and growing develop-
ing neurons in sufficient numbers and with sufficient 
purity. Second, it has been challenging to modify neu-
rons by introducing new genes so as to improve their 
chances of functioning in a new environment. Third, in 
many cases, the grafted neurons are already too mature 
A  Normal
Spinal
cord
GP
Putamen
B  Parkinson disease
C  Recovery 
SN
GP
Putamen
SN
Injection of
DA neurons


