===== Page 1 =====
76    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 4–2  A simple behavior is mediated by many parts of 
the brain.
A.  A tennis player watching an approaching ball uses the visual 
cortex to judge the size, direction, and velocity of the ball. The 
premotor cortex develops a motor program to return the ball. 
The amygdala acts in conjunction with other brain regions 
to adjust the heart rate, respiration, and other homeostatic 
mechanisms and also activates the hypothalamus to motivate 
the player to hit well.
B.  To execute the shot, the player must use all of the struc-
tures illustrated in part A as well as others. The motor cortex 
sends signals to the spinal cord that activate and inhibit many 
muscles in the arms and legs. The basal ganglia become 
involved in initiating motor patterns and perhaps recalling 
learned movements to hit the ball properly. The cerebellum 
adjusts movements based on proprioceptive information  
from peripheral sensory receptors. The posterior parietal 
cortex provides the player with a sense of where his body 
is located in space and where his racket arm is located with 
respect to his body. Brain stem neurons regulate heart rate, 
respiration, and arousal throughout the movement. The  
hippocampus is not involved in hitting the ball but is involved 
in storing the memory of the return so that the player can 
brag about it later.
Premotor
cortex
A
B
Motor cortex
Posterior
parietal
cortex
Cerebellum
Brain stem
nuclei
Spinal cord
Hippocampus
Basal
ganglia
Amygdala
Visual
cortices
Hypothalamus
in the brain. The system for fine touch, pressure, and 
proprioception is called the epicritic system, whereas 
the system for pain and temperature is called the pro-
topathic system.
Somatosensory Information From the Trunk and 
Limbs Is Conveyed to the Spinal Cord
All forms of somatosensory information from the 
trunk and limbs enter the spinal cord, which has a core 
H-shaped region of gray matter where neuronal cell 
bodies are located. The gray matter is surrounded by 
white matter formed by myelinated axons that make 
up both short and long connections. The gray matter 
on each side of the cord is divided into dorsal (or pos-
terior) and ventral (or anterior) horns (Figure 4–3).
The dorsal horn contains groups of secondary 
sensory neurons (sensory nuclei) whose dendrites 
receive stimulus information from primary sensory 
neurons that innervate the body’s skin, muscles, 
and joints. The ventral horn contains groups of 
motor neurons (motor nuclei) whose axons exit the 
spinal cord and innervate skeletal muscles. The spi-
nal cord has circuits that mediate behaviors rang-
ing from the stretch reflex to coordination of limb 
movements.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, when consider-
ing the knee-jerk reflex, interneurons of various 
types in the gray matter regulate the output of the 
spinal cord motor neurons (see Figure 3–5). Some of 
these interneurons are excitatory, whereas others are 
inhibitory. These interneurons modulate both sensory 
information flowing toward the brain and motor com-
mands descending from the brain to the spinal motor 
neurons. Motor neurons can also adjust the output 
of other motor neurons via the interneurons. These 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    77
Figure 4–3  The major anatomical features of the spinal 
cord. The ventral horn (green) contains large motor neurons, 
whereas the dorsal horn (orange) contains smaller neurons. 
Fibers of the gracile fascicle carry somatosensory information 
from the lower limbs, whereas fibers of the cuneate fascicle 
carry somatosensory information from the upper body. Fiber 
bundles of the lateral and ventral columns include both ascend-
ing and descending fiber bundles.
Cell Stain
Fiber Stain
Dorsal
horn
Ventral sulcus
Ventral columns
Lateral columns
Cuneate fascicle
Gracile fascicle 
Ventral
horn
White
matter
Ascending axons 
 
Information
from body's
surface
Innervation
of skeletal
muscle
Gray
matter
Dorsal roots
Ventral roots
Motor
neurons
Sensory
neurons
To brain 
stem
Ascending and 
descending axons 
 
circuits will be considered in more detail when we dis-
cuss the spinal cord in Chapter 32.
The white matter surrounding the gray matter 
contains bundles of ascending and descending axons 
that are divided into dorsal, lateral, and ventral col-
umns. The dorsal columns, which lie between the two 
dorsal horns of the gray matter, contain only ascend-
ing axons that carry somatosensory information to the 
brain stem (Figure 4–1). The lateral columns include 
both ascending and descending axons from the brain 
stem and neocortex that innervate spinal interneurons 
and motor neurons (Figure 4–3). This demonstrates a 
general principle about central nervous system con-
nections. Processing tends to be hierarchical: Projec-
tions from a lower to a higher processing region are 
said to be feedforward, while descending projections 
can modulate spinal reflexes and are considered to 
be feedback. The motif in which region A projects 
to region B and, in turn, also receives return projec-
tions from B, is recapitulated throughout the nervous 


===== Page 3 =====
78    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 4–4  The internal and external appearances of the 
spinal cord vary at different levels. The proportion of gray 
matter (the H-shaped area within the spinal cord) to white mat-
ter is greater at sacral levels than at cervical levels. At sacral 
levels, very few incoming sensory axons have joined the spinal 
cord, whereas most of the motor axons have already termi-
nated at higher levels of the spinal cord. The cross-sectional 
enlargements at the lumbar and cervical levels are regions 
where the large number of fibers innervating the limbs enter or 
leave the spinal cord.
Cervical 
(head, neck, 
arms)
C 1
C 4
Cervical
enlargement
Lumbar
enlargement
Thoracic 
(upper trunk)
Filum
terminale
C 7, 8
T 2
T 12
L 5
S 3
S 4
Features of the 
rostrocaudal axis 
The spinal cord 
Rostral spinal cord
Caudal spinal cord
Increasing 
proportion of 
ascending and 
descending axons
Increasing 
proportion 
of gray matter
Lumbar
(lower torso
and legs)
Sacral
(lower torso
and legs)
system. The ventral columns also include ascending 
and descending axons. The ascending somatosensory 
axons in the lateral and ventral columns constitute 
parallel pathways that convey information about pain 
and thermal sensation to higher levels of the central 
nervous system. The descending axons control axial 
muscles and posture.
The spinal cord is divided along its length into four 
major regions: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral 
(Figure 4–4). Connections arising from these regions 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    79
are segregated according to the embryological somites 
from which muscles, bones, and other components 
of the body develop (Chapter 45). Axons projecting 
from the spinal cord to body structures that develop 
at the same segmental level join with axons entering 
the spinal cord in the intervertebral foramen to form 
spinal nerves. Spinal nerves at the cervical level are 
involved with sensory perception and motor function 
of the back of the head, neck, and arms; nerves at the 
thoracic level innervate the upper trunk; lumbar and 
sacral spinal nerves innervate the lower trunk, back, 
and legs.
Each of the four regions of the spinal cord contains 
multiple segments corresponding approximately to 
the different vertebrae in each region; there are 8 cer-
vical segments, 12 thoracic segments, 5 lumbar seg-
ments, and 5 sacral segments. The actual substance of 
the mature spinal cord does not look segmented, but 
the segments of the four spinal regions are nonetheless 
defined by the number and location of the dorsal and 
ventral roots that enter or exit the spinal cord. The spi-
nal cord varies in size and shape along its rostrocaudal 
axis because of two organizational features.
First, relatively few sensory axons enter the cord 
at the sacral level. The number of sensory axons 
entering the cord increases at progressively higher 
levels (lumbar, thoracic, and cervical). Conversely, 
most descending axons from the brain terminate at 
cervical levels, with progressively fewer descending 
to lower levels of the spinal cord. Thus, the num-
ber of fibers in the white matter is highest at cervi-
cal levels (where there are the highest numbers of 
both ascending and descending fibers) and lowest at 
sacral levels. As a result, sacral levels of the spinal 
cord have much less white matter than gray matter, 
whereas the cervical cord has more white matter than 
gray matter (Figure 4–4).
The second organizational feature is variation in 
the size of the ventral and dorsal horns. The ventral 
horn is larger at the levels where the motor nerves 
innervate the arms and legs. The number of ventral 
motor neurons dedicated to a body region roughly 
parallels the dexterity of movements of that region. 
Thus, a larger number of motor neurons is needed to 
innervate the greater number of muscles and to regu-
late the greater complexity of movement in the limbs 
as compared with the trunk. Likewise, the dorsal horn 
is larger where sensory nerves from the limbs enter the 
cord. Limbs have a greater density of sensory recep-
tors to mediate finer tactile discrimination and thus 
send more sensory fibers to the cord. These regions 
of the cord are known as the lumbosacral and cervical 
enlargements (Figure 4–4).
Descending to 
other levels of 
the spinal cord
Ventral 
root
Information 
from skin,
muscles, 
and joints
Dorsal
root
Dorsal root
ganglion
neuron
Ascending
to brain
stem
Dorsal
columns
Figure 4–5  Dorsal root ganglia and spinal nerve roots. The 
cell bodies of neurons that bring sensory information from the 
skin, muscles, and joints lie in the dorsal root ganglia, clusters 
of cells that lie adjacent to the spinal cord. The axons of these 
neurons are bifurcated into peripheral and central branches. The 
central branch enters the dorsal portion of the spinal cord.
The Primary Sensory Neurons of the Trunk and 
Limbs Are Clustered in the Dorsal Root Ganglia
The sensory neurons that convey information from the 
skin, muscles, and joints of the limbs and trunk to the 
spinal cord are clustered together in dorsal root gan-
glia within the vertebral column, immediately adja-
cent to the spinal cord (Figure 4–5). These neurons are 
pseudo-unipolar in shape; they have a bifurcated axon 
with central and peripheral branches. The peripheral 
branch innervates the skin, muscle, or other tissue as 
a free nerve ending or in association with specialized 
receptors for sensing touch, proprioception (stretch 
receptors), pain, and temperature.
The somatosensory system and its pathways from 
receptors to perception are more fully described in 
Chapters 17 to 20. Suffice it to say at this point that there 
are essentially two somatosensory pathways from the 
periphery that carry either touch and stretch (epicritic 
system) or pain and temperature (protopathic system). 
Epicritic fibers travel in the posterior column–medial 
lemniscal system (Figure 4–6). The centrally directed 
axons from neurons in the dorsal root ganglion ascend 
in the dorsal (or posterior) column white matter and 
terminate in the gracile nucleus or cuneate nucleus of 
the medulla. The centrally directed axons of the pain 
and temperature pathway form the spinothalamic 


===== Page 5 =====
80    Part I / Overall Perspective
Medulla
Spinal cord
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Touch
Pain
Somatic sensory cortex
(postcentral gyrus)
Forearm and
hand area
Trunk
Leg and
foot
Lateral
sulcus
Face
Internal
capsule
Thalamus
Ventral posterior
lateral and 
medial nuclei
Spinomesencephalic 
tract
Medial lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Spinothalamic tract
Principal
trigeminal
nucleus
Spinoreticular tract
Gracile nucleus
Gracile fascicle
Cuneate fascicle
Dorsal root
ganglion cells
Anterolateral system
Cuneate nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus (N.V.) and tract
Sensory decussation
Dorsal column
medial lemniscal
system
Dorsal anterior
insular cortex


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    81
pathway. They terminate within the gray matter of the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Second-order neurons 
cross to the other side of the spinal cord and ascend in the 
anterior and lateral spinothalamic tracts (Figure 4–6). 
Both pathways ultimately terminate in the thalamus, 
which sends projections to the primary somatosensory 
area of the cerebral cortex. In the next section, we focus 
on the epicritic system.
The local and ascending branches from touch and 
proprioceptive sensory neurons provide two func-
tional pathways for somatosensory information enter-
ing the spinal cord from dorsal root ganglion cells. The 
local branches can activate local reflex circuits that 
modulate motor output, while the ascending branches 
carry information into the brain, where this informa-
tion is further processed in the thalamus and cerebral 
cortex.
The Terminals of Central Axons of Dorsal Root 
Ganglion Neurons in the Spinal Cord Produce a 
Map of the Body Surface
The manner in which the central axons of the dorsal 
root ganglion cells terminate in the spinal cord forms a 
neural map of the body surface. This orderly somato-
topic distribution of inputs from different portions of 
the body surface is maintained throughout the entire 
ascending somatosensory pathway. This arrange-
ment illustrates another important principle of neural 
organization. Neurons that make up neural circuits at 
any particular level are often connected in a systematic 
fashion and appear similar from individual to indi-
vidual. Similarly, fiber bundles that connect different 
processing regions at different levels of the nervous 
system are also arranged in a highly organized and 
stereotypical fashion.
Figure 4–6  (Opposite) Somatosensory information from the 
limbs and trunk is conveyed to the thalamus and cerebral 
cortex by two ascending pathways. Brain slices along the 
neuraxis from the spinal cord to the cerebrum illustrate the 
anatomy of the two principal pathways conveying somatosen-
sory information to the cerebral cortex. The two pathways are 
separated until they reach the pons, where they are juxtaposed.
Dorsal column–medial lemniscal system (orange). Touch and 
limb proprioception signals are conveyed to the spinal cord and 
brain stem by large-diameter myelinated nerve fibers and trans-
mitted to the thalamus in this system. In the spinal cord, the 
fibers for touch and proprioception divide, one branch  
going to the ipsilateral spinal gray matter and the other ascend-
ing in the ipsilateral dorsal column to the medulla. The second-
order fibers from neurons in the dorsal column nuclei cross the 
midline in the medulla and ascend in the contralateral medial 
lemniscus toward the thalamus, where they terminate in the 
lateral and medial ventral posterior nuclei. Thalamic neurons in 
these nuclei convey tactile and proprioceptive information to 
the primary somatosensory cortex.
Anterolateral system (brown). Pain, itch, temperature, and 
visceral information is conveyed to the spinal cord by small-
diameter myelinated and unmyelinated fibers that terminate in 
the ipsilateral dorsal horn. This information is conveyed across 
the midline by neurons within the spinal cord and transmitted 
to the brain stem and the thalamus in the contralateral ante-
rolateral system. Anterolateral fibers terminating in the brain 
stem compose the spinoreticular and spinomesencephalic 
tracts; the remaining anterolateral fibers form the spinothalamic 
tract.
Axons that enter the cord in the sacral region 
ascend in the dorsal column near the midline, whereas 
those that enter at successively higher levels ascend at 
progressively more lateral positions within the dorsal 
columns. Thus, in the cervical cord, where axons from 
all portions of the body have already entered, sensory 
fibers from the lower body are located medially in the 
dorsal column, while fibers from the trunk, arm and 
shoulder, and finally the neck occupy progressively 
more lateral areas. In the cervical spinal cord, the axons 
forming the dorsal columns are divided into two bun-
dles: a medially situated gracile fascicle and a more lat-
erally situated cuneate fascicle (Figure 4–1).
Each Somatic Submodality Is Processed in a Distinct 
Subsystem From the Periphery to the Brain
The submodalities of somatic sensation—touch, pain, 
temperature, and position sense—are processed in the 
brain through different pathways that end in different 
brain regions. We illustrate the specificity of these par-
allel pathways by the path of information for the sub-
modality of touch.
The primary afferent fibers that carry information 
about touch enter the ipsilateral dorsal column and 
ascend to the medulla. Fibers from the lower body 
run in the gracile fascicle and terminate in the gracile 
nucleus, whereas fibers from the upper body run in the 
cuneate fascicle and terminate in the cuneate nucleus. 
Neurons in the gracile and cuneate nuclei give rise 
to axons that cross to the other side of the brain and 
ascend to the thalamus in a long fiber bundle called the 
medial lemniscus (Figure 4–1).
As in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord, the fib-
ers of the medial lemniscus are arranged somatotopi-
cally. Because the fibers carrying sensory information 


===== Page 7 =====
82    Part I / Overall Perspective
cross the midline to the other side of the brain, the right 
side of the brain receives sensory information from the 
left side of the body, and vice versa. The fibers of the  
medial lemniscus end in a specific subdivision of  
the thalamus called the ventral posterior lateral nucleus 
(Figure 4–1). There the fibers maintain their somatotopic 
organization such that those carrying information from 
the lower body end laterally and those carrying infor-
mation from the upper body end medially.
The Thalamus Is an Essential Link Between 
Sensory Receptors and the Cerebral Cortex
The thalamus is an egg-shaped structure that consti-
tutes the dorsal portion of the diencephalon. It con-
tains a class of excitatory neurons called thalamic relay 
cells that convey sensory input to the primary sensory 
areas of the cerebral cortex. However, the thalamus is 
not merely a relay. It acts as a gatekeeper for informa-
tion to the cerebral cortex, preventing or enhancing 
the passage of specific information depending on the 
behavioral state of the organism.
The cerebral cortex has feedback projections that 
terminate, in part, in a special portion of the thalamus 
called the thalamic reticular nucleus. This nucleus 
forms a thin sheet around the thalamus and is made up 
almost totally of inhibitory neurons that synapse onto 
the relay cells. It does not project to the neocortex at 
all. In addition to receiving feedback projections from 
the neocortex, the reticular nucleus receives input from 
axons leaving the thalamus en route to the neocortex, 
enabling the thalamus to modulate the response of its 
relay cells to incoming sensory information.
The thalamus is a good example of a brain region 
made up of several well-defined nuclei. As many as 
50 thalamic nuclei have been identified (Figure 4–7). 
Some nuclei receive information specific to a sensory 
modality and project to a specific area of the neocor-
tex. For example, cells in the ventral posterior lateral 
nucleus (where the medial lemniscus terminates) pro-
cess somatosensory information, and their axons pro-
ject to the primary somatosensory cortex (Figures 
4–1 and 4–7). Projections from the retinal ganglion cells 
terminate in another portion of the thalamus called the 
lateral geniculate nucleus (Figure 4–7). Neurons in 
this nucleus project in turn to the visual cortex. Other 
portions of the thalamus participate in motor func-
tions, transmitting information from the cerebellum 
and basal ganglia to the motor regions of the frontal 
lobe. Axons from cells of the thalamus that project 
to the neocortex travel in the corona radiata, a large 
Figure 4–7  The major subdivisions of the thalamus. The 
thalamus is the critical relay for the flow of sensory informa-
tion from peripheral receptors to the neocortex. Somatosen-
sory information is conveyed from dorsal root ganglia to the 
ventral posterior lateral nucleus and from there to the primary 
somatosensory cortex. Likewise, visual information from the 
retina reaches the lateral geniculate nucleus, from which it is 
conveyed to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. Each 
of the sensory systems, except olfaction, has a similar process-
ing step within a distinct region of the thalamus.
Anterior nuclei
Reticular nucleus
Ventrolateral nuclei:
1. Lateral dorsal
2. Lateral posterior
Pulvinar
3. Ventral anterior
4. Ventral lateral
6. Ventral posterior
    lateral
5. Ventral posterior
    medial
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Posterior
nuclei
Medial nuclei
Medial geniculate
nucleus
Internal medullary
lamina
Midline nuclei
Intralaminar nuclei
Visual cortex
Visual
cortex
Somatosensory cortex
Primary
somatosensory
cortex
Retina
Dorsal column
nuclei
Dorsal column
nuclei
Dorsal root
ganglion
Thalamus
Retina


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    83
fiber bundle that carries most of the axons running to 
and from the cerebral hemispheres. Through its con-
nections with the frontal lobe and hippocampus, the 
thalamus may play a role in cognitive functions, such 
as memory. Some nuclei that may play a role in atten-
tion project diffusely to large but distinctly different 
regions of cortex.
The nuclei of the thalamus are most commonly 
classified into four groups—anterior, medial, vent-
rolateral, and posterior—with respect to the internal 
medullary lamina, a sheet-like bundle of fibers that runs 
the rostrocaudal length of the thalamus (Figure 4–7). 
Thus, the medial group of nuclei is located medial to 
the internal medullary lamina, whereas the ventrolat-
eral and posterior groups are located lateral to it. At 
the rostral pole of the thalamus, the internal medul-
lary lamina splits and surrounds the anterior group. 
The caudal pole of the thalamus is occupied by the 
posterior group, dominated by the pulvinar nucleus. 
Groups of neurons are also located within the fibers 
of the internal medullary lamina and are collectively 
referred to as the intralaminar nuclei.
The anterior group receives its major input from the 
mammillary nuclei of the hypothalamus and from the 
presubiculum of the hippocampal formation. The role 
of the anterior group is uncertain, but because of its 
connections, it is thought to be related to memory and 
emotion. The anterior group is mainly interconnected 
with regions of the cingulate and frontal cortices.
The medial group consists mainly of the medio-
dorsal nucleus. This large thalamic nucleus has three 
subdivisions, each of which is connected to a particu-
lar portion of the frontal cortex. The nucleus receives 
inputs from portions of the basal ganglia, the amyg-
dala, and midbrain and has been implicated in mem-
ory and emotional processing.
The nuclei of the ventrolateral group are named 
according to their positions within the thalamus. The 
ventral anterior and ventral lateral nuclei are impor-
tant for motor control and carry information from the 
basal ganglia and cerebellum to the motor cortex. The 
ventral posterior nuclei convey somatosensory infor-
mation to the neocortex. The ventroposterior lateral 
nucleus conveys information from the spinal cord 
tracts, as described earlier. The ventroposterior medial 
nucleus conveys information from the face, which 
enters the brain stem mainly through the trigeminal 
nerve (cranial nerve V).
The posterior group includes the medial and lateral 
geniculate nuclei, the lateral posterior nucleus, and 
the pulvinar. The medial geniculate nucleus is a com-
ponent of the auditory system and is organized tono-
topically based on the sound frequency information 
carried by its inputs; it conveys auditory information 
to the primary auditory cortex in the superior temporal 
gyrus of the temporal lobe. The lateral geniculate nucleus 
receives information from the retina and conveys it to 
the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. Compared 
to rodents, the pulvinar is enlarged disproportionately 
in the primate brain, especially in the human brain, and 
its development seems to parallel the enlargement of the 
association regions of the parietal, occipital, and tempo-
ral cortices. It has been divided into at least three subdivi-
sions and is extensively interconnected with widespread 
regions of the parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes, as 
well as with the superior colliculus and other nuclei of 
the brain stem related to vision.
As noted previously, the thalamus not only projects 
to the neocortex (feedforward connections) but also 
receives extensive return inputs back from the neocor-
tex (feedback connections). For example, in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus, the number of synapses formed 
by axons from the feedback projection from the visual 
cortex is actually greater than the number of synapses 
that the lateral geniculate nucleus receives from the 
retina! This feedback is thought to play an important 
modulatory role in the processing of sensory informa-
tion, although the exact function is not yet understood. 
Although this feedback is mainly from cortical neu-
rons that are activated by both eyes, the neurons in the 
lateral geniculate nucleus are responsive to only one or 
the other eye. The implication is that they are primarily 
driven by input from the retina (which is from differ-
ent eyes in different layers), not the feedback from the 
cortex, despite its numerical advantage. Most nuclei of 
the thalamus receive a similarly prominent return pro-
jection from the cerebral cortex, and the significance of 
these projections is one of the unsolved mysteries of 
neuroscience.
The thalamic nuclei described thus far are called 
the relay (or specific) nuclei because they have a spe-
cific and selective relationship with a particular por-
tion of the neocortex. Other thalamic nuclei, called  
nonspecific nuclei, project to several cortical and subcor-
tical regions. These nuclei are located either on the mid-
line of the thalamus (the midline nuclei) or within the 
internal medullary lamina (the intralaminar nuclei). 
The largest of the midline nuclei are the paraventricu-
lar, paratenial, and reuniens nuclei; the largest of the 
intralaminar cell groups is the centromedian nucleus. 
The intralaminar nuclei project to medial temporal 
lobe structures, such as the amygdala and hippocam-
pus, but also send projections to portions of the basal 
ganglia. These nuclei receive inputs from a variety of 
sources in the spinal cord, brain stem, and cerebellum 
and are thought to mediate cortical arousal.


===== Page 9 =====
84    Part I / Overall Perspective
The thalamus is an important step in the hierarchy 
of sensory processing, not a passive relay station where 
information is simply passed on to the neocortex. It is 
a complex brain region where substantial information 
processing takes place (Figure 4–1). To give but one 
example, the output of somatosensory information 
from the ventral posterior lateral nucleus is subject to 
four types of processing: (1) local processing within the 
nucleus; (2) modulation by brain stem inputs, such as 
from the noradrenergic and serotonergic systems; (3) 
inhibitory input from the reticular nucleus; and (4) 
modulatory feedback from the neocortex.
Sensory Information Processing Culminates in 
the Cerebral Cortex
Somatosensory information from the ventral poste-
rior lateral nucleus is conveyed mainly to the primary 
somatosensory cortex (Figure 4–1). The neurons here 
are exquisitely sensitive to tactile stimulation of the 
skin surface. The somatosensory cortex, like earlier 
stages in tactile sensory processing, is somatotopically 
organized (Figure 4–8).
Figure 4–8  Homunculi illustrate the relative amounts of corti-
cal area dedicated to sensory and motor innervation of indi-
vidual parts of the body. The entire body surface is represented 
in an orderly array of somatosensory inputs in the cortex. (From 
Penfield and Rasmussen 1950. Reproduced by permission of the 
Osler Library of the History of Medicine, McGill University.)
A.  The area of cortex dedicated to processing sensory information 
from a particular part of the body is not proportional to the mass of 
the body part but instead reflects the density of sensory receptors 
in that part. Thus, sensory input from the lips and hands occupies 
more area of cortex than, say, that from the elbow.
B.  Output from the motor cortex is organized in similar fashion. 
The amount of cortical surface dedicated to a part of the body 
is related to the degree of motor control of that part. Thus, in 
humans, much of the motor cortex is dedicated to controlling 
the muscles of the fingers and the muscles related to speech.
Eye
Thumb
Index
Middle
Ring
Little
Hand
Wrist
Elbow
Forearm
Arm
Shoulder
Head
Neck
Hip
Leg
Trunk
Foot
Toes
Genitals
A  Sensory homunculus
B  Motor homunculus
Medial
Lateral
Nose
Face
Upper lip
Lower lip
Teeth, gums, and jaw
Tongue
Pharynx
Intra-abdominal
B
A
Medial
Lateral
Ankle
Knee
Hip
Trunk
Shoulder
Elbow
Wrist
Hand
Little
Ring
Middle
Fingers
Index
Thumb
Neck
Brow
Eyelid and eyeball
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
Toes
[—
–V
oc
ali
za
ti
on
–—
] 
[
M
a
st
ic
at
io
n
]
 
[
S
ali
va
ti
o
n
]
 
Fingers
When the neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield stimu-
lated the surface of the somatosensory cortex in 
patients undergoing brain surgery in the late 1940s and 
early 1950s, he found that sensation from the lower 
limbs is mediated by neurons located near the midline 
of the brain, whereas sensations from the upper body, 
hands and fingers, face, lips, and tongue are medi-
ated by neurons located laterally. Penfield found that, 
although all parts of the body are represented in the 
cortex somatotopically, the amount of surface area of 
cortex devoted to each body part is not proportional 
to its mass. Instead, it is proportional to the fineness 
of discrimination in the body part, which in turn is 
related to the density of innervation of sensory fib-
ers (Chapter 19). Thus, the area of cortex devoted to  
the fingers is larger than that for the arms. Likewise, 
the representation of the lips and tongue occupies 
more cortical surface than that of the remainder of the 
face (Figure 4–8). As we shall see in Chapter 53, the 
amount of cortex devoted to a particular body part is 
not fixed but can be modified by experience, as seen in 
concert violinists, where there is an expansion of the 
region of somatosensory cortex devoted to the fingers 
of the hand used to finger the strings. This illustrates 


