===== Page 1 =====
1084    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 44–3  The ascending arousal system.  The ascending 
arousal system comprises primarily axons from glutamatergic 
neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine tegmental 
nuclei and cholinergic and GABAergic (dark gray) neurons in the 
basal forebrain. Lesions of either the parabrachial and pedunculo-
pontine nuclei or the basal forebrain cause coma. Of somewhat 
lesser importance are dopaminergic neurons in the ventral teg-
mental area (VTA) and ventral periaqueductal gray (vPAG) matter 
and glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons in the supramammil-
lary nucleus, where lesions can increase sleep by about 20%. 
In addition, populations of modulatory neurons can strongly pro-
mote wakefulness when stimulated, but when damaged cause 
minimal changes in wake–sleep amounts. These include the 
monoaminergic neurons in the noradrenergic locus ceruleus, the 
serotonergic dorsal and median raphe nuclei, and the histaminer-
gic tuberomammillary nucleus; the cholinergic neurons  
in the pedunculopontine and lateral dorsal tegmental nuclei; and 
the orexinergic neurons in the lateral hypothalamus (LH). All of 
these neurons send their axons through the hypothalamus and 
basal forebrain directly to the cerebral cortex, where their net 
effect is to increase cortical arousal. Many of the modulatory 
pathways also activate the thalamus, enabling thalamic transmis-
sion of sensory information to the cerebral cortex. GABAergic 
neurons in the lateral hypothalamus also promote wakefulness 
by inhibiting neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area and reticu-
lar nucleus of the thalamus that oppose wakefulness.
lesions in the anterior hypothalamus. He proposed 
that neurons in this area are important for inhibiting 
the brain stem arousal system to allow sleep. Modern 
studies have shown a system of wake–sleep circuitry 
in the brain that is remarkably close to von Economo’s 
model.
The Ascending Arousal System in the Brain Stem 
and Hypothalamus Innervates the Forebrain
The composition of the ascending arousal system has 
been debated since von Economo’s time. In the late 
1940s and early 1950s, lesion studies confirmed that 
damage to the upper midbrain reticular formation 
could cause coma, whereas electrical stimulation of this 
region could arouse animals. The location and nature 
of the wake-promoting neurons were unknown.
GABA 
Acetylcholine 
Basal 
forebrain
Glutamate
Parabrachial
nucleus
Acetylcholine
Laterodorsal
tegmental nucleus
Histamine 
Tuberomammillary
nucleus
GABA
Glutamate
Supramammillary
nucleus
 
Modulatory system
Ascending arousal system
Thalamus 
Serotonin 
Raphe nucleus
VTA / vPAG 
Dopamine 
LH
GABA 
Norepinephrine 
Locus ceruleus
Acetylcholine
Glutamate
Pedunculopontine
nucleus
LH
Orexin 
In the succeeding decades, it became clear that 
these lesions damaged the axons of neurons in the 
upper brain stem that project to the forebrain, includ-
ing noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus, sero-
tonergic neurons in the dorsal and median raphe, and 
midbrain dopaminergic neurons (Chapter 40). The 
axons of other neurons in the posterior hypothalamus, 
including those producing histamine and orexin, also 
join this pathway, which splits into two bundles, with 
some projections innervating the thalamus and others 
the hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and cerebral cortex 
(Figure 44–3).
Neurons contributing to all of these ascend-
ing pathways fire fastest during the awake state but 
much slower during sleep, suggesting that they are 
wake-promoting. However, although many mono-
amine antagonists cause sleepiness, and lesions of the 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1085
monoaminergic cell groups impair the ability to stay 
awake under adverse conditions, such lesions have lit-
tle lasting effect on the amount or timing of wake or 
sleep.
Lesions of the orexinergic neurons in the lateral 
hypothalamus cause narcolepsy, a condition in which 
sleep–wake states are present in normal amounts but 
are unstable, as discussed later. In fact, of all of the mon-
oaminergic cell groups that are thought to contribute to 
arousal, only lesions of the dopaminergic neurons near 
the dorsal raphe nucleus cause small but long-lasting 
reductions in arousal, resulting in about a 20% increase 
in total sleep time. Interestingly, the ability of drugs 
such as amphetamine or modafinil to promote wakeful-
ness appears to depend upon their ability to block dopa-
mine reuptake, as mice with deletions of the dopamine 
transporter do not respond to these drugs.
Because lesions of the ascending monoaminer-
gic and orexinergic pathways have little if any effect 
on the total amount of wakefulness, recent work has 
emphasized the role of glutamatergic, cholinergic, 
and GABAergic neurons in maintaining wakefulness. 
Lesions of glutamatergic neurons in the dorsolateral 
rostral pons, including the parabrachial nucleus and 
adjacent pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, cause 
a comatose state from which the animals cannot be 
awakened. Lesions confined to the thalamus impair 
the content of consciousness but have relatively little 
effect on wake–sleep cycles. On the other hand, lesions 
of the posterior lateral hypothalamus cause profound 
sleepiness, which cannot be accounted for by dam-
age to the orexinergic or histaminergic neurons in this 
region. Glutamatergic neurons in the supramammil-
lary region, which activate the cortex, and GABAergic 
neurons in the lateral hypothalamus that inhibit sleep-
promoting circuits, may account for this arousal effect. 
Finally, large bilateral lesions of the basal forebrain 
also can produce coma, similar to lesions of the dorso-
lateral pons. Optogenetic or chemogenetic activation 
of cholinergic, GABAergic, or glutamatergic neurons 
in the basal forebrain indicates that neurons of all three 
types may produce arousal.
Thus, the current view of the ascending arousal 
system is that the crucial components are glutamater-
gic neurons in the dorsolateral pons, supramammil-
lary hypothalamus, and basal forebrain; cholinergic 
neurons in the dorsolateral pons and basal forebrain; 
and GABAergic neurons in the lateral hypothala-
mus and basal forebrain. These are likely to be aug-
mented by modulatory pathways containing orexin 
and monoamines, needed to allow full and sustained 
wakefulness particularly under adverse conditions 
(Figure 44–3).
Damage to the Ascending Arousal System  
Causes Coma
Consciousness depends upon the activity of the cer-
ebral hemispheres during the awake state. Hence, loss 
of consciousness occurs when there is injury to the 
ascending arousal system or to both cerebral hemi-
spheres, or there is a severe metabolic derangement 
(eg, low blood sugar, inadequate oxygenation, various 
forms of drug intoxication) that affects both the arousal 
system and its cortical targets. A patient who cannot 
be awakened, even by vigorous stimulation, is said to 
be in a coma. Those who can be partially awakened by 
such stimuli are said to be stuporous or obtunded.
The clinical approach to a comatose or obtunded 
patient is first to determine if there is injury to the 
ascending arousal system. Because of the proximity of 
the arousal pathways to those that control eye move-
ment and pupillary responses, as well as respiration 
and some motor responses (Chapter 40), clinicians 
examine these brain stem functions carefully. If these 
functions are intact, it is likely that the problem is due 
to a metabolic condition, which can be assessed by var-
ious blood and spinal fluid tests. In addition, a com-
puted tomographic (CT) scan of the brain is needed to 
look for pathology affecting both cerebral hemispheres 
(eg, a large tumor or blood clot).
Circuits Composed of Mutually Inhibitory Neurons 
Control Transitions From Wake to Sleep and From 
Non-REM to REM Sleep
In contrast to coma, sleep is a temporary, reversible loss 
of consciousness produced by specific brain circuitry 
that inhibits the ascending arousal system. Neurons in 
the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus contain the inhibi-
tory neurotransmitters GABA and galanin and project 
extensively to most parts of the ascending arousal sys-
tem. These preoptic neurons fire slowest during wake-
fulness, increase their firing as animals fall asleep, and 
fire fastest during deep sleep after a period of sleep 
deprivation.
Similarly, GABAergic neurons in the nearby 
median preoptic nucleus also promote sleep and pro-
ject to some components of the arousal system. Lesions 
of these preoptic neurons result in fragmented sleep 
and cause animals to lose as much as half of their total 
sleep. Of clinical relevance, elderly people often have 
fragmented sleep, and those with the most fragmented 
sleep show the greatest loss of the sleep-promoting 
ventrolateral preoptic galanin neurons in postmortem 
examination. In addition, a population of GABAergic 
neurons in the parafacial zone, a region near the facial 


===== Page 3 =====
1086    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
nerve as it courses through the brain stem, inhibits the 
parabrachial nucleus. Lesions of the parafacial zone 
also result in loss of up to half of total sleep time.
Interestingly, the ventrolateral preoptic neurons 
receive inhibitory inputs from neurons throughout 
the arousal system. Mutually inhibitory connections 
between the ventrolateral preoptic neurons and the 
arousal system result in a neural circuit with proper-
ties similar to an electrical flip-flop switch, in which 
each side of the circuit turns the other off. Such a cir-
cuit produces rapid and full transitions between two 
states. Although it may sometimes appear that it takes 
a long time to fall asleep, the actual transitions from 
wake to sleep, or vice versa, are generally quick, tak-
ing only a few seconds to a few minutes. In fact, most 
animals spend nearly their entire day clearly awake or 
asleep, with very little time spent in transitions. These 
rapid transitions are behaviorally adaptive as an ani-
mal would be vulnerable in an intermediate, drowsy 
state. A neural flip-flop switch prevents this situation 
because when either side of the switch gains advan-
tage over the other, the circuit produces a rapid and 
complete transition in state (Figure 44–4).
REM sleep is generated by a network of brain stem 
neurons centered in the pons. The fast EEG rhythms 
and dream activity of REM sleep are thought to be 
driven by coordinated activity of glutamatergic neu-
rons in the subceruleus region (ventral to the locus 
ceruleus in the pons) plus cholinergic and glutamater-
gic neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine 
tegmental nucleus that innervate the basal forebrain 
and thalamus. Other glutamatergic subceruleus neu-
rons produce the paralysis of REM sleep via projec-
tions to the ventromedial medulla and spinal cord, 
where they activate GABAergic and glycinergic neu-
rons that deeply hyperpolarize motor neurons.
The subceruleus area in turn receives input from 
a population of GABAergic neurons in and just lateral 
to the periaqueductal gray matter, where the cerebral 
aqueduct opens into the fourth ventricle. These neu-
rons are most active during wake and non-REM sleep, 
and they inhibit the subceruleus neurons, preventing 
entry into REM sleep. Conversely, GABAergic neurons 
in the subceruleus area also project back to the vent-
rolateral periaqueductal gray region. The mutual inhi-
bition between the two populations of neurons may 
form another flip-flop switch that promotes rapid and 
complete transitions into and out of REM sleep.
Interestingly, the noradrenergic locus ceruleus 
and serotonergic dorsal raphe nucleus innervate and 
inhibit the subceruleus region. Thus, REM sleep is 
often reduced when people take antidepressants that 
increase brain levels of serotonin or norepinephrine. 
In addition, as these monoaminergic neurons are 
active during wakefulness, they prevent direct transi-
tions from wake into REM sleep (Figure 44–5).
Sleep Is Regulated by Homeostatic and 
Circadian Drives
The circadian regulation of sleep obeys a 24-hour bio-
logical clock (described later), whereas the homeo-
static drive for sleep gradually accumulates during 
the awake state. After a period of sleep deprivation, 
much of the lost sleep is recovered over the next few 
nights, which in younger people may involve deeper 
and longer periods of stage N3 non-REM sleep.
REM sleep is also recovered after REM depriva-
tion; rebound REM sleep can include especially intense 
dreams, long periods of REM sleep, and occasional 
breakthrough of REM sleep phenomena into wakeful-
ness, such as dream-like hallucinations or brief paraly-
sis when falling asleep or waking up. Rebound sleep 
on a weekend is commonly enriched in REM sleep in 
people who wake up early to an alarm clock on work-
days and miss out on the last portion of sleep, which is 
mainly REM sleep.
The Homeostatic Pressure for Sleep Depends on 
Humoral Factors
Humoral factors circulating in the brain signal the 
homeostatic pressure for non-REM sleep. The brain 
is metabolically quite active during wakefulness and 
uses ATP, but with sustained periods of wakefulness, 
ATP is dephosphorylated to adenosine, which acts 
as a local neuromodulator in the extracellular envi-
ronment. Adenosine type 1 receptors are inhibitory 
receptors that are expressed on wake-promoting neu-
rons and in many other parts of the brain, so higher 
adenosine levels may produce sleepiness by inhibiting 
these neurons. In addition, adenosine can excite neu-
rons via adenosine type 2a receptors; these receptors 
are common in the shell of the nucleus accumbens and 
may cause sleepiness by means of projections to the 
hypothalamus that activate the ventrolateral preoptic 
neurons.
The pressure for sleep can be measured by the time 
it takes an individual to fall asleep if given the oppor-
tunity in a comfortable environment. This approach is 
used by sleep clinicians in the Multiple Sleep Latency 
Test, in which an individual is given 20-minute inter-
vals to try to fall asleep in a comfortable, quiet bed 
every 2 hours beginning at 9 am, for five sleep oppor-
tunities. An individual who is well rested generally 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1087
Figure 44–4  Sleep-promoting pathways.
A. The components of the ascending arousal system (Figure 
44–3) receive inhibitory, largely GABAergic inputs from sleep-
promoting neurons. Neurons in the ventrolateral and median 
preoptic nuclei (VLPO, MNPO) innervate the entire arousal- 
promoting system, while those in the parafacial zone (PFZ) 
innervate mainly the parabrachial area. Many of the VLPO  
neurons also contain galanin (GAL), an inhibitory peptide. 
Neurons in the lateral hypothalamus (LH) that release melanin-
concentrating hormone (MCH) may promote REM sleep by 
inhibiting both nearby orexinergic neurons as well as neurons in 
the periaqueductal gray matter that prevent REM sleep  
(see Figure 44–5). (Abbreviations: vPAG, ventral periaqueductal 
gray; VTA, ventral tegmental area.)
B. The flip-flop switch relationship of the ventrolateral and 
median preoptic nuclei and the mutually inhibitory components 
of the ascending arousal system (LC, locus ceruleus; A1, 
noradrenergic neurons; DR, dorsal raphe; TMN, tuberomam-
millary nucleus; PB, parabrachial nucleus). When activated, the 
sleep-promoting neurons inhibit the components of the ascend-
ing arousal system. However, the sleep-promoting cell groups 
are also inhibited by the arousal system. The net effect is that 
the individual spends most time fully awake or asleep while 
minimizing time in transitional states.
Parabrachial
nucleus
Laterodorsal
tegmental nucleus
Raphe nucleus
LH
LH
Locus ceruleus
Pedunculopontine
nucleus
PFZ
MNPO, VLPO
Sleep-promoting system
Arousal cell groups
Modulatory cell groups
Sleep-promoting system
Ascending arousal system
Acetylcholine
Serotonin 
Dopamine 
Orexin 
Norepinephrine 
Acetylcholine
GABA 
GABA 
Galanin 
MCH 
Glutamate
Glutamate
Supramammillary
nucleus
Glutamate
Tuberomammillary
nucleus
Histamine
VTA / vPAG 
Asleep
Awake
VLPO, MNPO 
LC, A1, DR, TMN, PB 
B
A
takes at least 15 to 20 minutes to fall asleep, but a very 
sleepy person can easily fall asleep within a few 
minutes in each nap. Another test of sleep pressure is 
the Psychomotor Vigilance Task. The subject is told to 
watch a small lamp and press a button as soon as they 
see the light turned on. The light then turns on at ran-
dom times over a 5- to 10-minute test period; sleepy 
subjects are inattentive and intermittently are slow or 
completely fail to respond to the light stimulus.
Circadian Rhythms Are Controlled by a Biological 
Clock in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Circadian rhythms are roughly 24-hour physiological 
rhythms that synchronize the internal state of an ani-
mal with the external daily environment and anticipate 
various physiologic demands that occur on a daily 
basis. In humans, circadian wake-promoting signals 
during the day counterbalance the rising homeostatic 


===== Page 5 =====
1088    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 44–5  The REM sleep switch. Brain stem neurons are 
essential for controlling the transitions between non–rapid eye 
movement (REM) and REM sleep. REM sleep is generated by 
a population of neurons in the rostral pons, just ventral to the 
laterodorsal tegmental nucleus and locus ceruleus, in what is 
called the sublaterodorsal area in rodents and the subceruleus 
region in humans. These glutamatergic neurons project to 
other parts of the brain stem, where they initiate the motor and 
autonomic manifestations of REM sleep, and to the forebrain, 
where they mediate behavioral and electroencephalographic 
components of REM sleep. The descending projection activates 
inhibitory interneurons in the medulla and spinal cord that pro-
foundly hyperpolarize motor neurons and prevent the individual 
from acting out his or her dreams. These REM-on neurons are 
inhibited by GABAergic neurons in the ventrolateral periaque-
ductal gray matter and adjacent pontine reticular formation, 
while the latter are themselves inhibited by neurons  
in the REM-on region, thus forming a flip-flop switch (see 
Figure 44–4B). These REM-off neurons are under the control 
of forebrain neurons, including neurons that release the excita-
tory orexin neuropeptides, neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic 
nucleus (VLPO) that release the inhibitory signaling molecules 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and galanin, and hypothalamic 
neurons that release the inhibitory neuropeptide melanin-
concentrating hormone (MCH). In addition, modulatory neurons 
in the locus ceruleus and dorsal raphe inhibit the REM genera-
tor, whereas cholinergic neurons in the pedunculopontine and 
laterodorsal tegmental nuclei promote REM sleep. This model 
explains many clinical observations, such as the fact that cho-
linergic agonist drugs promote REM sleep, whereas drugs such 
as antidepressants that increase monoamine levels suppress 
REM sleep. Loss of orexinergic neurons can cause abrupt 
onset of REM sleep, whereas loss of REM-on neurons in the 
sublaterodorsal area abolishes atonia during REM sleep. Thus, 
individuals with this condition act out their dreams (REM sleep 
behavior disorder).
REM-On
REM-Off
Pedunculopontine
nucleus
Laterodorsal
tegmental nucleus
Locus ceruleus
Dorsal raphe nucleus
Medullary and spinal 
motor inhibitory 
interneurons
produce atonia
Basal forebrain
arousal system
Orexin
VLPO
Acetylcholine
GABA
Ventrolateral PAG
GABA
Subceruleus
region
GABA
Glutamate
MCH
Norepinephrine
Serotonin
sleep pressure. The circadian wake-promoting signal 
dips slightly in the mid-afternoon, when many peo-
ple take a nap or siesta. Around the habitual bedtime, 
this circadian waking influence rapidly collapses, the 
homeostatic drive for sleep is unopposed, and sleep 
ensues. In the hour or two before the customary wak-
ing time, circadian promotion of sleep occurs to ensure 
an adequate amount of sleep, since homeostatic sleep 
pressure is low late in the sleep period (Figure 44–6A).
Circadian rhythms are driven by a small group of 
GABAergic neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
located in the hypothalamus just above the optic chi-
asm. The 24-hour rhythm of activity in this biological 
clock is driven by a set of “clock genes,” which undergo 
a transcriptional-translational cycle with an approxi-
mately 24-hour period. The positive limb of the loop 
consists of two proteins, BMAL1 and CLOCK, which 
dimerize and form a transcription factor that binds 
to the E-box motif, which is found in the promoter 
region of hundreds of genes that undergo daily cycles 
in their expression. Among those genes whose expres-
sion is increased by BMAL1 and CLOCK are the Period 
and Cryptochrome genes. Their protein products also 
dimerize, form a complex with casein kinase 1 delta or 
epsilon, and are translocated to the nucleus of the cell, 
where they cause BMAL1 and CLOCK to dissociate 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1089
Figure 44–6  The circadian drive for wakefulness 
interacts with the homeostatic drive for sleep to 
shape wake–sleep cycles.
A. Sleep drive builds up gradually over the course of a 
long period of wakefulness, whereas the circadian drive 
for wakefulness varies on a 24-hour cycle, regardless 
of previous sleep. The peak of this circadian wake cycle 
occurs in the hours before bed, as the homeostatic 
sleep drive is rising, whereas the low point occurs in the 
hours just before the habitual time of awakening, when 
the homeostatic drive for sleep is ebbing.
B. The 24-hour rhythm in mammalian cells is regulated 
by a set of proteins that form a transcriptional-translational 
loop. BMAL1 and CLOCK form a dimer that binds to the 
E-box motif found on many genes that have circadian 
rhythms of transcription. Among these are the Period 1 
and 2 genes (Per1, Per2) and the Cryptochrome 1 and 2 
genes (Cry1, Cry2). Their products dimerize and form a 
complex with casein-1 kinase epsilon or delta (CK1E/D). 
The complex translocates to the nucleus, where it inhib-
its the dimerization of BMAL1 and CLOCK, causing it to 
fall off the E-box. This reduces the transcription of Period 
and Cryptochrome genes; as PER and CRY proteins are 
degraded, BMAL1 and CLOCK dimerize once more, and 
the cycle repeats.
C. Circadian rhythms regulate the timing of sleep and 
wake. The plot shows the wake cycles (yellow bars) 
of an individual who initially lives under regular lighting 
conditions for 3 days and then lives in a dimly lit environ-
ment with no time cues for 18 days. The individual main-
tains daily cycles of about 25.2 hours, drifting an entire 
day over this period. Blind people who cannot relay light 
signals to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (see Figure 44–7) 
often live continuously like this, a condition called non–
24-hour wake–sleep disorder.
PER
CRY
Per1/Per2
Cry1/Cry2
CK1E/D
P
P
CLOCK
BMAL1
E-box
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
C  Wake–sleep cycle without light cues
Days of experiment
Night
Hour of day
0
1
5
10
15
20
25
8
16
24
8
16
24
8
8
16
24
Day
Without
time cues
Sleep drive
Circadian 
wake drive
Awake
Awake
Asleep
Asleep
A  Wake–sleep  cycle with light cues
Hour of day
8
16
24
8
16
24
8
Night
Night
Day
Day
B  Genetic clock of the wake–sleep cycle


===== Page 7 =====
1090    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
from the E-box, reducing transcription of many genes, 
including themselves. This results in a fall in Period and 
Cryptochrome proteins until BMAL1 and CLOCK can 
once more dimerize, restarting the cycle. In addition to 
this core loop, additional genetic side loops modulate 
the period of the circadian clock (Figure 44–6B).
This daily gene cycle functions in almost all cells in 
the body, including those in the brain, and it is essen-
tial for driving a wide range of circadian rhythms, 
from secretion of hormones and digestive enzymes 
to readying the liver for metabolic processing of food 
and the cardiovascular system for the active period 
of the day. When removed from the body and placed 
in a culture dish, most cells in the body rapidly fall 
out of synchrony, as the individual cellular clock 
cycles vary between cells by as much as an hour or 
two from the 24-hour mean. However, when neurons 
of the suprachiasmatic nucleus are cultured they con-
tinue to communicate with one another and thereby 
synchronize their cellular rhythms. This coordinated 
activity by suprachiasmatic neurons results in a close 
to 24-hour rhythm; the average period in humans 
who are placed in a continuous dim light environ-
ment is 24.1 hours, resulting in a slow drift in circa-
dian rhythms (Figure 44–6C).
The suprachiasmatic nucleus exerts control over 
all of the other body clocks by regulating body temper-
ature as well as autonomic, endocrine, and behavioral 
functions. Interestingly, although the daily rhythm in 
body temperature can adjust the timing of rhythms 
in many organs, the rhythm of the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus itself is highly resistant to changes in tempera-
ture, so its fundamental pacemaking is unaltered. In 
the end, the circadian timing of the brain and body 
runs on suprachiasmatic time.
Still, the suprachiasmatic clock must be entrained 
to the external world. If it were not, each person with a 
24.1-hour cycle would progressively wake up six min-
utes later each day than the day before and would be 
unable to adjust to seasonal variations in sunrise and 
sunset. To avoid this situation, the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus receives direct inputs from a special class of 
retinal ganglion cells that signal light levels, rather 
than participating in image formation. Like all retinal 
ganglion cells, these neurons receive inputs from 
rods and cones, but they also contain melanopsin, a 
photopigment that makes them intrinsically photosen-
sitive and hence they function as luminance detectors. 
In addition to entraining internal circadian rhythms to 
the ambient light cycle, these cells also regulate other 
non–image-forming visual functions such as the 
pupillary light reflex and the feeling of pain that can 
occur when one looks into bright lights.
Some individuals have unusually short circadian 
periods due to mutations in clock genes or their regu-
latory elements. For example, individuals with familial 
advanced sleep-phase syndrome prefer to go to bed early 
in the evening and cannot sleep past 3 or 4 am. In fami-
lies with this disorder, mutations in the genes coding 
for Period or Casein kinase-1 delta result in more rapid 
cycling of the clock.
Blind people in whom the melanopsin-containing 
neurons are damaged lack visual input to their supra-
chiasmatic nucleus, often resulting in non–24-hour 
sleep–wake rhythm disorder. Because most people have 
an intrinsic cycle longer than 24 hours, circadian 
rhythms in these individuals drift, becoming a few 
minutes later each day, so that most of the time they 
are out of synch with the rest of the world. They lack 
the ability to entrain to external light–dark conditions 
because the suprachiasmatic nucleus lacks the crucial 
resetting signal from the retina. This problem is most 
common in people who have lost their eyes (eg, due 
to trauma or infection), but it is not seen in blind peo-
ple in whom the melanopsin-containing neurons are 
intact (eg, blindness due to degeneration of rods and 
cones, or problems with the cornea or lens) and who 
also retain their pupillary light reflexes.
In contrast to light, which is signaled by the mel-
anopsin neurons, the hormone melatonin signals 
darkness. Melatonin is made by the pineal gland, and 
the suprachiasmatic neurons time its release through 
communication with neurons in the paraventricular 
nucleus of the hypothalamus that activate sympa-
thetic innervation of the pineal gland. Neurons in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus contain melatonin receptors, 
which reinforce circadian rhythms. Similarly, exog-
enous melatonin or melatonin agonists can entrain cir-
cadian rhythms, promoting sleep by regularizing sleep 
onset. This treatment approach is particularly useful in 
entraining circadian rhythms in individuals with non–
24-hour sleep–wake rhythm disorder.
Circadian Control of Sleep Depends on 
Hypothalamic Relays
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is most active during 
the daily light period in all mammalian species. While 
humans are diurnal (awake during the day and asleep 
during the night), nocturnal mammals have the oppo-
site activity cycle. How can such opposite behavioral 
patterns be set by the suprachiasmatic nucleus if it is 
most active during the light period?
The answer appears to lie in a series of relays inter-
posed between the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the 
wake–sleep control circuitry, which give the circadian 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 44 / Sleep and Wakefulness    1091
Figure 44–7  Neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus pro-
vide a master clock for wake–sleep. Retinal inputs signaling 
light activate the suprachiasmatic nucleus (upper figure), 
which then drives the wake–sleep cycle through a series of 
relays in the hypothalamus (lower figure). The sagittal section 
through the hypothalamus shows the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
projecting to neurons in the ventral subparaventricular zone 
(vSPZ), which in turn project to the dorsomedial nucleus of 
the hypothalamus (DMH). The DMH contains glutamatergic 
neurons that excite orexinergic and glutamatergic neurons 
in the lateral hypothalamic area (LHA), causing wakefulness. 
GABAergic neurons in the DMH inhibit the ventrolateral pre-
optic nucleus (VLPO), turning off the sleep-promoting system. 
Animals with DMH lesions fail to show circadian rhythms of 
wake–sleep and sleep about an hour more per day.
timing system flexibility in meeting the needs of the 
individual. The suprachiasmatic neurons are GABAergic, 
and they send the bulk of their output to an adjacent 
region called the subparaventricular zone. This area in 
the anterior hypothalamus contains mostly GABAergic 
neurons that fire in antiphase to the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus, ie, are most active at night. The targets of the 
subparaventricular zone largely overlap those of the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus, including parts of the para-
ventricular, dorsomedial, ventromedial, and lateral 
hypothalamus that regulate various physiological and 
behavioral systems. Presumably, then, the timing of a 
particular physiological or behavioral function would 
depend upon the relationships of these two antiphase 
circadian inputs to their target neurons.
One crucial target of the subparaventricular zone is 
the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, which 
regulates a number of circadian behaviors, includ-
ing the wake–sleep cycle. Lesions of the dorsomedial 
nucleus severely disrupt circadian rhythms of sleep, 
feeding, locomotor activity, and corticosteroid secre-
tion. The dorsomedial nucleus is thought to promote 
wakefulness via GABAergic projections to the ventro-
lateral preoptic nucleus and glutamatergic projections 
to the lateral hypothalamus (Figure 44–7).
Sleep Loss Impairs Cognition and Memory
When people are sleepy, they often have impaired vigi-
lance, working memory, judgement, and insight. Some 
of the attentional problems may be caused by microsleeps, 
brief periods of slower cortical activity. For example, sub-
jects who rarely miss stimuli on the Psychomotor Vigilance 
Task when well rested may miss over 20% of the visual 
stimuli when sleepy. In addition to these global lapses in 
cortical function, sleepiness can also produce local sleep 
with slow EEG waves in focal cortical areas. Executive 
function is often the first thing to fail with sleepiness, and 
sleep-deprived people show reduced metabolism and 
focal slowing in the frontal cortex in EEGs.
While sleepiness impairs cognition, sleep itself 
helps consolidate memories. When subjects are taught 
a simple motor task, such as pressing buttons in a 
predetermined sequence, they become more efficient 
with practice. Robert Stickgold and colleagues found 
that if the training is in the morning, and the subjects 
are tested 12 hours later in the evening (without inter-
vening sleep), they perform at about the same level as 
when they stopped their training. However, if they are 
tested the next morning after a night of sleep, they usu-
ally perform better than on the day of training. Sub-
jects who are trained in the evening still perform 
better 12 hours later if they have had a chance to sleep 
Pituitary
Wakefulness
Sleep
LHA
DMH
VLPO
vSPZ
Suprachiasmatic
nucleus
Input 
from 
retina
Glutamate
GABA
Hypothalamus
Suprachiasmatic
nucleus
Retina
overnight but not if they remained awake. Improve-
ment of certain types of memory consolidation (eg, 
memory for a visual perception task) is correlated with 
the amount of REM sleep, while other types (eg, mem-
ory for a finger-tapping sequence task) correlate with 
stage N2 non-REM sleep.


===== Page 9 =====
1092    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
These studies suggest that in each stage of sleep 
the cerebral cortex undergoes synaptic reorganiza-
tion to consolidate the memory of specific types of 
salient information. Conversely, this memory consoli-
dation is lost when subjects are deprived of sleep or 
have fragmented sleep. A related theory, proposed 
by Giulio Tononi and Chiara Cirelli, is that rebalanc-
ing of synaptic strengths based on recent experience 
(synaptic homeostasis) occurs during sleep. The size 
of many excitatory synapses is increased during learn-
ing, requiring that some excitatory inputs be reduced 
to avoid overexciting the target neuron. Tononi and 
Cirelli found that the size of smaller synapses in motor 
and sensory cortex is reduced during sleep, resulting 
in strong inputs being strengthened while competing 
weaker ones are removed.
Diseases that cause sleep loss or that wake people 
from sleep can impair cognition. For example, obstructive 
sleep apnea can severely fragment sleep, resulting in 
daytime sleepiness, inattention, and other cognitive 
impairments. Fragmented sleep is also common in 
Alzheimer disease. Alzheimer patients tend to have 
fewer neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus, 
and the extent of neuronal loss correlates with their 
degree of sleep fragmentation. Whether treating sleep 
fragmentation can improve cognition in Alzheimer 
patients remains to be determined.
Sleep Changes With Age
Sleep changes with age in striking and characteristic 
ways. As every new parent quickly learns, the lengthy 
sleep time of a newborn is distributed almost ran-
domly throughout the day. Although the EEG rhythms 
in newborns are not as well formed as those of older 
children or adults, more than 50% (8–9 hours per day) 
of that sleep is spent in a state much like REM sleep.
Sleep recordings from a premature infant exhibit 
an even higher percentage of REM-like sleep, indicat-
ing that in utero the fetus spends a large fraction of 
the day in a brain-activated but movement-inhibited 
state. As neuronal activity influences the development 
of functional circuits in the brain (Chapters 48 and 49), 
it is reasonable to think that the spontaneous activity of 
the immature brain during sleep facilitates the devel-
opment of neural circuits.
By approximately 4 months of age, the average 
baby begins to show diurnal rhythms that are synchro-
nized with day and night, much to the relief of weary 
parents. The total duration of sleep gradually declines, 
and by 5 years of age, the child may sleep 11 hours 
each night plus a nap, and 10 hours of sleep is typical 
around age 10. At these early ages, sleep is deep; stage 
N3 is prominent, with an abundance of delta waves in 
the EEG. As a result, children are not easily wakened 
by environmental stimuli.
With age, sleep becomes lighter and more frag-
mented. The percentage of time spent in stage N3 
sleep drops across adulthood, and by the age of 50 to 
60, it is not unusual for N3 to fade entirely, especially in 
men. This shift toward lighter stages of non-REM sleep 
results in two to three times as many spontaneous 
awakenings and more easily disrupted sleep. Many 
sleep disorders, including insomnia and sleep apnea, 
become more prevalent with age, and insomnia is com-
mon, often due to waking in response to neural signals 
to empty the bladder or due to discomfort from meno-
pausal symptoms or from arthritis and other diseases. 
Why this change occurs with age is unclear; homeo-
static sleep pressure appears normal, but the neural 
mechanisms for producing deep non-REM sleep may 
be less effective.
Disruptions in Sleep Circuitry Contribute to 
Many Sleep Disorders
Insomnia May Be Caused by Incomplete Inhibition 
of the Arousal System
Insomnia is one of the most common problems in all 
of medicine, yet the underlying neurobiology remains 
a mystery. Insomnia is defined as difficulty falling 
asleep or trouble staying asleep, so that function the 
next day is impaired. Positron emission tomography 
studies in patients with chronic insomnia demonstrate 
unusual activation of brain arousal systems during 
sleep, and the EEG often shows persistence of high-
frequency activity (15–30 Hz) that is usually seen only 
during wake.
In addition, rats exposed to acute stress show 
high-frequency EEG activity during sleep, as well as 
simultaneous activity in neurons of the ventrolateral 
preoptic nucleus and components of the arousal sys-
tem, such as the locus ceruleus and histamine neurons. 
This simultaneous activation can produce a unique 
state in which the EEG shows slow waves consistent 
with sleep along with high-frequency activity consist-
ent with the awake state; this may explain why some 
patients appear asleep on the polysomnogram record-
ing but they may feel awake.
Clinically, insomnia is often treated with cogni-
tive behavioral therapy that is aimed at reducing 
the hyperarousal and improving sleep habits. Some 
patients may be treated with benzodiazepines and 


