===== Page 1 =====
35
The Control of Gaze
I
n preceding chapters, we learned about the motor 
systems that control the movements of the body in 
space. In this and the next chapter, we consider the 
motor systems that control our gaze, balance, and posture 
as we move through the world around us. In examining 
these motor systems, we will focus on three biological 
challenges that these systems resolve: How do we visu-
ally explore our environment quickly and efficiently? 
How do we compensate for planned and unplanned 
movements of the head? How do we stay upright?
In this chapter, we describe the oculomotor sys-
tem and how it uses visual information to guide eye 
movements. It is one of the simplest motor systems, 
requiring the coordination of only the 12 evolutionar-
ily old muscles that move the two eyes. In humans 
and other primates, the primary objective of the ocu-
lomotor system is to control the position of the fovea, 
the central point in the retina that has the highest den-
sity of photoreceptors and thus the sharpest vision. 
The fovea is less than 1 mm in diameter and covers 
less than 1% of the visual field. When we want to 
examine an object, we must move its image onto the 
fovea (Chapter 22).
The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles
Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit
To a good approximation, the eye is a sphere that sits 
in a socket, the orbit. Eye movements are simply rota-
tions of the eye in the orbit. The eye’s orientation can 
be defined by three axes of rotation—horizontal, ver-
tical, and torsional—that intersect at the center of the 
eyeball, and eye movements are described as rotations 
The Eye Is Moved by the Six Extraocular Muscles
Eye Movements Rotate the Eye in the Orbit
The Six Extraocular Muscles Form Three Agonist–
Antagonist Pairs
Movements of the Two Eyes Are Coordinated
The Extraocular Muscles Are Controlled by  
Three Cranial Nerves
Six Neuronal Control Systems Keep the Eyes on Target
An Active Fixation System Holds the Fovea on a 
Stationary Target
The Saccadic System Points the Fovea Toward  
Objects of Interest
The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in the Brain Stem
Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the Pontine 
Reticular Formation
Vertical Saccades Are Generated in the Mesencephalic 
Reticular Formation
Brain Stem Lesions Result in Characteristic Deficits in 
Eye Movements
Saccades Are Controlled by the Cerebral Cortex Through the 
Superior Colliculus
The Superior Colliculus Integrates Visual and Motor 
Information into Oculomotor Signals for the Brain Stem
The Rostral Superior Colliculus Facilitates Visual Fixation
The Basal Ganglia and Two Regions of Cerebral Cortex 
Control the Superior Colliculus
The Control of Saccades Can Be Modified by Experience
Some Rapid Gaze Shifts Require Coordinated Head and 
Eye Movements
The Smooth-Pursuit System Keeps Moving Targets on the Fovea
The Vergence System Aligns the Eyes to Look at Targets at 
Different Depths
Highlights


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    861
Figure 35–1  The different actions of eye movements and 
the muscles that control them.
A. View of the left eye and the three dimensions of eye 
movement.
B. 1. Lateral view of the left eye with the orbital wall cut away. Each 
rectus muscle inserts in front of the equator of the globe so that 
contraction rotates the cornea toward the muscle. Conversely, the 
oblique muscles insert behind the equator, and contraction rotates 
the cornea away from the insertion. The superior oblique tendon 
passes through the trochlea, a bony pulley on the nasal side of the 
orbit, before it inserts on the globe. The levator muscle of the upper 
eyelid raises the lid. 2. Superior view of the left eye with the roof 
of the orbit and the levator muscle cut away. The superior rectus 
passes over the superior oblique and inserts in front of it on the 
globe.
around these axes. Horizontal and vertical eye move-
ments change the line of sight by redirecting the 
fovea; torsional eye movements rotate the eye around 
the line of sight but do not change where the eyes are 
looking.
Horizontal rotation of the eye away from the nose 
is called abduction, and rotation toward the nose is 
adduction (Figure 35–1A). Vertical movements are referred 
to as elevation (upward rotation) and depression (down-
ward rotation). Finally, torsional movements include 
B  Muscles
1  Lateral view
A  Eye movements
2  Superior view
Trochlea
Lateral rectus
Lateral
rectus
Medial
rectus
Inferior
oblique
Superior
oblique
Superior
rectus
Superior rectus
Inferior rectus
Inferior oblique
Superior oblique
Levator (cut)
Levator
(cut)
Optic
nerve
Abduction
Adduction
Depression
Elevation
Extorsion
Intorsion
intorsion (rotation of the top of the cornea toward the 
nose) and extorsion (rotation away from the nose).
Most eye movements are conjugate; that is, both 
eyes move in the same direction. These eye movements 
are called version movements. For example, during 
gaze to the right, the right eye abducts and the left eye 
adducts. Similarly, if the right eye extorts, the left eye 
intorts. When you change your gaze from far to near, the 
eyes move in opposite directions—both eyes adduct. 
These movements are called vergence movements.


===== Page 3 =====
862    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–2  The effect of orbital position on the action of 
the superior oblique muscle.
A. When the eye is adducted (looking toward the nose), con-
traction of the superior oblique depresses the eye.
B. When the eye is abducted (looking away from the nose), 
contraction of the superior oblique intorts the eye.
The Six Extraocular Muscles Form Three  
Agonist–Antagonist Pairs
Each eye is rotated by six extraocular muscles arranged 
in three agonist–antagonist pairs (Figure 35–1B). The 
four rectus muscles (lateral, medial, superior, and infe-
rior) share a common origin, the annulus of Zinn, at 
the apex of the orbit. They insert on the surface of the 
eye, or sclera, anterior to the center of the eye, so the 
superior rectus elevates the eye and the inferior rectus 
depresses it. The origin of the inferior oblique muscle 
is on the medial wall of the orbit; the superior oblique 
muscle’s tendon passes through the trochlea, or pul-
ley, before inserting on the globe, so that its effective 
origin is also on the anteromedial wall of the orbit. The 
oblique muscles insert posterior to the center of the eye, 
so the superior oblique depresses the eye and the infe-
rior oblique elevates it.
Each muscle has a dual insertion. The part of the 
muscle farthest from the eye inserts on a soft-tissue 
pulley through which the rest of the muscle passes on 
its way to the eye. When the extraocular muscles con-
tract, they not only rotate the eye but also change their 
pulling directions as a result of these pulleys.
The actions of the extraocular muscles are deter-
mined by their geometry and by the position of the 
eye in the orbit. The medial and lateral recti rotate the 
eye horizontally; the medial rectus adducts, whereas 
the lateral rectus abducts. The superior and inferior 
recti and the obliques rotate the eye both vertically and 
torsionally. The superior rectus and inferior oblique 
elevate the eye, and the inferior rectus and superior 
oblique depress it. The superior rectus and superior 
oblique intort the eye, whereas the inferior rectus and 
inferior oblique extort it.
The superior and inferior recti and the obliques 
are often called the cyclovertical muscles because 
they produce both vertical and torsional eye rotation. 
The relative amounts of each rotation depend on eye 
position. The superior and inferior recti exert their 
maximal vertical action when the eye is abducted, 
that is, when the line of sight is parallel to the mus-
cles’ pulling directions, while the oblique muscles 
exert their maximal vertical action when the eye is 
adducted (Figure 35–2).
Movements of the Two Eyes Are Coordinated
Humans and other frontal-eyed animals have binocu-
lar vision—the fields of vision of the two eyes over-
lap. This facilitates stereopsis, the ability to perceive 
a visual scene in three dimensions, as well as depth 
perception. At the same time, binocular vision requires 
A  In adduction, the superior
oblique depresses the eye
B  In abduction, the superior
    oblique intorts the eye
Axis of
rotation
Pulling
direction
y
x
Axis of
rotation
Pulling
direction
Nasal
side
Nasal
side
y
x
precise coordination of the movements of the two eyes 
so that both foveae are always directed at the target 
of interest. For most eye movements, both eyes must 
move by the same amount and in the same direction. 
This is accomplished, in large part, through the pairing 
of eye muscles in the two eyes.
Just as each eye muscle is paired with its antagonist 
in the same orbit (eg, the medial and lateral recti), it is 
also paired with the muscle that moves the opposite eye 
in the same direction. For example, coupling of the left 
lateral rectus and right medial rectus moves both eyes 
to the left during a leftward saccade. The orientations 
of the vertical muscles are such that each pair consists 
of one rectus muscle and one oblique muscle. For exam-
ple, the left superior rectus and the right inferior oblique 
both move the eyes upward in left gaze, while the right 
inferior rectus and the left superior oblique both move 
the eyes downward in right gaze (Table 35–1).
The Extraocular Muscles Are Controlled by  
Three Cranial Nerves
The extraocular muscles are innervated by groups of 
motor neurons whose cell bodies are clustered in the 
three oculomotor nuclei in the brain stem (Figure 35–3). 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    863
Table 35–1  Vertical Muscle Action in Adduction and 
Abduction
Muscle
Action in 
adduction
Action in 
abduction
Superior rectus
Intorsion
Elevation
Inferior rectus
Extorsion
Depression
Superior oblique
Depression
Intorsion
Inferior oblique
Elevation
Extorsion
Figure 35–3  The oculomotor nuclei in the brain stem.  The 
nuclei are shown in a parasagittal section through the thala-
mus, pons, midbrain, and cerebellum of a rhesus monkey. The 
oculomotor nucleus (cranial nerve III) lies in the midbrain at the 
level of the mesencephalic reticular formation; the trochlear 
nucleus (nerve IV) is slightly caudal; and the abducens nucleus 
(nerve VI) lies in the pons at the level of the paramedian pontine 
reticular formation, adjacent to the fasciculus of the facial nerve 
(VII). Compare with Figure 40–5. (Abbreviations: iC, interstitial 
nucleus of Cajal; iMLF, interstitial nucleus of the medial longi-
tudinal fasciculus; nD, nucleus of Darkshevich; VN, vestibular 
nuclei.) (Adapted from Henn, Hepp, and Büttner-Ennever 1982.)
Cerebellum
3 mm
Thalamus
Rostral
iMLF
nD
Pontine
nuclei
Paramedian
pontine reticular
formation
Mesencephalic
reticular
formation
Posterior commissure
VI
III
IV
iC
VII
VN
Superior colliculus
Inferior colliculus
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Oculomotor
Trochlear
Abducens
The lateral rectus is innervated by the abducens nerve 
(cranial nerve VI), whose nucleus lies in the pons in the 
floor of the fourth ventricle. The superior oblique muscle 
is innervated by the trochlear nerve (cranial nerve IV), 
whose nucleus is located in the contralateral midbrain at 
the level of the inferior colliculus. (The trochlear nerve 
gets its name from the trochlea, the bony pulley through 
which the superior oblique muscle travels.)
All the other extraocular muscles—the medial, 
inferior, and superior recti, and the inferior oblique—
are innervated by the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III), 
whose nucleus lies in the midbrain at the level of the 
superior colliculus. Superior rectus axons cross the mid-
line and join the contralateral oculomotor nerve. Thus, 
both superior rectus and superior oblique motor neu-
rons innervate their respective muscles on the opposite 
side. The oculomotor nerve also contains fibers that 
innervate the levator muscle of the upper eyelid. Cell 
bodies of axons innervating both eyelids are located in 
the central caudal nucleus, a single midline structure 
within the oculomotor complex. Finally, traveling with 
the oculomotor nerve are parasympathetic fibers that 
innervate the iris sphincter muscle, which constricts the 
pupil, and the ciliary muscles that adjust the curvature 
of the lens to focus the eye during vergence movements 
from far to near, the process of accomodation.
The pupil and eyelid also have sympathetic inner-
vation, which originates in the intermediolateral cell 
column of the ipsilateral upper thoracic spinal cord. 
Fibers of these neurons synapse on cells in the supe-
rior cervical ganglion in the upper neck. Axons of these 
postganglionic cells travel along the carotid artery to 
the cavernous sinus and then into the orbit. Sympa-
thetic pupillary fibers innervate the iris dilator mus-
cle, causing the pupil to dilate and thus providing the 
pupillary component of the so-called “fight or flight” 
response. Sympathetic fibers also innervate Müller’s 
muscle, a secondary elevator of the upper eyelid. The 
sympathetic control of pupillary dilatation and lid 
elevation is responsible for the “wide-eyed” look of 
excitement and sympathetic overload.
The best way to understand the actions of the 
extraocular muscles is to consider the eye movements 
that remain after a lesion of a specific nerve (Box 35–1).
The force generated by an extraocular muscle is 
determined both by the firing rate of the motor neu-
rons and the number of motor units recruited. Like the 
motor units for skeletal muscle (Chapter 31), eye motor 
units are recruited in a fixed sequence. For example, 
as the eye moves laterally, the number of active abdu-
cens neurons and their individual firing rates both 
increase, thereby increasing the strength of lateral rec-
tus contraction.


===== Page 5 =====
864    Part V / Movement
Patients with lesions of the extraocular muscles or their 
nerves complain of double vision (diplopia) because the 
images of the object of gaze no longer fall on the corre-
sponding retinal locations in both eyes. Lesions of each 
nerve produce characteristic symptoms that depend on 
which extraocular muscles are affected. In general, dou-
ble vision increases when the patient tries to look in the 
direction of the weak muscle.
Abducens Nerve
A lesion of the abducens nerve (VI) causes weakness of 
the lateral rectus. When the lesion is complete, the eye 
cannot abduct beyond the midline, such that a hori-
zontal diplopia increases when the subject looks in the 
direction of the affected eye.
Trochlear Nerve
A left trochlear nerve (IV) lesion affects both torsional 
and vertical eye movements by weakening the superior 
oblique muscle (Figure 35–4). Vertical misalignment in 
superior oblique paresis is also affected by the position 
of the head. A tilt to one side, such that the ear moves 
toward the shoulder, induces a small torsion of the eye 
in the opposite direction, known as ocular counter-roll. 
For example, when the head tilts to the left, the left eye 
is ordinarily intorted by the left superior rectus and left 
superior oblique, while the right eye is extorted by the 
right inferior rectus and right inferior oblique. In the left 
eye, the elevation action of the superior rectus is canceled 
by the depression action of the superior oblique, so the 
eye only rotates about the line of sight. When the head 
tilts to the right, the inferior oblique and inferior rectus 
extort the left eye and the superior oblique and the supe-
rior rectus relax.
With paresis of the left superior oblique, the elevat-
ing action of the superior rectus is unopposed when the 
head tilts to the left such that the left eye moves further 
upward. In contrast, tilting the head to the right relaxes 
the superior rectus and superior oblique (Figure 35–4D). 
Thus, patients with trochlear nerve lesions often prefer 
to keep their heads tilted away from the affected eye 
because this reduces the misalignment and can elimi-
nate diplopia.
Oculomotor Nerve
A lesion of the oculomotor nerve (III) has complex 
effects because this nerve innervates multiple muscles. 
A complete lesion spares only the lateral rectus and 
superior oblique muscles. Thus, the paretic eye is typi-
cally deviated downward and abducted at rest and can-
not move medially or upward. Downward movement 
is also affected because the inferior rectus muscle is 
weak; because the eye is abducted, the primary action 
of the intact superior oblique is intorsion rather than 
depression.
Because the fibers that control lid elevation, accom-
modation, and pupillary constriction travel in the oculo-
motor nerve, damage to this nerve also results in drooping 
of the eyelid (ptosis), blurred vision for near objects, and 
pupillary dilation (mydriasis). Although sympathetic 
innervation is still intact with an oculomotor nerve lesion, 
the ptosis is essentially complete, since Müller’s muscle 
contributes less to elevation of the upper eyelid than does 
the levator muscle of the upper eyelid.
Sympathetic Oculomotor Nerves
Sympathetic fibers innervating the eye arise from the 
thoracic spinal cord, traverse the apex of the lung, and 
ascend to the eye on the outside of the carotid artery. 
Interruption of the sympathetic pathways to the eye 
leads to Horner syndrome, which includes a partial ipsi-
lateral ptosis owing to weakness of Müller’s muscle and 
a relative constriction (miosis) of the ipsilateral pupil. 
The pupillary asymmetry is most pronounced in low 
light because the normal pupil is able to dilate but the 
pupil affected by Horner syndrome is not.
Box 35–1  Extraocular Muscle or Nerve Lesions


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    865
Figure 35–4  Effect of a left trochlear nerve palsy.  The 
trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle, which 
inserts behind the equator of the eye. It depresses the eye 
when it is adducted and intorts the eye when it is abducted.
A. Hypertropia, a permanent upward deviation of the eye, 
can be seen when a patient is looking straight ahead. The 
right eye is in the center of the orbit, but the affected left 
eye is slightly above the right eye.
B. The hypertropia is worse when the eye is adducted 
because the unopposed inferior oblique pushes the eye 
higher (left). The condition is improved when the eye is 
abducted (right) because the superior oblique contributes 
less to depression than to intorsion.
C. When the patient looks to the right, the hypertropia is 
worse on downward gaze (left) than it is on upward gaze 
(right).
D. The hypertropia is improved by head tilt to the right (left) 
and worsened by tilt to the left (right). The ocular counter-
rolling reflex induces intorsion of the left eye on leftward 
head tilt and extorsion of the eye on rightward head tilt 
(Chapter 27). With leftward head tilt, intorsion requires 
increased activity of the superior rectus, whose elevating 
activity is unopposed by the weak superior oblique, caus-
ing increased hypertropia. With rightward head tilt and 
extorsion of the left eye, the unopposed superior rectus 
muscle is less active, and the hypertropia decreases.
A
B
C
D
Trochlear 
nerve 
Superior
oblique


===== Page 7 =====
866    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–5  Eye movements track the outline of an object 
of attention. An observer looks at a picture of a woman for 
1 minute. The resulting eye positions are then superimposed 
on the picture. As shown here, the observer concentrated on 
certain features of the face, lingering over the woman’s eyes 
and mouth (fixations) and spending less time over intermediate 
positions. The rapid movements between fixation points are 
saccades. (Reproduced, with permission, from Yarbus 1967.)
Six Neuronal Control Systems Keep  
the Eyes on Target
The oculomotor nuclei are the final common targets 
for all types of eye movements generated by higher 
brain networks. Hermann Helmholtz and other 19th-
century psychophysicists appreciated that analysis of 
eye movements was essential for understanding visual 
perception, but they assumed that all eye movements 
were smooth. In 1890, Edwin Landott discovered that 
during reading the eyes do not move smoothly along 
a line of text but make fast intermittent movements 
called saccades (French, jerks), each followed by a 
short pause.
By 1902, Raymond Dodge outlined five distinct 
types of eye movement that direct the fovea to a visual 
target and keep it there. All of these eye movements 
share an effector pathway originating in the three ocu-
lomotor nuclei in the brain stem.
• Saccadic eye movements shift the fovea rapidly to 
a new visual target.
• Smooth-pursuit movements keep the image of a 
moving target on the fovea.
• Vergence movements move the eyes in opposite 
directions so that the image of an object of inter-
est is positioned on both foveae regardless of its 
distance.
• Vestibulo-ocular reflexes stabilize images on the 
retina during brief head movements.
• Optokinetic movements stabilize images during 
sustained head rotation or translation.
A sixth system, the fixation system, holds the eye 
stationary during intent gaze when the head is not 
moving by actively suppressing eye movement. The 
optokinetic and vestibular systems are discussed in 
Chapter 27. We consider the other four systems here.
An Active Fixation System Holds the Fovea  
on a Stationary Target
Vision is most accurate when the eyes are still. The 
gaze system actively prevents the eyes from moving 
when we examine an object of interest. It is not as 
active in suppressing movement when we are doing 
something that does not require vision, such as men-
tal arithmetic. Patients with disorders of the fixation 
system—for example, patients with irrepressible sac-
cadic eye movements (opsoclonus)—have poor vision 
not because their visual acuity is deficient but because 
they cannot hold their eyes still enough for the visual 
system to work correctly.
The Saccadic System Points the Fovea Toward 
Objects of Interest
Our eyes explore the world in a series of very quick 
saccades that move the fovea from one fixation point 
to another (Chapter 25) (Figure 35–5). Saccades allow 
us to scan the environment quickly and to read. Highly 
stereotyped, they have a standard waveform with a 
single smooth increase and decrease of eye velocity. 
Saccades are also extremely fast, occurring within a 
fraction of a second at angular speeds up to 900° per 
second (Figure 35–6A). The velocity of a saccade is 
determined only by its size. We can voluntarily change 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 35 / The Control of Gaze    867
Figure 35–6  Saccadic and smooth-pursuit eye move-
ments. Eye position, target position, and eye velocity are  
plotted against time.
A. The human saccade. At the beginning of the plot, the eye is 
on the target (the traces representing eye and target positions 
are superimposed). Suddenly, the target jumps to the right, and 
within 200 ms, the eye moves to bring the target back to the 
fovea. Note the smooth, symmetric velocity profile. Because 
eye movements are rotations of the eye in the orbit, they are 
described by the angle of rotation. Similarly, objects in the visual 
field are described by the angle of arc they subtend at the eye. 
Viewed at arm’s length, a thumb subtends an angle of approxi-
mately 1°. A saccade from one edge of the thumb to the other 
therefore traverses 1° of arc. (Abbreviations: L, left; R, right.)
B. Human smooth pursuit. In this example, the subject is asked 
to make a saccade to a target that jumps away from the center 
of gaze and then slowly moves back to center. The first  
movement seen in the position and velocity traces is a smooth-
pursuit movement in the same direction as the target move-
ment. The eye briefly moves away from the target before a 
saccade is initiated because the latency of the pursuit system 
is shorter than that of the saccade system. The smooth-pursuit 
system is activated by the target moving back toward the 
center of gaze, the saccade adjusts the eye’s position to catch 
the target, and thereafter, smooth pursuit keeps the eye on 
the target. The recording of saccade velocity is clipped so that 
the movement can be shown on the scale of the pursuit move-
ment, an order of magnitude slower than the saccade.
Saccade
Smooth 
pursuit
R
L
Eye and 
target
position
Eye and 
target
position
Eye
velocity
600°/s
200 ms
20°
–20
20
200 ms
Eye 
velocity
°/s
Eye position
Target position
Target moving
0
A  Saccade
B  Smooth pursuit
10°
the amplitude and direction of saccades but not their 
speed, although fatigue, drugs, or pathological states 
can slow saccades.
Ordinarily, there is no time for visual feedback to 
modify the course of a saccade as it is being made; instead, 
corrections to the direction and/or amplitude of move-
ment are made over the course of successive saccades. 
Accurate saccades can be made not only to visual targets 
but also to sounds, tactile stimuli, memories of locations 
in space, and even verbal commands (eg, “look left”).
When a saccade is made, the activity of neurons 
in higher brain centers that control gaze specify only 
a desired change in eye position (eg, 20° to the right 
of current gaze, usually based on a target location in 
the visual field). For the eye movement to be made, 
this location signal must be transformed into signals 
for the eye muscles that execute the desired velocity 
and change in eye position. We can illustrate how the 
gaze system generates eye movements by considering 
the activity of an oculomotor neuron during a saccade 
(Figure 35–7A). To move the eye quickly to a new posi-
tion in the orbit and keep it there, two passive forces 
must be overcome: the elastic force of the orbital tis-
sues, which tends to restore the eye to a central posi-
tion, and a velocity-dependent viscous force that 
opposes rapid movement. Thus, the motor signal for 
an eye movement must include both a position com-
ponent to counter the elastic force and a velocity com-
ponent to overcome orbital viscosity and move the eye 
quickly to the new position.
This eye position and velocity information are 
coded by the discharge frequencies of oculomotor neu-
rons. When a saccade is made, the firing rate of a neu-
ron rises rapidly as eye velocity increases; this is called 
the saccadic pulse (Figure 35–7B). The frequency of this 
pulse determines the speed of the saccade, whereas the 
length of the pulse controls the duration of the saccade 
and thus its amplitude. When the saccade is completed 
and the eye has reached its goal, there must be a new 
level of tonic input to the eye muscles that is appropri-
ate for the elastic restoring force at that orbital position. 
This difference in the tonic firing rate between before 
and after the saccade is called the saccadic step (Figure 
35–7B). If the size of the step is not properly matched to 


===== Page 9 =====
868    Part V / Movement
Figure 35–7  Oculomotor neurons signal eye position and 
velocity.
A. The record is from an abducens neuron of a monkey. When the 
eye is positioned in the medial side of the orbit, the cell is silent 
(position θ0). As the monkey makes a lateral saccade, there is a 
burst of firing (D1), but in the new position (θ1), the eye is still too 
far medial for the cell to discharge continually. During the next 
saccade, there is a burst (D2), and at the new position (θ2), there 
is a tonic position-related discharge. Before and during the next 
saccade (D3), there is again a pulse of activity and a higher tonic 
discharge when the eye is at the new position (θ3). When the eye 
makes a medial movement, there is a period of silence during the 
saccade (D4) even though the eye ends up at a position (θ4) asso-
ciated with a tonic discharge. (Adapted from Fuchs and Luschei 
1970.)
B. Saccades are associated with a step of activity, which signals 
the change in eye position, and a pulse of activity, which signals 
eye velocity. The neural activity corresponding to eye position and 
velocity is illustrated both as a train of individual spikes and as an 
estimate of the instantaneous firing rate (spikes per second).
Medial
Lateral
Horizontal 
eye position 
(degrees)
Abducens 
motor 
neuron
Spikes /s
Spikes
Pulse
Step
Eye position
5 ms
Lateral
Eye velocity
D1
D2
D3
D4
Lateral 
rectus
Abducens
motor neuron
(N. VI)
Recording
A
B
Time
Medial
θ
θ1
θ0
θ2
θ4
θ3
the pulse, then the eye drifts away from the target after 
the saccade. As described later, the pulse and step are 
generated by different brain stem structures.
The Motor Circuits for Saccades Lie in  
the Brain Stem
Horizontal Saccades Are Generated in the  
Pontine Reticular Formation
The neuronal signal for horizontal saccades origi-
nates in the paramedian pontine reticular formation, 
adjacent to the abducens nucleus to which it projects 
(Figure 35–8A). The paramedian pontine reticular for-
mation contains a family of burst neurons that gives 
rise to the saccadic pulse. These cells fire at a high 
frequency just before and during ipsiversive saccades 
(toward the same side as the discharging neurons), and 
their activity resembles the pulse component of oculo-
motor neuron discharge (Figure 35–7B).
There are several types of burst neurons (Figure 
35–8B). Medium-lead excitatory burst neurons make 
direct excitatory connections to motor neurons and 
interneurons in the ipsilateral abducens nucleus. 


