===== Page 1 =====
1212    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
of infants raised in a nursing home attached to a 
women’s prison. Both institutions were clean and both 
provided adequate food and medical care. The babies 
in the prison nursing home were all cared for by their 
mothers, who, although in prison and away from their 
families, tended to shower affection on their infants in 
the limited time allotted to them each day. In contrast, 
infants in the foundling home were cared for by nurses, 
each of whom was responsible for several babies. As a 
result, children in the foundling home had far less con-
tact with other humans than did those in the prison’s 
nursing home.
The two institutions also differed in another 
respect. In the prison nursing home, the cribs were 
open, so that the infants could readily watch other 
activities in the ward; they could see other babies play 
and observe the staff go about their business. In the 
foundling home, the bars of the cribs were covered 
by sheets that prevented the infants from seeing out-
side. In reality, the babies in the foundling home were 
living under conditions of severe sensory and social 
deprivation.
Infants at the two institutions were followed 
through their early years. At the end of the first 4 months, 
the infants in the foundling home fared better on sev-
eral developmental tests than those in the prison nurs-
ing home, suggesting that intrinsic factors did not 
favor the infants in the prison nursing home. But by 
the end of the first year, the motor and intellectual per-
formance of the children in the foundling home had 
fallen far below that of children in the prison nursing 
home. Many of the children in the foundling home had 
developed a syndrome that Spitz called hospitalism and 
is now sometimes called anaclitic depression. These chil-
dren were withdrawn and displayed little curiosity or 
gaiety. Moreover, their defects extended beyond emo-
tional and cognitive signs. They were especially prone 
to infection, implying that the brain exerts complex 
controls over the immune system as well as behavior. 
By their second and third years, children in the prison 
nursing home were similar to children raised in nor-
mal families at home—they were agile, had a vocabu-
lary of hundreds of words, and spoke in sentences. In 
contrast, the development of children in the foundling 
home was still further delayed—many were unable to 
walk or to speak more than a few words.
More recent studies of other similarly deprived 
children have confirmed these conclusions and 
shown that the defects are long-lasting. Longitudi-
nal studies of orphans who were raised for several 
years in large impersonal institutions with little or 
no personal care, then adopted by caring families, 
have been especially revealing. Despite every effort 
of the adoptive parents, many of the children were 
never able to develop appropriate, caring relation-
ships with family members or peers (Figure 49–1A). 
More recent imaging studies have revealed defects in 
brain structure correlated with, and presumably due 
to, this deprivation (Figure 49–1B).
As compelling as these observations are, it is dif-
ficult to derive definitive conclusions from them. An 
influential set of studies that extended the analysis 
of social behavior to monkeys was carried out in the 
1960s by two psychologists, Harry and Margaret 
Harlow. The Harlows reared newborn monkeys in 
isolation for 6 to 12 months, depriving them of con-
tact with their mothers, other monkeys, or people. At 
the end of this period, the monkeys were physically 
healthy but behaviorally devastated. They crouched in 
a corner of their cage and rocked back and forth like 
autistic children (Figure 49–1C). They did not interact 
with other monkeys, nor did they fight, play, or show 
any sexual interest. Thus, a 6-month period of social 
isolation during the first 18 months of life produced 
persistent and serious disturbances in behavior. By 
comparison, isolation of an older animal for a compa-
rable period was found to be without such drastic con-
sequences. These results confirmed, under controlled 
conditions, the critical influence of early experience on 
later behavior. For ethical reasons, these studies would 
not be possible today.
Development of Visual Perception Requires  
Visual Experience
The dramatic dependence of the brain on experience 
and the ability of that experience to shape perception 
is evident in people born with cataracts. Cataracts are 
opacities of the lens that interfere with the optics of 
the eye but not directly with the nervous system; they 
are easily removed surgically. In the 1930s, it became 
apparent that patients who had congenital binocular 
cataracts removed after the age of 10 years experienced 
permanent deficits in visual acuity and had difficulties 
perceiving shape and form. In contrast, when cataracts 
that develop in adults are removed decades after they 
form, normal vision returns immediately.
Likewise, children with strabismus (crossed eyes) 
do not have normal depth perception (stereopsis), an 
ability that requires the two eyes to focus on the same 
location at the same time. They can acquire this abil-
ity if their eyes are aligned surgically during the first 
few years of life, but not if surgery occurs later in ado-
lescence. As a result of these observations, congenital 
cataracts are now usually removed, and strabismus 
is corrected surgically, in early childhood. Over the 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1213
Figure 49–1  Early social deprivation has a 
profound impact on later brain structure and 
behavior.
A. Neurocognitive dysfunction is evident in children 
raised under conditions of social deprivation in 
orphanages. The incidence of cognitive impairment 
increases with the duration of stay in the orphanage. 
(Adapted from Behen et al. 2008.)
B. Diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scans show a well-developed and robust unci-
nate fasciculus (red region) in a normal child (left), 
whereas in a socially deprived child (right), it is thin 
and poorly organized. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Eluvathingal et al. 2006. Copyright © 2006 by 
the AAP.)
C. Early social interactions impact later social behav-
ior patterns. Monkeys reared in the presence of 
their siblings acquire social skills that permit effec-
tive interactions in later life (left). A monkey reared 
in isolation never acquires the capacity to interact 
with others and remains secluded and isolated in 
later life (right). (Source: Harry F. Harlow. Used with 
permission.)
B
A
100
80
60
40
20
0
36
Duration in orphanage (months)
C
6
6–12
13–20
21–36
Incidence of cognitive impairment (%)
past five decades, researchers have elucidated struc-
tural and physiological underpinnings of these criti-
cal periods.
Development of Binocular Circuits in the 
Visual Cortex Depends on Postnatal Activity
Because sensory experience of the world is trans-
formed into patterns of electrical activity in the brain, 
one might imagine that electrical signals in neural cir-
cuits affect the brain’s circuitry. But is this true? And if 
it is true, what changes occur, and how does activity 
trigger them?
Our most detailed understanding of these links 
comes from studies of the neural circuits that mediate 
binocular vision. The key figures in the early phases of 
this work were David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel. Fol-
lowing their pioneering studies on the structural and 
functional organization of the visual cortex in cats and 
monkeys (Chapter 23), they undertook another set of 
studies on how experience affects the circuits they had 
delineated.
Visual Experience Affects the Structure and 
Function of the Visual Cortex
In one influential study, Hubel and Wiesel raised a 
monkey from birth to 6 months of age with one eye-
lid sutured shut, thus depriving the animal of vision 
in that eye. When the sutures were removed, it became 
clear that the animal was blind in the deprived eye, a 
condition called amblyopia. They then performed elec-
trophysiological recordings from cells along the visual 


===== Page 3 =====
1214    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 49–2  Afferent pathways from the two eyes project 
to discrete columns of neurons in the visual cortex. Retinal 
ganglion neurons from each eye send axons to separate  
layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus. The axons of neurons 
in this nucleus project to neurons in layer IVC of the primary 
visual cortex, which is organized in alternating sets of ocular 
dominance columns; each column receives input from only one 
eye. The axons of the neurons in layer IVC project to neurons in 
adjacent columns as well as to neurons in the upper and lower 
layers of the same column. As a result, most neurons in the 
upper and lower layers of the cortex receive information from 
both eyes.
pathway to determine where the defect arose (Figure 
49–2). They found that retinal ganglion cells in the 
deprived eye, as well as neurons in the lateral genicu-
late nucleus that receive input from the deprived eye, 
responded well to visual stimuli and had essentially 
normal receptive fields.
In contrast, cells in the visual cortex were fun-
damentally altered. In the cortex of normal animals, 
most neurons are responsive to binocular input. In 
animals that had been monocularly deprived for the 
first 6 months, most cortical neurons did not respond 
to signals from the deprived eye (Figure 49–3). The few 
cortical cells that were responsive were not sufficient 
for visual perception. Not only had the deprived eye 
lost its ability to drive most cortical neurons, but little 
recovery ever occurred: The loss was permanent and 
irreversible.
Hubel and Wiesel went on to test the effects of 
visual deprivation imposed for shorter periods and 
at different ages. They obtained three types of results, 
depending on the timing and duration of the depri-
vation. First, monocular deprivation for a few weeks 
shortly after birth led to loss of cortical responses from 
the deprived eye that was reversible after the eye had 
been opened, especially if the opposite eye was then 
closed to encourage use of the initially deprived eye. 
Second, monocular deprivation for a few weeks dur-
ing the next several weeks also resulted in a substan-
tial loss of cortical responsiveness to signals from the 
deprived eye, but in this case, the effects were irrevers-
ible. Finally, deprivation in adults, even for periods of 
Left eye
Right eye
Visual cortex of
the left cerebral
hemisphere
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Optic tract
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Left eye
Right eye
IVC
many months, had no effect on the responses of cortical 
cells to signals from the deprived eye or on visual per-
ception. These results demonstrated that the cortical 
connections that control visual perception are estab-
lished within a critical period of early development.
Are there anatomical correlates of these functional 
defects? To address this question, we need to recall 
three basic facts about the anatomy of the visual cortex 
(Figure 49–2). First, inputs from the two eyes remain 
segregated in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Second, 
the geniculate inputs carrying information from the 
two eyes to the cortex terminate in alternating col-
umns, termed ocular dominance columns. Third, lateral 
geniculate axons terminate on neurons in layer IVC of 
the primary visual cortex; convergence of input from 
the two eyes on a common target cell occurs at the 
next stage of the pathway, in cells above and below 
layer IVC.
To examine whether the architecture of ocular dom-
inance columns depends on visual experience early in 
postnatal life, Hubel and Wiesel deprived newborn 
animals of vision in one eye and then injected a labeled 
amino acid into the normal eye. The injected label was 
incorporated into proteins in retinal ganglion cell bod-
ies, transported along the retinal axons to the lateral 
geniculate nucleus, transferred to geniculate neurons, 
and then transported to the synaptic terminals of these 
axons in the primary visual cortex. After closure of one 
eye, the columnar array of synaptic terminals relaying 
input from the deprived eye was reduced, whereas the 
columnar array of terminals relaying input from the 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1215
Figure 49–3  (Right) Responses of neurons in the primary 
visual cortex of a monkey to visual stimuli. (Adapted from 
Hubel and Wiesel 1977.)
A. A diagonal bar of light is moved leftward across the visual 
field, traversing the receptive fields of a binocularly responsive 
cell in area 17 of visual cortex. Receptive fields measured 
through the right and left eye are drawn separately. The recep-
tive fields of the two cells are similar in orientation, position, 
shape, and size, and respond to the same form of stimulus. 
Recordings (below) show that the cortical neuron responds 
more effectively to input from the ipsilateral eye. (Abbreviation: 
F, fixation point.)
B. The responses of individual cortical neurons in area 17 can 
be classified into seven groups. Neurons receiving input only 
from the contralateral eye (C) fall into group 1, whereas neu-
rons that receive input only from the ipsilateral eye (I) fall into 
group 7. Other neurons receive inputs from both eyes, but the 
input from one eye may influence the neuron much more than 
the other (groups 2 and 6), or the differences may be slight 
(groups 3 and 5). Some neurons respond equally to input from 
both eyes (group 4). According to these criteria, the cortical 
neuron shown in part A falls into group 6.
C. Responsiveness of neurons in area 17 to stimulation of one 
or the other eye. 1. The responses of more than 1,000 neurons 
in area 17 in the left hemisphere of normal adult and juvenile 
monkeys. Neurons in layer IV that normally receive only monoc-
ular input have been excluded. 2. The responses of neurons 
in the left hemisphere of a monkey in which the contralateral 
(right) eye was closed from the age of 2 weeks to 18 months 
and then reopened. Most neurons respond only to stimulation 
of the ipsilateral eye.
C
I
C
I
80
60
40
20
C1  Normal area 17
A  Movement across the retina
B  Variation in responses of single cortical cells
Contralateral (right) eye
Ipsilateral (left) eye
Left
cortex
C2  Area 17 after closure of contralateral eye
Number of cells
Number of cells
200
100
0
0
F
F
1 s
C
I
C
I
C
I
C
I
C
I
Eyes
Cortical
cells
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
normal eye was expanded (Figure 49–4). Thus, sensory 
deprivation early in life alters the structure of the cer-
ebral cortex.
How are these striking anatomical changes 
brought about? Does sensory deprivation alter ocular 
dominance columns after they have been established, 
or does it interfere with their formation? A columnar 
organization of the visual cortex is already evident by 
birth in monkeys, although the mature pattern is not 
achieved until several weeks after birth (Figure 49–5). 
Only at this time do the terminals of fibers from the lat-
eral geniculate nucleus become completely segregated 
in the cortex. Because the inputs are partially but not 
completely segregated at the time visual deprivation 
exerts its effects, we can conclude that the depriva-
tion perturbs the ability of the inputs to acquire their 
mature pattern. We shall return to the question of what 
leads to the initial, experience-independent phases of 
segregation in a later section of this chapter.
Patterns of Electrical Activity Organize  
Binocular Circuits
How does activity lead to maturation of ocular 
dominance columns? The crucial factor may be the 


===== Page 5 =====
1216    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A  Normal
B  Deprived: open eye labeled (white)
C  Deprived: closed eye labeled
Figure 49–4  Visual deprivation of one eye during a critical period 
of development reduces the width of the ocular dominance col-
umns for that eye. (Scale bars = 1 mm) (Adapted, with permission, 
from Hubel, Wiesel, and LeVay 1977.)
A. A tangential section through area 17 of the right hemisphere of a 
normal adult monkey, 10 days after one eye was injected with a  
radiolabeled amino acid. Radioactivity is localized in stripes (white) 
in layer IVC of the visual cortex, indicating sites of termination of the 
axons from the lateral geniculate nucleus that carry input from the 
injected eye. The alternating unlabeled (dark) stripes indicate sites 
of termination of the axons carrying signals from the uninjected eye. 
Labeled and unlabeled stripes are of equal width.
B. A comparable section through the visual cortex of an 18-month-
old monkey whose right eye had been surgically closed at 2 weeks 
of age. Label was injected into the left (open) eye. The wider (white) 
stripes are the labeled terminals of afferent axons carrying signals 
from the open eye; the narrow (dark) stripes are terminals of axons 
with input from the closed eye.
C. A section comparable to that in part B from an 18-month-old animal 
whose right eye had been shut at 2 weeks. Label was injected into 
the closed eye, giving rise to narrow (white) stripes of labeled axon 
terminals and wide (dark) stripes of unlabeled terminals.
differences in the proportion of inputs from each eye 
that converge on common target cells at birth. If by 
chance the fibers conveying input from one eye are 
initially more numerous in one local region of cortex, 
those axons may have an advantage, leading to further 
segregation.
How might this occur? An attractive idea, based on 
a theory first proposed in the 1940s by Donald Hebb, is 
that synaptic connections are strengthened when pre- 
and postsynaptic elements are active together. In the 
case of binocular interactions, neighboring axons from 
the same eye tend to fire in synchrony because they are 
activated by the same visual stimulus at any instant. 
The synchronization of their firing means that they 
cooperate in the depolarization and excitation of a tar-
get cell. This cooperative action maintains the viability 
of those synaptic contacts at the expense of the nonco-
operating synapses.
Cooperative activity could also promote branch-
ing of axons and thus create the opportunity for the 
formation of additional synaptic connections with cells 
in the target region. At the same time, the strengthen-
ing of synaptic contacts made by the axons of one eye 
will impede the growth of synaptic inputs from the 
opposite eye. In this sense, fibers from the two eyes 
may be said to compete for a target cell. Together, 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1217
Figure 49–5  The effects of eye closure on the formation 
of ocular dominance columns. The top diagrams show the 
gradual segregation of the terminals of lateral geniculate affer-
ents in layer IVC of the visual cortex under normal conditions 
(left) and when one eye is deprived of stimulation (right). Blue 
domains represent the areas of termination of inputs from one 
eye, red domains those of the other eye. The lengths of the 
domains represent the density of the terminals at each point 
along layer IVC. For clarity, the columns are shown here as one 
above the other, whereas in reality, they are side by side in 
the cortex. During normal development, layer IVC is gradually 
divided into alternating sites of input from each eye. The conse-
quences of depriving sight in one eye depend on the timing of 
eye closure. Closure at birth leads to dominance by the open 
eye (red) because at this point little segregation has occurred. 
Closure at 2, 3, and 6 weeks has a progressively weaker effect 
on the formation of ocular dominance columns because the 
columns become more segregated with time. (Abbreviations: 
L, left; R, right.) (Adapted, with permission, from Hubel, Wiesel, 
and LeVay 1977.)
Normal development of ocular
dominance columns
Development of ocular dominance columns 
after closure of one eye at different times
 
Birth
2 wk
3 wk
6 wk
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
L
R
L
R
R
L
L
R
L
R
R
L
Visual cortex
layer IVC
cooperation and competition between axons ensure 
that two populations of afferent fibers will eventually 
innervate distinct regions of the primary visual cortex 
with little local overlap.
Competition and cooperation are not simply the 
outcome of neural activity per se or of differences in 
absolute levels of activity among axons. Instead, they 
appear to depend on precise temporal patterns of 
activity in the competing (or cooperating) axons. The 
principle was dramatically illustrated by Hubel and 
Wiesel in a set of studies that examined stereoscopic 
vision—the perception of depth. The brain normally 
computes depth perception by comparing the dispar-
ity in retinal images between the two eyes. When the 
eyes are improperly aligned, this comparison cannot 
be made and stereoscopy is impossible. Such mis-
alignments occur in children who are “cross-eyed,” or 
strabismic. As noted above, this condition can be sur-
gically repaired, but unless the surgery occurs during 
the first few years of life, the children forever remain 
incapable of stereoscopy.
Hubel and Wiesel examined the impact of strabis-
mus on the organization of the visual system in cats. 
To render cats strabismic, the tendon of an extraocu-
lar muscle was severed in kittens. Both eyes remained 
fully functional but misaligned. Inputs from the two 
eyes that converged on a binocular cell in the visual 
cortex now carried information about different stimuli 


===== Page 7 =====
1218    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
in slightly different parts of the visual field. As a result, 
cortical cells became monocular, driven by input from 
one eye or the other but not both (Figure 49–6). Con-
versely, cortical neurons remained binocularly respon-
sive following binocular visual deprivation, leading to 
a decrease but not an imbalance in activity arising from 
the two eyes. These findings suggested to Hubel and 
Wiesel that disruption of the synchrony of inputs led 
to competition rather than cooperation, so that cortical 
cells came to be dominated by one eye, presumably the 
one that had dominated at the outset.
These physiological studies led investigators to 
test whether pharmacological blockade of electrical 
activity in retinal ganglion cells could affect neural 
connectivity in the visual system. Activity was blocked 
by injecting both eyes with tetrodotoxin, a toxin that 
selectively blocks voltage-sensitive Na+ channels. Sig-
nals from the two eyes were generated separately by 
direct electric stimulation of the bilateral optic nerves. 
In kittens, ocular dominance columns are not estab-
lished if activity in retinal ganglion neurons is blocked 
before the critical period of development. When the 
two optic nerves were stimulated synchronously, ocu-
lar dominance columns still failed to form. Only when 
the optic nerves were stimulated asynchronously were 
ocular dominance columns established.
If the development of ocular dominance columns 
indeed depends on competition between fibers from 
the two eyes, might it be possible to induce the forma-
tion of columns where they normally are not present, 
simply by establishing competition between two sets 
of axons? This radical possibility was tested in frogs, 
where retinal ganglion neurons from each eye project 
only to the contralateral side of the brain. In normal 
frogs, afferent fibers from the two eyes do not compete 
for the same cells, so there is no columnar segregation 
of afferent inputs. To generate competition, a third eye 
was transplanted early in larval development into a 
region of the frog’s head near one of the normal eyes. 
The retinal ganglion neurons of the extra eye extended 
axons to the contralateral optic tectum. Remarkably, 
axon terminals from the transplanted and normal eyes 
segregated, generating a pattern of alternating col-
umns (Figure 49–7).
This finding provided dramatic support for the 
idea that competition between afferent axons for the 
same population of target neurons drives their seg-
regation into distinct target territories. The colum-
nar segregation of retinal inputs in the frog brain is 
dependent on synaptic activity, presumably at the syn-
apses between retinal axons and tectal neurons. Thus, 
neural activity has powerful roles in fine-tuning visual 
circuits.
60
40
20
160
80
Number of cells
Normal 
Strabismic 
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
A  Alignment of eyes
B  Ocular dominance columns
C  Ocular dominance preference of V1 cells
Figure 49–6  Inducing strabismus in kittens impairs the for-
mation of binocular response regions in the primary visual 
cortex.
A. The eyes of strabismic cats are misaligned. (Photos [left] 
Steve Richardson/Alamy Stock Photo and [right] reproduced 
with permission from Van Sluyters and Levitt 1980.)
B. In strabismic animals, left and right eye domains are more 
sharply defined, an indication of the paucity of binocular 
regions. (Reproduced, with permission, from Löwel 1994. 
Copyright © 1994 Society for Neuroscience.)
C. Strabismic animals have fewer binocularly tuned neurons in 
the visual cortex. (Reproduced, with permission, from Hubel 
and Wiesel 1965.)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1219
Figure 49–7  Ocular dominance 
columns can be experimentally 
induced in a frog by transplanta-
tion of a third eye. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Constantine-Paton 
and Law 1978. Copyright © 1978 
AAAS.)
A. Three days before the transplant, 
the right eye was injected with a 
radiolabeled amino acid. The autora-
diograph in a coronal section of the 
hindbrain shows the entire superficial 
neuropil of the left optic lobe filled 
with silver grains, indicating the 
region occupied by synaptic termi-
nals from the labeled (contralateral) 
eye.
B. Some time after a third eye was 
transplanted near the normal right 
eye, the right eye was injected with a 
radiolabeled amino acid. The autoradio-
graph shows that the left optic lobe 
receives inputs from both the labeled 
eye and the transplanted eye. The 
normally continuous synaptic zone 
of the contralateral eye has become 
divided into alternating dark and light 
zones that indicate the sites of inputs 
from each eye.
A  Inputs are normally segregated in the tectum
B  Transplanted eye induces ocular dominance columns
Optic
tectum
Transplanted
eye
Normal
eye
400 µm
400 µm
Reorganization of Visual Circuits During a 
Critical Period Involves Alterations in  
Synaptic Connections
The pioneering work of Hubel, Wiesel, and their col-
leagues showed that early experience is required for 
the emergence of normal structure and function in the 
visual cortex. However, the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms that underlie the critical period remained 
mysterious. In recent years, many investigators have 
begun addressing these issues. Much of their work has 
involved the use of mice, because mice are more ame-
nable to mechanistic analysis than the cats and mon-
keys studied by Hubel, Wiesel, and their disciples.
Cortical Reorganization Depends on Changes in 
Both Excitation and Inhibition
Unlike cats and monkeys, most of the mouse visual cor-
tex receives only contralateral input and its binocular 
region is not divided into ocular dominance columns. 
Nonetheless, the small binocular region contains a 
mixture of monocularly and binocularly driven neu-
rons, and closure of the contralateral eye during the 
critical period for ocular dominance markedly shifts 
the preference of binocular neurons to inputs from the 
ipsilateral eye (Figure 49–8).
What converts this early loss of input into a per-
manent alteration of functional capability? One idea 
is that thalamic axons carrying information from the 
deprived eye lose their ability to activate cortical neu-
rons. However, although a decrease in efficacy of the 
thalamocortical synapse may contribute to this effect, 
this is not the whole story. Each thalamic axon carries 
input from only one eye (Figure 49–2). Because loss 
of responsiveness to the deprived eye occurs only if 
the other eye remains active, one might imagine that 
the earliest changes would occur at the first site where 
inputs from the two eyes have the opportunity to inter-
act. Consistent with this idea, the first physiological 
changes are not observed in layer IV neurons, each of 
which receives input from only one eye. Rather, they 
occur in the binocular neurons of layers II/III and V, 
which receive convergent input from both right eye– 
and left eye– driven monocular layer IV neurons. This 
implies that the loss of cortical responsiveness to the 
deprived eye results from a circuit alteration rather 
than from a simple loss of input.
Several possible cellular mechanisms have been 
proposed to account for these changes in circuitry. 


===== Page 9 =====
1220    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Normal vision
Binocular
region
Monocular
region
LGN
One eye closed during 
normal critical period
A
B
Right 
eye
Optic chiasm
Ipsi
Contra
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Ipsi
Contra
Cells (%)
Cells (%)
LGN
Figure 49–8  A critical period for ocular dominance plasticity is 
evident in mice. (Adapted, with permission, from Hensch 2005.)
A. The visual cortex in mice contains a small region that receives 
thalamic (lateral geniculate nucleus [LGN]) inputs from both 
eyes. In this binocular region, most neurons are predominantly 
responsive to contralateral eye input, fewer respond to binocular 
inputs, and very few respond to ipsilateral eye input only.
B. When the contralateral eye has been closed during the 
normal critical period and then reopened, inputs from that eye 
are underrepresented, and many more neurons respond to 
binocular or ipsilateral eye input. Eye closure before or after the 
time of the normal critical period does not elicit the same shift 
in responsiveness.
First, excitatory synapses within the primary visual 
cortex may weaken because of the decreased input 
from the closed eye, perhaps through long-term 
depression (LTD) (Chapter 53). Second, excitatory syn-
apses carrying input from the open eye may become 
stronger. Third, the strength of inhibitory synapses 
may be altered, leading to a net decrease in the level of 
excitation of cortical neurons by inputs from the closed 
eye or a net increase in excitation from the open eye. 
Fourth, neuromodulation within the cortex may tune 
the circuit in more subtle ways, altering the balance 
between excitation and inhibition.
Careful analysis of neurons in mouse cortex has 
provided insight into roles played by some of these 
mechanisms. During the first few days after clos-
ing one eye, responses to input from the closed eye 
are greatly weakened, with no major effect on inputs 
from the open eye. The weakening results from a pro-
cess like LTD or a closely related phenomenon called 
spike timing–dependent plasticity (STDP). Then, over 
the following few days, responses to inputs from the 
open eye become stronger. The increase results from 
a combination of synaptic changes called long-term 
potentiation and homeostatic plasticity. Homeostatic 
plasticity is a circuit mechanism that endeavors to 
maintain a steady level of input to neurons. In this 
case, loss of excitatory drive from the closed eye leads 
to a compensatory increase in excitatory drive from the 
open eye.
Further studies demonstrated that inhibitory 
interneurons have an important role in the timing of the 
critical period. Maturation of inhibitory input onto vis-
ual cortical neurons coincides with the beginning of the 
critical period. Moreover, manipulations that lead to ear-
lier development of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) signal-
ing result in advancing the critical period (Figure 49–9). 
Conversely, delaying GABA signaling delays the period 
in which monocular deprivation enhances the prefer-
ence for ipsilateral eye input (Figure 49–9). Together 
these results and others suggest that a sufficient level 
of inhibitory input plays a critical role in “gating” the 
opening of the critical period, whereas excitatory mech-
anisms may play a more prominent role in enacting the 
alterations that occur during the critical period.


