===== Page 1 =====
1348    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Whereas the early phase of LTP is mediated by changes 
at existing synapses, late LTP is thought to result from 
the growth of new synaptic connections between pairs 
of co-activated neurons.
Although the mechanisms for early LTP in the Schaf-
fer collateral and mossy fiber pathways are quite differ-
ent, the mechanisms for late LTP in the two pathways 
appear similar (Figure 54–3). In both pathways, late LTP 
recruits the cAMP and PKA signaling pathway to acti-
vate by phosphorylation the cAMP response element 
binding protein (CREB) transcription factor, leading to 
the synthesis of new mRNAs and proteins. Like sensi-
tization of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia, which 
also involves cAMP, PKA, and CREB (Chapter 53),  
late LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway is synapse 
specific. When two independent sets of synapses in the 
same postsynaptic CA1 neuron are stimulated using 
two electrodes spaced some distance apart, the appli-
cation of four trains of tetanic stimulation to one set of 
synapses induces late LTP only at the activated syn-
apses; synaptic transmission is not altered at the sec-
ond set of synapses that were not tetanized.
How can late LTP achieve synapse specificity 
given that transcription and most translation occurs 
in the cell body, such that newly synthesized proteins 
should be available to all synapses of a cell? To explain 
synapse specificity, Uwe Frey and Richard Morris pro-
posed the synaptic capture hypothesis, in which syn-
apses that are activated during the tetanus are tagged 
in some way, perhaps by protein phosphorylation, that 
enables them to make use of (“capture”) the newly 
synthesized proteins. Frey and Morris tested this idea 
using the two-pathway protocol described above. 
They delivered four tetani to induce late LTP at one set 
of synapses with one electrode and delivered a single 
tetanus to a second set of synapses with the other elec-
trode. Although a single tetanus on its own induces 
only early LTP, it is able to induce late LTP when deliv-
ered within 2–3 hours of the four tetani from the first 
electrode. This phenomenon is similar to the synapse-
specific capture of long-term facilitation at the sensory-
motor neuron synapses in Aplysia (Chapter 53).
According to Frey and Morris, the single train of 
tetanic stimulation, although not sufficient to induce 
new protein synthesis, is sufficient to tag the activated 
synapses, allowing them to capture the newly syn-
thesized proteins produced in response to the prior 
delivery of the four trains of tetanic stimulation. The 
increased synaptic plasticity that this tagging mecha-
nism affords, and its limitation to the period when 
newly synthesized proteins are around, may explain 
the recent finding that hippocampal cell assemblies 
that store memories of events closely spaced in time 
have a larger number of common neurons than do cell 
assemblies for events widely separated in time.
How can a few brief trains of synaptic stimulation 
produce such long-lasting increases in synaptic trans-
mission? One mechanism proposed by John Lisman 
depends on the unique properties of CaMKII. After 
a brief exposure to Ca2+, CaMKII can be converted to 
a calcium-independent state through its autophos-
phorylation at threonine-286 (Thr286). This ability to 
become persistently active in response to a transient 
Ca2+ stimulus has led to the suggestion that CaMKII 
may act as a simple molecular switch that can extend 
the duration of LTP following its initial activation.
Studies from Todd Sacktor have suggested that 
longer-lasting changes that maintain late LTP may 
depend on an atypical isoform of PKC termed PKMζ 
(PKM zeta). Most isoforms of PKC contain both a reg-
ulatory domain and a catalytic domain (Chapter 14). 
Binding of diacylglycerol, phospholipids, and Ca2+ to 
the regulatory domain relieves inhibitory domain bind-
ing to the catalytic domain, allowing PKC to phospho-
rylate its protein substrates. In contrast, PKMζ lacks a 
regulatory domain and so is constitutively active.
Levels of PKMζ in the hippocampus are normally 
low. Tetanic stimulation that induces LTP leads to an 
increase in synthesis of PKMζ through enhanced trans-
lation of its mRNA. Because this mRNA is present in 
the CA1 neuron dendrites, its translation can rapidly 
alter synaptic strength. Blockade of PKMζ with a pep-
tide inhibitor during the tetanic stimulation blocks late 
LTP but not early LTP. If the blocker is applied several 
hours after LTP induction, the late LTP that had been 
established will be reversed. This result indicates that 
the maintenance of late LTP requires the ongoing activ-
ity of PKMζ to maintain the increase in AMPA recep-
tors in the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 54–3). A 
second atypical PKC isoform may substitute for PKMζ 
under certain conditions, which may explain the sur-
prising finding that genetic deletion of PKMζ has little 
effect on late LTP.
Constitutively active forms of protein kinases 
may not be the only mechanism for maintaining 
long-lasting synaptic changes in the hippocampus. 
Repeated stimulation may lead to the formation of 
new synaptic connections, just as long-term facilita-
tion leads to the formation of new synapses during 
learning in Aplysia. In addition, long-lasting synaptic 
changes likely involve epigenetic changes in chroma-
tin structure. During late LTP, phosphorylated CREB 
activates gene expression by recruiting the CREB 
binding protein (CBP), which acts as a histone acet-
ylase, transferring an acetyl group to specific lysine 
residues on histone proteins, and thereby producing 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1349
Figure 54–6  Long-term potentiation (LTP) in CA1 pyrami-
dal neurons of the hippocampus shows cooperativity, 
associativity, and synapse specificity. With normal synaptic 
transmission, a single action potential in one or a few axons 
(weak input) leads to a small excitatory postsynaptic potential 
(EPSP) that is insufficient to expel Mg2+ from the N-methyl-
d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-channels and thus cannot induce 
LTP. This ensures that irrelevant stimuli are not remembered. 
The near-simultaneous activation of several weak inputs 
during strong activation (cooperativity) produces a suprath-
reshold EPSP that triggers an action potential, resulting in 
LTP in all pathways. Stimulation of strong and weak inputs 
together (associativity) causes LTP in both pathways. In this 
way, a weak input becomes significant when paired with a 
powerful one. An unstimulated synapse does not undergo LTP 
despite the strong stimulation of neighboring synapses. This 
ensures that memory is selectively stored at active synapses 
(synapse specificity).
long-lasting changes in gene expression. Mutations 
in CBP impair late LTP and learning and memory in 
mice. In humans, de novo mutations in the CBP gene 
underlie Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a developmen-
tal disorder associated with intellectual impairment. 
Other studies implicate a second epigenetic mecha-
nism, DNA methylation, in long-lasting synaptic 
plasticity and learning and memory.
Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity Provides a More 
Natural Mechanism for Altering Synaptic Strength
Under most circumstances, hippocampal neurons do 
not produce the high-frequency trains of action poten-
tials typically used to induce LTP experimentally. 
However, a form of LTP termed spike-timing-dependent 
plasticity (STDP) can be induced by a more natural 
pattern of activity in which a single presynaptic stimu-
lus is paired with the firing of a single action potential 
in the postsynaptic cell at a relatively low frequency 
(eg, one pair per second over several seconds). How-
ever, the presynaptic cell must fire just before the post-
synaptic cell. If instead the postsynaptic cell fires just 
before the EPSP, a long-lasting decrease in the size of 
the EPSP occurs. Such long-term depression of synap-
tic transmission represents a distinct form of synaptic 
plasticity from LTP and is described more fully below. 
If the postsynaptic action potential occurs more than 
a hundred milliseconds before or after the EPSP, the 
synaptic strength will not change.
The pairing rules of STDP thus follow Hebb’s postu-
late and result in large part from the cooperative proper-
ties of the NMDA receptor-channel. If the postsynaptic 
spike occurs during the EPSP, it is able to relieve the 
Mg2+ blockade of the channel at a time when the NMDA 
receptor has been activated by the binding of glutamate. 
This leads to a large influx of Ca2+ through the receptor 
and the induction of STDP. However, if the postsynaptic 
action potential occurs prior to the presynaptic release 
of glutamate, any relief from the Mg2+ block will occur 
when the gate of the receptor-channel is closed (because 
of the absence of glutamate). As a result, there will be 
only a small influx of Ca2+ through the receptor that is 
insufficient to induce STDP.
Long-Term Potentiation in the Hippocampus Has 
Properties That Make It Useful as A Mechanism for 
Memory Storage
NMDA receptor–dependent LTP at the Schaffer col-
lateral pathway and other hippocampal pathways has 
three properties with direct relevance to learning and 
memory (Figure 54–6). First, LTP in such pathways 
requires the near-simultaneous activation of a large 
number of afferent inputs, a feature called cooperativity 
(Figure 54–6). This requirement stems from the fact 
Normal synaptic transmission
Cooperativity
Associativity
Synapse speciﬁcity
Weak active input
Inactive input
Strong active input
No 
LTP
LTP
No LTP
LTP
LTP
LTP


===== Page 3 =====
1350    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
that relief of Mg2+ block of the NMDA receptor-channel 
requires a large depolarization, which is achieved only 
when the postsynaptic cell receives input from a large 
number of presynaptic cells.
Second, LTP at synapses with NMDA receptor-
channels is associative. A weak presynaptic input normally 
does not produce enough postsynaptic depolarization 
to induce LTP. However, if the weak input is paired 
with a strong input that produces a suprathreshold 
depolarization, the resulting large depolarization will 
propagate to the synapses with weak input, leading to 
relief of the Mg2+ blockade of the NMDA receptors and 
induction of LTP at those synapses.
Third, NMDA receptor-dependent LTP is synapse 
specific. If a particular synapse is not activated during 
a period of strong synaptic stimulation, the NMDA 
receptors at that site will not be able to bind glutamate 
and thus will not be activated despite the strong post-
synaptic depolarization. As a result, that synapse will 
not undergo LTP.
Each of these three properties—cooperativity, 
associativity, and synapse specificity—underlies a key 
requirement of memory storage. Cooperativity ensures 
that only events of a high degree of significance, those 
that activate sufficient inputs, will result in memory 
storage. Associativity, like associative Pavlovian con-
ditioning, allows an event (or conditioned stimulus) 
that has little significance in and of itself to be endowed 
with a higher degree of meaning if that event occurs 
just before or simultaneously with another more signif-
icant event (an unconditioned stimulus). In a network 
with strong recurrent connections, such as CA3, asso-
ciative LTP enables a pattern of activity in one group of 
cells to become linked to a distinct pattern of activity in 
a separate, but partially overlapping, group of synapti-
cally coupled cells. Such linkages of cell assemblies are 
thought to enable related events to become associated 
with one another and to be important for storing and 
recalling large varieties of experiences, as occurs with 
explicit memory. Finally, synapse specificity ensures 
that inputs that convey information not related to a par-
ticular event will not be strengthened. Synapse speci-
ficity is critical when large amounts of information 
must be stored in one network, because much more 
information can be stored in a cell through functional 
alterations at individual synapses than through blanket 
changes in a property of the cell, such as its excitability.
Spatial Memory Depends on Long-Term 
Potentiation
Long-term potentiation is an experimentally induced 
change in synaptic strength produced by strong direct 
stimulation of neural pathways. Does this or a related 
form of synaptic plasticity occur physiologically dur-
ing explicit memory storage? If so, how important is it 
for explicit memory storage in the hippocampus?
To date, a large number of experimental approaches 
have shown that inhibiting LTP interferes with spatial 
memory. In one approach, a mouse is placed in a pool 
filled with an opaque fluid (the Morris water maze); 
to escape from the liquid, the mouse must swim to 
find a platform submerged in the fluid and completely 
hidden from view. The animal is released at random 
locations around the pool and initially encounters the 
platform by chance. However, in subsequent trials, the 
mouse quickly learns to locate the platform and then 
remembers its position based on spatial information—
distal markings on the walls of the room in which the 
pool is located. This task requires the hippocampus. In 
a nonspatial, or cued, version of this test, the platform 
is raised above the water surface or marked with a flag 
so that it is visible, permitting the mouse to navigate 
directly to it using brain pathways that do not require 
the hippocampus.
When NMDA receptors are blocked by a pharma-
cological antagonist injected into the hippocampus 
immediately before an animal is trained to navigate 
the Morris water maze, the animal cannot remem-
ber the location of the hidden platform using spatial 
information but can find it in the version of the task 
with the visible marker. These experiments thus sug-
gest that some mechanism involving NMDA receptors 
in the hippocampus, perhaps LTP, is involved in spa-
tial learning. However, if the NMDA receptor blocker 
is injected into the hippocampus after an animal has 
learned a spatial memory task, it does not inhibit sub-
sequent memory recall for that task. This is consistent 
with findings that NMDA receptors are required for 
the induction, but not the maintenance, of LTP.
More direct evidence correlating memory forma-
tion and LTP comes from experiments with mutant 
mice that have genetic lesions that interfere with LTP. 
One interesting mutation is produced by the genetic 
deletion of the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor. 
Neurons lacking this subunit fail to form functional 
NMDA receptors. Mice with a general deletion of the 
subunit die soon after birth, indicating the importance 
of these receptors for neural function. However, it is 
possible to generate lines of conditional mutant mice 
in which the NR1 deletion is restricted to CA1 pyrami-
dal neurons and occurs only 1 or 2 weeks after birth 
(see Chapter 2, Figure 2–8, for a description of how 
this mouse line is generated). These mice survive into 
adulthood and show a loss of LTP in the Schaffer col-
lateral pathway. Although this disruption is highly 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1351
localized, the mutant mice have a serious deficit in 
spatial memory (Figure 54–7).
In some cases, genetic changes can actually enhance 
both hippocampal LTP and spatial learning and mem-
ory. One of the first examples of such an enhancement 
comes from studies of a mutant mouse that overex-
presses the NR2B subunit of the NMDA receptor. This 
subunit is normally present at hippocampal synapses in 
the early stages of development but is downregulated 
in adults. Receptors that include this subunit allow 
more Ca2+ influx than those without the subunit. In 
mutant mice that overexpress the NR2B subunit, LTP 
is enhanced, presumably because of an enhancement in 
Ca2+ influx. Importantly, learning and memory for sev-
eral different tasks are also enhanced (Figure 54–8).
One concern with gene knockouts or transgene 
expression is that such mutations might lead to subtle 
developmental abnormalities. That is, changes in the 
size of LTP and spatial memory in the mutant animals 
could be the result of an early developmental alteration 
in the wiring of the hippocampal circuit rather than a 
change in the basic mechanisms of LTP. This possibil-
ity can be addressed by reversibly turning on and off a 
transgene that interferes with LTP.
Reversible gene expression has been used to 
explore the role of CaMKII, whose autophosphoryla-
tion properties and function in LTP were discussed 
earlier in this chapter (see also Chapter 2, Figure 
2–9, for a description of the methodology). Mutation 
of the autophosphorylation Thr286 site to the nega-
tively charged amino acid aspartate mimics the effect 
of autophosphorylation at Thr286 and converts the 
CaMKII to a calcium-independent form. Transgenic 
expression of this dominant mutation of CaMKII 
(CaMKII-Asp286) results in a systematic shift in the 
relation between the frequency of a tetanus and the 
resultant change in synaptic strength during long-term 
plasticity.
In the transgenic mice, tetanic stimulation at an 
intermediate frequency of 10 Hz, which normally 
induces a small amount of LTP, induces long-term 
depression of synaptic transmission in the Schaffer col-
lateral pathway (Figure 54–9A). In contrast, the transgenic 
mice showed normal LTP to a 100-Hz tetanus. The defect 
in synaptic plasticity with 10-Hz stimulation is associ-
ated with an inability of the mutant mice to remember 
spatial tasks. However, the defects in the induction of 
LTP and in spatial memory can be fully extinguished 
when the mutant gene is switched off in the adult, 
showing that the memory defect is not due to a devel-
opmental abnormality (Figure 54–9).
These several experiments using restricted knock-
out and overexpression of the NMDA receptor and 
regulated overexpression of CaMKII-Asp286 make it 
clear that the molecular pathways important for LTP at 
Schaffer collateral synapses are also required for spatial 
memory. However, such results do not directly show 
that spatial learning and memory are actually associ-
ated with an enhancement in hippocampal synaptic 
transmission. Mark Bear and his colleagues addressed 
this question by monitoring the strength of synaptic 
transmission at the Schaffer collateral synapses in vivo 
in rats.
Recordings were made of synaptic strength using 
an array of extracellular electrodes to stimulate the 
Schaffer collateral inputs and another array to record 
the extracellular field EPSPs at various locations. Rats 
were then trained to avoid one side of a box through 
administration of a foot shock; the field EPSPs were 
remeasured after training, showing a small but sig-
nificant increase in the amplitude of synaptic trans-
mission at a subset of the recording electrodes. Does 
the increase in synaptic transmission during learning 
result from LTP or some other mechanism? Because 
the amount of LTP at a given synapse is finite, if learn-
ing does indeed recruit an LTP-like process, then the 
ability to induce LTP by tetanic stimulation after learn-
ing should be reduced. Indeed, Bear and his colleagues 
found that the magnitude of LTP is diminished at those 
recording sites where the behavioral training pro-
duced the greatest enhancement in the field EPSP. This 
result is similar to findings in the amygdala, where 
fear learning reduces the magnitude of LTP induced 
by subsequent tetanic stimulation.
If LTP-like changes take place during memory for-
mation in the hippocampus, such changes would be 
expected only in a small subset of synapses, namely 
those that participate in the storage of the particular 
memory. Different memories probably correspond 
to different assemblies of cells with strengthened 
synaptic interconnections. If this is true, however, 
hippocampal memories should be vulnerable to dis-
ruption by manipulations that indiscriminately alter 
synaptic strength within the network as a whole. To 
test this idea, investigators induced LTP throughout 
the dentate gyrus after hippocampal-dependent spatial 
training in the water maze task. This protocol indeed 
impairs the animal’s memory of the goal location in 
the water maze. Control animals that are given NMDA 
receptor antagonists after learning but prior to high-
frequency stimulation exhibit normal spatial memory. 
These results indicate that the memory impairment 
was generated specifically as a consequence of the 
generation of indiscriminate LTP, which likely disrupts 
the specific pattern of strong and weak synapses that 
encode memory of the goal location.


===== Page 5 =====
1352    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
C  Morris water maze learning
D  Probe trial test of memory
Wild type
Mutant
300
0
100
–30
0
30
60
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
B  Long-term potentiation
Wild type
Mutant
200
60
40
0
2
4
6
Trial block
Mutant
Wild type
8
10
12 
Escape latency (s)
20
50
25
0
Target
quadrant
Percent total search time
Movement patterns
Adj. right
quadrant
Chance
Mutant
Wild type
Opposite
Adj. left
quadrant
Wild type
Mutant
CA1
NMDA 
receptors
No NMDA 
receptors
A  Action of Cre recombinase is restricted to CA1 region
Wild type
Mutant
CA3
CA1
DG


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1353
Figure 54–7  (Opposite) Long-term potentiation (LTP) and 
spatial learning and memory are impaired in mice that 
lack the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the CA1 
region of the hippocampus. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Tsien, Huerta, and Tonegawa 1996.)
A. A line of mice is bred in which the gene encoding the NR1 
subunit of the NMDA receptor is selectively deleted in CA1 
pyramidal neurons. In situ hybridization is used to detect mRNA 
for the NR1 subunit in hippocampal slices from wild type and 
mutant mice that contain two floxed NR1 alleles and express 
Cre recombinase under the control of the CaMKIIα promoter. 
Note that NR1 mRNA expression (dark staining) is greatly 
reduced in the CA1 region of the hippocampus but not in CA3 
and the dentate gyrus (DG).
B. LTP at the CA1 Schaffer collateral synapses is abolished in 
these mice. Field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) 
were recorded in response to Schaffer collateral stimulation. 
Tetanic stimulation at 100 Hz for 1 second (arrow) caused a 
large potentiation in wild type mice but failed to induce LTP in 
the NMDA receptor knockout (mutant) mice.
C. Mice that lack the NMDA receptor in CA1 pyramidal neurons 
have impaired spatial memory. A platform (dashed square) is 
submerged in an opaque fluid in a circular tank (a Morris water 
maze). To avoid remaining in the water, the mice have to find 
the platform using spatial (contextual) cues on the walls sur-
rounding the tank and then climb onto the platform. The graph 
shows escape latency or the time required by mice to find the 
hidden platform in successive trials. The mutant mice display a 
longer escape latency in every block of trials (four  
trials per day) than do the wild type mice. Also, mutant mice do 
not reach the optimal performance attained by the control mice 
after 12 training days, even though they show some improve-
ment with training.
D. After the mice have been trained in the Morris maze, the 
platform is taken away. In this probe trial, the wild type mice 
spend a disproportionate amount of time in the quadrant that 
formerly contained the platform (the target quadrant), indicating 
that they remember the location of the platform. Mutant mice 
spend an equal amount of time (25%) in all quadrants; that is, 
they perform at chance level, indicating deficient memory.
Finally, although most behavioral tests of LTP have 
used spatial learning tasks to assess memory, studies 
have also shown that NMDA receptors, and by infer-
ence LTP, are necessary for a variety of hippocampal-
dependent explicit memories. When NMDA receptors 
in the CA1 area are blocked, mice are not able to master 
a nonspatial object recognition task, learn complex odor 
discrimination, or undergo the social transmission of a 
food preference, in which an animal learns to accept a 
novel food by observing a conspecific (another animal 
of its species) consume that same food. Thus, NMDA 
receptor–dependent LTP is likely required for many, if 
not all, forms of explicit memory in the hippocampus 
(most of which include a spatial recognition element).
Explicit Memory Storage Also Depends on Long-
Term Depression of Synaptic Transmission
If synaptic connections could only be enhanced and 
never attenuated, synaptic transmission might rap-
idly saturate—the strength of the synaptic connections 
might reach a point beyond which further enhance-
ment is not possible. Moreover, uniform synaptic 
strengthening may lead to a loss of memory specific-
ity, with one memory interfering with another. Yet 
individuals are able to learn, store, and recall new 
memories throughout a lifetime. This paradox led to 
the suggestion that neurons must have mechanisms to 
downregulate synaptic function to counteract LTP.
Such an inhibitory mechanism, termed long-term 
depression (LTD), was first discovered in the cerebellum, 
where it is important for motor learning. Since then, 
LTD has also been characterized at a number of syn-
apses within the hippocampus. Whereas LTP is typi-
cally induced by a brief high-frequency tetanus, LTD is 
induced by prolonged low-frequency synaptic stimu-
lation (Figure 54–10A). As mentioned above, it can 
also be induced by a spike pairing protocol in which 
an EPSP is evoked after an action potential in the post-
synaptic cell. This suggests a corollary to Hebb’s learn-
ing rule: Active synapses that do not contribute to the 
firing of a cell are weakened. Like LTP, a number of 
molecular and synaptic mechanisms are engaged dur-
ing the induction and expression of LTD.
Surprisingly, many forms of LTD require activa-
tion of the same receptors involved in LTP, namely the 
NMDA receptors (Figure 54–10A). How can activa-
tion of a single type of receptor produce both poten-
tiation and depression? A key difference lies in the 
experimental protocols used to induce LTP or LTD. 
Compared to the high-frequency stimulation used to 
induce LTP, the low-frequency tetanus used to induce 
LTD produces a relatively modest postsynaptic depo-
larization and thus is much less effective at relieving 
the Mg2+ block of the NMDA receptors. As a result, 
any increase in Ca2+ concentration in the postsynaptic 
cell is much smaller than the increase observed during 
induction of LTP and therefore insufficient to activate 
CaMKII, the enzyme implicated in LTP. Rather, LTD 
may result from activation of the calcium-dependent 
phosphatase calcineurin, an enzyme complex that has 
a higher affinity for Ca2+ compared to that of CaMKII 
(Chapter 14).


===== Page 7 =====
1354    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
NR2B transgenic
Wild type
40 pA
100 ms
Transgenic
Wild type
100 Hz, 1 s
A   NMDA-type receptor synaptic current
C  Morris water maze learning
Transgenic
Wild type
Wild type
Transgenic
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
Session
Latency (s)
Search quadrant (%)
Target
quadrant
Opposite
quadrant
Left
quadrant
Right
quadrant
3
4
5
6
Time (min)
50
100
150
200
0
15
30
45
–15
CA1
Normal NMDA 
receptors
More Ca2+
enters the cell
NR2B subunit
overexpressed
Ca2+
50
250
B  Long-term potentiation
Wild type
NR2B 
Transgenic
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
Figure 54–8  Learning and memory are enhanced in mice 
that overexpress a subunit of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) glutamate receptor. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Tang et al. 1999. Copyright © 1999 Springer Nature.)
A. The amplitude of the current generated by the NMDA recep-
tors in response to a brief pulse of glutamate is enhanced and 
its time course prolonged in hippocampal neurons obtained 
from mice that contain a transgene that expresses higher levels 
of the receptor’s NR2B subunit compared to wild type mice.
B. Long-term potentiation produced by tetanic stimulation of 
the Schaffer collateral synapses is greater in the transgenic 
mice than in wild type mice. (Abbreviation: fEPSP, field excita-
tory postsynaptic potential.)
C. Spatial learning is enhanced in the transgenic mice (upper 
plot). The rate of learning in a Morris water maze (the reduction 
in time to find the hidden platform, or escape latency) is faster 
in transgenic mice than in wild type mice. Spatial memory is 
also enhanced in the transgenic mice (lower plot). In the probe 
trial, the transgenic mice spend more time in the target quad-
rant, which previously contained the hidden platform, than do 
wild-type mice.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1355
B
A  
160
120
80
–20
0
20
10 Hz
Time (min)
Transgenic + Dox
Wild 
type
40
60
75
C
0
% of group that acquired task
Transgenic
+ Dox
Transgenic
(CaMKII-Asp286)
Transgenic
(CaMKII-Asp286)
Wild type
50
25
Transgenic + Dox
Wild type
Transgenic
Mouse fed 
doxycycline
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
Figure 54–9  Deficits in long-term potentiation (LTP) and 
spatial memory due to a transgene are reversible. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Mayford et al. 1996.)
A. An LTP deficit is seen in hippocampal slices from transgenic 
mice that overexpress CaMKII-Asp286 kinase, a constitutively 
active mutant form of CaMKII. Expression of this transgene is 
driven by a second transgene, the tTA bacterial transcription 
factor, which is inhibited by the antibiotic doxycycline (Dox) (see 
Chapter 2, Figure 2–9, for a complete description). Four groups 
of mice were tested: transgenic mice that were fed doxycy-
cline, which blocks expression of the kinase; transgenic mice 
without doxycycline, in which the kinase is expressed; and wild 
type mice with and without doxycycline. In wild type mice, a 
10-Hz tetanus induces LTP; doxycycline has no effect (data are 
not shown). In the transgenic mice, the tetanus fails to induce 
LTP but causes a small synaptic depression. In the transgenic 
mice that were fed doxycycline, the deficit in LTP is reversed. 
(Abbreviation: fEPSP, field excitatory postsynaptic potential.)
B. The effect of the kinase on spatial memory was tested in a 
Barnes maze. The maze consists of a platform with  
40 holes, one of which leads to an escape tunnel that allows 
the mouse to exit the platform. The mouse is placed in the 
center of the platform. Mice do not like open, well-lit spaces 
and therefore try to escape from the platform by finding the 
hole that leads to the escape tunnel. The most efficient way 
of learning and remembering the location of the hole (and the 
only way of meeting the criteria set for the task by the experi-
menter) is for the mouse to use distinctive markings on the 
four walls as spatial cues, thus demonstrating hippocampal 
spatial memory.
C. Transgenic mice that receive doxycycline perform  
as well as wild type mice in learning the Barnes maze task 
(approximately 65% of animals learn the task), whereas  
transgenic mice without the doxycycline, which thus express 
CaMKII-Asp286, do not learn the task.


===== Page 9 =====
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Time (min)
0
100
200
0
30
60
90
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Path (cm)
Wild type
Transgenic
Day
Day
Transgene off
Transgene on
Time (min)
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
0
100
200
0
30
60
90
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
0
15
Time (min)
Control
Wild type
Mutant gene on
Wild type
Mutant gene off
APV
1 Hz stimulation
EPSP (percent of baseline)
30
45
50
100
75
1 Hz
1 Hz
Hidden 
platform 1
Hidden 
platform 2
Hidden 
platform 1
Hidden 
platform 2
125
B   Protein phosphatase 2A is required for LTD
C   LTD contributes to behavioral ﬂexibility
A   NMDA receptors are required for long-term depression
CA1
NMDA 
receptor
AMPA 
receptor
Low-frequency
stimulation
Long-term 
depression
Figure 54–10  Long-term depression of synaptic transmis-
sion requires N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and 
phosphatase activity.
A. Prolonged low-frequency stimulation (1 Hz for 15 minutes) of 
Schaffer collateral fibers produces a long-term decrease in the 
size of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) in the 
hippocampal CA1 region, a decrease that outlasts the period 
of stimulation (control). Long-term depression (LTD) occurs 
when α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA) receptors are removed from the postsynaptic mem-
brane by endocytosis; it is blocked when the NMDA receptors 
are blocked by the drug 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV). 
(Adapted from Dudek and Bear 1992.)
B. LTD requires protein dephosphorylation. The plots compare 
LTD in the hippocampal CA1 region of wild type mice and trans-
genic mice that express a protein that inhibits phosphoprotein 
phosphatase 2A. Transgene expression is under control of the 
tTA system. In the absence of doxycycline, the phosphatase 
inhibitor is expressed, and induction of LTD is inhibited (left 
plot). When expression of the phosphatase inhibitor is turned 
off by administering doxycycline, a normal-sized LTD is induced 
(right plot).
C. Inhibition of phosphatase 2A reduces behavioral flexibility. 
Transgenic mice expressing the phosphatase inhibitor learn the 
location of a submerged platform in the Morris maze at the same 
rate as wild-type mice (days 1–10). Thus, LTD is not necessary for 
learning the initial platform location. At the end of day 10, the plat-
form is moved to a new hidden location and the mice are retested 
(days 11–15). Now the transgenic mice travel significantly longer 
paths to find the platform on the first day of retesting (day 11), indi-
cating an impaired learning (reduced flexibility). When transgene 
expression is turned off with doxycycline, the transgenic mice 
display normal learning on all phases of the test. (Panels B and C 
reproduced, with permission, from Nicholls et al. 2008.)


