===== Page 1 =====
284    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
NMDA and AMPA receptors to the total excitatory 
postsynaptic current (EPSC) can be quantified using 
pharmacological antagonists in a voltage-clamp exper-
iment (Figure 13–9). Since NMDA receptors are largely 
inhibited by Mg2+ at the normal resting potential of 
most neurons, the EPSC is predominantly determined 
by charge flow through the AMPA receptors. This cur-
rent has very rapid rising and decay phases. However, 
as a neuron becomes depolarized and Mg2+ is driven 
out of the mouth of the NMDA receptors, more charge 
flows through them. Thus, the NMDA receptor-channel 
conducts current maximally when two conditions 
are met: Glutamate is present, and the cell is depolar-
ized. That is, the NMDA receptor acts as a molecular 
“coincidence detector,” opening during the concurrent 
activation of the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. In 
addition, because of its intrinsic kinetics of ligand gat-
ing, the current through the NMDA receptor-channel 
rises and decays with a much slower time course than 
the current through AMPA receptor-channels. As a 
result, the NMDA receptors contribute to a late, slow 
phase of the EPSC and EPSP.
As most glutamatergic synapses contain AMPA 
receptors that are capable of triggering an action poten-
tial by themselves, what is the function of the NMDA 
receptor? At first glance, the function of these receptors 
is even more puzzling because their intrinsic channel 
is normally blocked by Mg2+ at the resting potential. 
However, the high permeability of the NMDA receptor-
channels to Ca2+ endows them with the special ability 
to produce a marked rise in intracellular [Ca2+] that 
can activate various calcium-dependent signaling 
cascades, including several different protein kinases 
(Chapters 15 and 53). Thus, NMDA receptor activation 
can translate electrical signals into biochemical ones. 
Some of these biochemical reactions lead to long-lasting 
changes in synaptic strength through a set of processes 
called long-term synaptic plasticity, which are important 
for refining synaptic connections during early develop-
ment and regulating neural circuits in the adult brain, 
including circuits critical for long-term memory.
The Properties of the NMDA Receptor Underlie 
Long-Term Synaptic Plasticity
In 1973, Tim Bliss and Terje Lomo found that a brief 
period of high-intensity and high-frequency synaptic 
stimulation (known as a tetanus) leads to long-term 
potentiation (LTP) of excitatory synaptic transmission 
in the hippocampus, a region of the mammalian brain 
required for many forms of long-term memory (Figure 
13–10; see Chapters 53 and 54). Subsequent studies 
demonstrated that LTP requires Ca2+ influx through 
the NMDA receptor-channels, which open in response 
to the combined effect of glutamate release and strong 
postsynaptic depolarization during the tetanic stimu-
lation. LTP is blocked if the tetanus is delivered in the 
presence of APV, which blocks the NMDA receptors, 
or if the postsynaptic neuron is injected with a com-
pound that chelates intracellular Ca2+.
The rise of Ca2+ in the postsynaptic cell is thought 
to potentiate synaptic transmission by activating post-
synaptic biochemical cascades that trigger the insertion 
of additional AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic 
membrane. Under some circumstances, postsynaptic 
Ca2+ can trigger production of a retrograde messenger, 
a chemical signal that enhances transmitter release from 
the presynaptic terminal (Chapter 14). As we will dis-
cuss later, the Ca2+ accumulation and biochemical acti-
vation are largely restricted to the individual spines that 
are activated by the tetanic stimulation. As a result, LTP 
is input-specific; only those synapses that are activated 
during the tetanic stimulation are potentiated.
The prolonged high-frequency presynaptic fir-
ing required to induce LTP is unlikely to be achieved 
under physiological conditions. However, a more 
physiologically relevant form of plasticity, termed spike-
timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), can be induced if a 
single presynaptic stimulus is paired at low frequency 
with the triggered firing of one or more postsynaptic 
action potentials, providing sufficient depolarization 
to relieve Mg2+ block of the NMDA receptor pore. The 
presynaptic activity must precede postsynaptic firing, 
following a rule proposed in 1949 by the psycholo-
gist Donald Hebb for how individual neurons could 
become grouped together into functional assemblies 
during associative memory storage. A number of lines 
of evidence now suggest that LTP, STDP, or related pro-
cesses provide an important cellular mechanism for 
memory storage (Chapters 53 and 54) and fine-tuning 
synaptic connections during development (Chapter 49).
NMDA Receptors Contribute to  
Neuropsychiatric Disease
Unfortunately, there is also a downside to recruiting 
Ca2+ through the NMDA receptors. Excessively high 
concentrations of glutamate are thought to result in an 
overload of Ca2+ in the postsynaptic neurons, a condi-
tion that can be toxic to neurons. In tissue culture, even 
a brief exposure to high concentrations of glutamate 
can kill many neurons, an action called glutamate exci-
totoxicity. High concentrations of intracellular Ca2+ are 
thought to activate calcium-dependent proteases and 
phospholipases and lead to the production of free radi-
cals that are toxic to the cell.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     285
Figure 13–9  The contributions of the AMPA and NMDA 
receptor-channels to the excitatory postsynaptic  
current.  These voltage-clamp current records are from a cell in 
the rat hippocampus. Similar receptor-channels are present in 
motor neurons and throughout the brain. (Adapted, with  
permission, from Hestrin et al. 1990.)
A. The drug APV selectively binds to and blocks the NMDA 
receptor. Shown here is the excitatory postsynaptic current 
(EPSC) before and during application of 50 μM APV at three 
different membrane potentials. The difference between the 
traces (blue region) represents the contribution of the NMDA 
receptor-channel to the EPSC. The current that remains in the 
presence of APV is the contribution of the AMPA receptor-
channels. At −80 mV, there is no current through the NMDA 
receptor-channels because of pronounced Mg2+ block (see 
Figure 13–8). At −40 mV, a small late inward current through 
NMDA receptor-channels is evident. At +20 mV, the late 
component is more prominent and has reversed to become 
an outward current. The time 25 ms after the peak of the syn-
aptic current (dashed line) is used for the calculations of late 
current in part B.
B. The postsynaptic currents through the NMDA and AMPA 
receptor-channels differ in their dependence on the membrane 
potential. The current through the AMPA receptor-channels 
contributes to the early phase of the synaptic current (filled 
triangles). The early phase is measured at the peak of the 
synaptic current and plotted here as a function of membrane 
potential. The current through the NMDA receptor-channels 
contributes to the late phase of the synaptic current (filled 
circles). The late phase is measured 25 ms after the peak 
of the synaptic current, a time at which the AMPA receptor 
component has decayed almost to zero (see part A). Note that 
the AMPA receptor-channels behave as simple resistors; cur-
rent and voltage have a linear relationship. In contrast, current 
through the NMDA receptor-channels is nonlinear and increases 
as the membrane is depolarized from −80 to −40 mV, owing 
to progressive relief of the Mg2+ block. The reversal potential of 
both receptor-channel types is at 0 mV. The components of the 
synaptic current in the presence of 50 μm APV are indicated by 
the unfilled circles and triangles. Note how APV blocks the 
late (NMDA receptor) component of the EPSC but not the early 
(AMPA receptor) component.
A  Early and late components of synaptic current
B  Current-voltage relationship of the synaptic current
Membrane
potential
+20 mV
–40 mV
–80 mV
100 pA
50 ms
Peak current
Late current
With APV
With APV
Without APV
Without APV
Without APV
–150
Late current 
with APV
Peak (early) 
current
with APV
Peak (early) 
current 
without APV
Late current 
without APV
–100
–50
+50 mV
+100 pA
–100
–200
–300
Glutamate toxicity may contribute to cell damage 
after stroke, to the cell death that occurs with episodes 
of rapidly repeated seizures experienced by patients 
who have status epilepticus, and to degenerative dis-
eases such as Huntington disease. Agents that selec-
tively block the NMDA receptor may protect against 
the toxic effects of glutamate and have been tested 
clinically. The hallucinations that accompany NMDA 
receptor blockade have so far limited the usefulness of 
such compounds. A further complication of attempts 
to control excitotoxicity by blocking NMDA receptor 
function is that physiological levels of NMDA receptor 
activation may actually protect neurons from damage 
and cell death.
Not all of the physiological and pathophysiological 
effects mediated by the NMDA receptor may result from 
Ca2+ influx. There is increasing evidence that binding of 
glutamate to the NMDA receptor may cause a conforma-
tional change in the receptor that activates downstream 
intracellular signaling pathways independently of ion 


===== Page 3 =====
286    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
flux. Such metabotropic functions of the NMDA receptor 
may contribute to long-term depression, a form of syn-
aptic plasticity in which low-frequency synaptic activity 
produces a long-lasting decrease in glutamatergic syn-
aptic transmission, the opposite of LTP. Metabotropic 
actions of the NMDA receptor may also contribute to the 
effect of β-amyloid, the peptide fragment implicated in 
Alzheimer disease, in depressing synaptic function.
A number of lines of evidence implicate NMDA 
receptor malfunction in schizophrenia. Pharmacologi-
cal blockade of NMDA receptors with drugs such as 
phencyclidine or the general anesthetic ketamine, a 
derivative of PCP, produces symptoms that resemble 
the hallucinations associated with schizophrenia; in 
contrast, certain antipsychotic drugs enhance current 
through the NMDA receptor-channels. A particularly 
Control
100
150
200
250
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
–10
0
10
Time (min)
20
30
A  Schaffer collateral pathway LTP
B  Mechanism of LTP
CA1
CA3
Schaffer collateral 
pathway
Extracellular
recording
APV
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
K+
K+
1  Normal
    synaptic
    transmission
2  Induction of
    long-term
    potentiation
3  Expression of
   long-term
   potentiation
Retrograde
signal
Glu
Glu
Glu
Glu
Ca2+/
calmodulin
CA3
neuron
terminal
CA1
neuron
spine
AMPA 
Glu receptor
Dendritic
shaft
Mg2+
NMDA 
Glu receptor
Enhanced
transmitter
release
Presynaptic
targets
Retrograde
messenger
Glu
Glu
Na+
K+
K+
NO? 
Insertion of 
new AMPA
receptor
Na+
K+P
Mg2+
P
NO 
synthase 
CaMKII
P
P
PKC


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     287
Figure 13–10  (Opposite) NMDA receptor-dependent long-
term potentiation of synaptic transmission at Schaffer col-
lateral synapses.
A. Tetanic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral pathway for 
1 second (arrow) induces LTP at the synapses between the 
presynaptic terminals of CA3 pyramidal neurons and the post-
synaptic dendritic spines of CA1 pyramidal neurons. The graph 
shows the size of the synaptic response (extracellular field 
EPSP or fEPSP) as a percentage of the initial response prior to 
induction of LTP. At these synapses, LTP requires activation of 
the NMDA receptor-channels in the CA1 neurons; LTP is com-
pletely blocked when the tetanus is delivered in the presence 
of the NMDA receptor antagonist APV. (Adapted from Morgan 
and Teyler 2001.)
B. A model for the mechanism of long-term potentiation at 
Schaffer collateral synapses.
1. During normal, low-frequency synaptic transmission, glu-
tamate (Glu) released from the terminals of CA3 Schaffer 
collateral axons binds to both NMDA and AMPA receptors in 
the postsynaptic CA1 neurons (specifically at the postsynaptic 
membrane of dendritic spines, the site of excitatory input). 
Sodium and potassium ions flow through the AMPA receptors 
but not through the NMDA receptor-channels, because their 
pores are blocked by Mg2+ at negative membrane potentials.
2. During a high-frequency tetanus, the large depolarization of 
the postsynaptic membrane (caused by the large amount of 
glutamate release resulting in strong activation of the AMPA 
receptors) relieves the Mg2+ blockade of the NMDA receptor-
channels, allowing Ca2+, Na+, and K+ to flow through these 
channels. The resulting increase of Ca2+ in the dendritic spine 
activates calcium-dependent protein kinases—calcium/ 
calmodulin–dependent kinase (CaMKII) and protein kinase C 
(PKC)—leading to induction of LTP. 
3. Second-messenger cascades activated during induction of 
LTP have two main effects on synaptic transmission. Phospho-
rylation through activation of protein kinases, including PKC, 
enhances current through the AMPA receptor-channels, in part 
by causing insertion of new receptors into the postsynaptic 
CA1 neuron. In addition, the postsynaptic cell releases (in ways 
that are still not understood) retrograde messengers that dif-
fuse to the presynaptic terminal to enhance subsequent trans-
mitter release. One such retrograde messenger may be nitric 
oxide (NO), produced by the enzyme NO synthase (shown in 
panel B-2).
striking link with schizophrenia is seen in anti-
NMDA receptor encephalitis, an autoimmune dis-
order in which the production of antibodies to the 
NMDA receptor reduces levels of the receptor in the 
membrane. Individuals with this disorder often expe-
rience severe seizures, most likely a result of the loss 
of inhibitory tone because of a reduction in NMDA 
receptor excitation in GABAergic interneurons, as 
well as psychoses, including hallucinations and other 
symptoms resembling schizophrenia. Treatments that 
reduce antibody levels often lead to complete remis-
sion of these symptoms. The idea that a decrease 
in NMDA receptor function may contribute to the 
symptoms of schizophrenia is further supported by 
recent genome-wide linkage analysis suggesting an 
association between the NR2A gene and schizophre-
nia. One additional link between the NMDA recep-
tor and neuropsychiatric disorders is provided by the 
finding that low doses of ketamine exert a rapid and 
powerful antidepressant action.
Fast Inhibitory Synaptic Actions Are Mediated 
by Ionotropic GABA and Glycine Receptor-
Channels Permeable to Chloride
Although glutamatergic excitatory synapses account 
for the vast majority of synapses in the brain, inhibi-
tory synapses play an essential role in the nervous 
system both by preventing too much excitation and by 
regulating the firing patterns of networks of neurons. 
IPSPs in spinal motor neurons and most central neu-
rons are generated by the amino acid neurotransmit-
ters GABA and glycine.
GABA acts on both ionotropic and metabotropic 
receptors. The GABAA receptor is an ionotropic recep-
tor that directly opens a Cl− channel. The GABAB 
receptor is a metabotropic receptor that activates a 
second-messenger cascade, which often indirectly acti-
vates a K+ channel (Chapter 15). Glycine, a less com-
mon inhibitory transmitter in the brain, also activates 
ionotropic receptors that directly open Cl− channels. 
Glycine is the major transmitter released in the spi-
nal cord by the interneurons that inhibit antagonist 
motorneurons.
Ionotropic Glutamate, GABA, and Glycine 
Receptors Are Transmembrane Proteins Encoded by 
Two Distinct Gene Families
The individual subunits that form the GABAA and 
glycine receptors are encoded by two distinct but 
closely related sets of genes. More surprisingly, 
these receptor subunits are structurally related to the 
nicotinic ACh receptor subunits, even though the 
latter select for cations and are therefore excitatory. 
Thus, as we saw above (Figure 13–4), the three types 
of receptor subunits are members of one large gene 
family.


===== Page 5 =====
288    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Like the nicotinic ACh receptor-channels, the 
GABAA and glycine receptor-channels are pentamers. 
The GABAA receptors are usually composed of two α-, 
two β-, and one γ- or δ-subunit and are activated by 
the binding of two molecules of GABA in clefts formed 
between the two α- and β-subunits. The glycine recep-
tors are composed of three α- and two β-subunits and 
require the binding of up to three molecules of ligand 
to open. The transmembrane topology of each GABAA 
and glycine receptor subunit is similar to that of a 
nicotinic ACh receptor subunit, consisting of a large 
extracellular ligand-binding domain followed by four 
hydrophobic transmembrane α-helices (labeled M1, 
M2, M3, and M4), with the M2 helix forming the lin-
ing of the channel pore (Figure 13–4A). However, the 
amino acids flanking the M2 domain are strikingly 
different from those of the nicotinic ACh receptor. As 
discussed in Chapter 12, the pore of the ACh recep-
tor contains rings of negatively charged acidic residues 
that help the channel select for cations over anions. In 
contrast, the GABA and glycine receptor-channels con-
tain either neutral or positively charged basic residues 
at the homologous positions, which contribute to the 
selectivity of these channels for anions.
Most of the major classes of receptor subunits are 
encoded by multiple related genes. Thus, there are six 
types of GABAA α-subunits (α1–α6), three β-subunits 
(β1–β3), three γ-subunits (γ1–γ3), and one δ-subunit. 
The genes for these different subtypes are often dif-
ferentially expressed in different types of neurons, 
endowing their inhibitory synapses with distinct 
properties. The possible combinatorial arrangements 
of these subunits in a fully assembled pentameric 
receptor provides an enormous potential diversity of 
receptors.
The GABAA and glycine receptors play important 
roles in disease and in the actions of drugs. GABAA 
receptors are the target for several types of drugs that 
are clinically important and socially abused, includ-
ing general anesthetics, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, 
and alcohol. General anesthetics, either gases or inject-
able compounds, induce loss of consciousness and 
are therefore widely used during surgery. Benzodiaz-
epines are antianxiety agents and muscle relaxants that 
include diazepam (Valium), lorazepam (Ativan), and 
clonazepam (Klonopin). Zolpidem (Ambien) is a ben-
zodiazepine compound that promotes sleep. The bar-
biturates comprise a distinct group of hypnotics that 
includes phenobarbital and secobarbital.
The different classes of compounds—GABA, gen-
eral anesthetics, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and 
alcohol—bind to different sites on the receptor but 
act similarly to increase the opening of the GABA 
receptor-channel. For example, whereas GABA binds 
to a cleft between the α- and β-subunits, benzodiaz-
epines bind to a cleft between the α- and γ-subunits. 
In addition, the binding of any one of these classes of 
drug influences the binding of the others. For exam-
ple, a benzodiazepine (or a barbiturate) binds more 
strongly to the receptor-channel when GABA also is 
bound, and this tight binding helps stabilize the chan-
nel in the open state. In this manner, the various com-
pounds all enhance inhibitory synaptic transmission.
How do these different compounds, all acting on 
GABAA receptors to promote channel opening, pro-
duce such diverse behavioral and psychological effects, 
for example, reducing anxiety versus promoting sleep? 
It turns out that many of these compounds bind selec-
tively to specific subunit types, which can be expressed 
in different types of neurons in different regions of 
the brain. For example, zolpidem binds selectively to 
GABAA receptors containing the α1- subunit. In con-
trast, the anxiolytic effect of benzodiazepines requires 
binding to the α2- and γ-subunits.
In addition to being important pharmacological 
targets, the GABAA and glycine receptors are targets 
of disease and poisons. Missense mutations in the 
α-subunit of the glycine receptor underlie an inher-
ited neurological disorder called familial startle disease 
(or hyperekplexia), characterized by abnormally high 
muscle tone and exaggerated responses to noise. These 
mutations decrease the opening of the glycine receptor 
and so reduce the normal levels of inhibitory transmis-
sion in the spinal cord. The poison strychnine, a plant 
alkaloid compound, causes convulsions by blocking 
the glycine receptor and decreasing inhibition. Non-
sense mutations that result in truncations of GABAA 
receptor α- and γ-subunits have been implicated in 
congenital forms of epilepsy.
Chloride Currents Through GABAA and Glycine 
Receptor-Channels Normally Inhibit the 
Postsynaptic Cell
The function of GABA receptors is intimately linked to 
their biophysical properties. Eccles and his colleagues 
determined the ionic mechanism of the IPSP in spinal 
motor neurons by systematically changing the level 
of the resting membrane potential in a motor neuron 
while stimulating a presynaptic inhibitory interneuron 
(Figure 13–11).
When the motor neuron membrane is held at the 
normal resting potential (−65 mV), a small hyperpo-
larizing potential is generated when the presynaptic 
interneuron is stimulated. When the motor neuron 
membrane is held at −70 mV, no change in potential 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     289
Figure 13–11  Inhibitory actions at chemical synapses result 
from the opening of ion channels selective for chloride.
A. In this hypothetical experiment, two electrodes are placed in 
the presynaptic interneuron and two in the postsynaptic motor 
neuron. The current-passing electrode in the presynaptic cell is 
used to produce an action potential; in the postsynaptic cell, it 
is used to alter the membrane potential systematically prior to 
the presynaptic input.
B. Inhibitory actions counteract excitatory actions. 1. A large 
EPSP occurring alone depolarizes the membrane toward EEPSP 
and exceeds the threshold for generating an action potential.  
2. An IPSP alone moves the membrane potential away from the 
threshold toward ECl, the equilibrium potential for Cl−  
(−70 mV). 3. When inhibitory and excitatory synaptic potentials 
occur together, the effectiveness of the EPSP is reduced and 
prevented from reaching the threshold for an action potential.
C. The IPSP and inhibitory synaptic current reverse at ECl. 1. A 
presynaptic spike produces a hyperpolarizing IPSP at the rest-
ing membrane potential (−65 mV). The IPSP is larger when 
the membrane potential is set at −40 mV due to the increased 
inward driving force on Cl−. When the membrane potential is 
set at −70 mV the IPSP is nullified. This reversal potential for 
the IPSP occurs at ECl. With further hyperpolarization of the 
membrane, the IPSP is inverted to a depolarizing postsynaptic 
potential (at −80 and −100 mV) because the membrane poten-
tial is negative to ECl. 2. The reversal potential of the inhibitory 
postsynaptic current measured under voltage clamp. An inward 
(negative) current flows at membrane potentials negative to the 
reversal potential (corresponding to an efflux of Cl−), and an out-
ward (positive) current flows at membrane potentials positive 
to the reversal potential (corresponding to an influx of Cl−).  
(Up arrows = efflux; down arrows = influx.)
Presynaptic
potential
1
2
Postsynaptic
current
Cl–
ﬂux
Postsynaptic
potential
Vm
C  Reversal of inhibitory synaptic potential
ECl
(EIPSP)
–40 mV
–65 mV
–70 mV
EK
–80 mV
–100 mV
A  Experimental setup
Action 
potential
1  EPSP alone
2  IPSP alone
3  EPSP + IPSP
B  Reduction of excitatory synaptic potential by inhibition
+40 mV
0 mV
–55 mV
–65 mV
EPSP alone
EEPSP
–70 mV
Threshold
IPSP alone
IPSP + EPSP
Current
passing
Motor
neuron
Recording
Recording
Current
passing
Inhibitory
interneuron
is recorded when the interneuron is stimulated. But 
at potentials more negative than −70 mV, the motor 
neuron generates a depolarizing response following 
stimulation of the inhibitory interneuron. This reversal 
potential of −70 mV corresponds to the Cl− equilibrium 
potential in spinal motor neurons (the extracellular 
concentration of Cl− is much greater than the intracel-
lular concentration). Thus, at −70 mV, the tendency of 
Cl− to diffuse into the cell down its chemical concen-
tration gradient is balanced by the electrical force (the 
negative membrane potential) that opposes Cl− influx. 
Replacement of extracellular Cl− with an impermeant 
anion reduces the size of the IPSP and shifts the rever-
sal potential to more positive values in accord with 
the predictions of the Nernst equation. Thus, the IPSP 
results from an increase in Cl− conductance.


===== Page 7 =====
290    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 13–12  Inhibition can shape the firing pattern of a 
spontaneously active neuron. Without inhibitory input, the 
neuron fires continuously at a fixed interval. With inhibitory 
input (arrows), some action potentials are inhibited, resulting in 
a distinctive pattern of impulses.
Without
inhibitory
input
With
inhibitory
input
IPSP
The currents through single GABA and glycine 
receptor-channels, the unitary currents, have been 
measured using the patch-clamp technique. Both 
transmitters activate Cl− channels that open in an all-
or-none manner, similar to the opening of ACh and 
glutamate-gated channels. The inhibitory effect of 
GABA and glycine on neuronal firing depends on two 
related mechanisms. First, in a typical neuron, the rest-
ing potential of −65 mV is slightly more positive than 
ECl (−70 mV). At this resting potential, the chemical 
force driving Cl− into the cell is slightly greater than the 
electrical force opposing Cl− influx—that is, the elec-
trochemical driving force on Cl− (Vm − ECl) is positive. 
As a result, the opening of Cl− channels leads to a posi-
tive current, based on the relation ICl = gCl (Vm − ECl). 
Because the charge carrier is the negatively charged 
Cl− ion, the positive current corresponds to an influx 
of Cl− into the neuron, down its electrochemical gradi-
ent. This causes a net increase in the negative charge on 
the inside of the membrane—the membrane becomes 
hyperpolarized.
However, some central neurons have a resting 
potential that is approximately equal to ECl. In such 
cells, an increase in Cl− conductance does not change 
the membrane potential—the cell does not become 
hyperpolarized—because the electrochemical driving 
force on Cl− is nearly zero. However, the opening of Cl− 
channels in such a cell still inhibits the cell from firing 
an action potential in response to a near-simultaneous 
EPSP. This is because the depolarization produced by 
an excitatory input depends on a weighted average of 
the batteries for all types of open channels—that is, 
the batteries for the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
conductances and the resting conductances—with the 
weighting factor equal to the total conductance for a 
particular type of channel (see Chapter 12, Postscript). 
Because the battery for Cl− channels lies near the rest-
ing potential, opening these channels helps hold the 
membrane near its resting potential during the EPSP 
by increasing the weighting factor for the Cl− battery.
The effect that the opening of Cl− channels has on 
the magnitude of an EPSP can also be described in 
terms of Ohm’s law. Accordingly, the amplitude of the 
depolarization during an EPSP, ΔVEPSP is given by:
ΔVEPSP = IEPSP/gl
where IEPSP is the excitatory synaptic current and gl is 
the conductance from all other channels open in the 
membrane, including resting channels and transmitter-
gated Cl− channels. Because the opening of the Cl− 
channels increases the resting conductance, ie, makes 
the neuron more leaky, the depolarization during the 
EPSP decreases. This consequence of synaptic inhibi-
tion is called the short-circuiting or shunting effect.
By counteracting synaptic excitation, synaptic inhi-
bition can exert powerful control over action potential 
firing in neurons that are spontaneously active because 
of the presence of intrinsic pacemaker channels. This 
function, called the sculpting role of inhibition, shapes 
the pattern of firing in such cells (Figure 13–12). In fact, 
this sculpting role of inhibition likely happens in all 
neurons, leading to the temporal patterning of neu-
ronal spiking and to the control of the synchronization 
of neural circuits.
The different biophysical properties of synaptic 
conductances can be understood as distinct mathemat-
ical operations carried out by the postsynaptic neuron. 
Thus, inhibitory inputs that hyperpolarize the cell per-
form a subtraction on the excitatory inputs, whereas the 
shunting effect of the conductance increase performs 
a division. Adding excitatory inputs (or removing 
nonshunting inhibitory inputs) results in summation. 
Finally, the combination of an excitatory input with the 
removal of an inhibitory shunt produces a multiplication. 
These arithmetic effects, however, are often mixed and 
can vary with time as the membrane potential of neu-
rons constantly varies, leading to changes in the driv-
ing force on Cl− through GABAA receptor-channels.
In some cells, such as those with metabotropic 
GABAB receptors, inhibition is caused by the opening 
of K+ channels. Because the K+ equilibrium potential of 
neurons (EK = −80 mV) is always negative to the resting 
potential, opening K+ channels inhibits the cell even 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     291
more profoundly than opening Cl− channels (assum-
ing a similar-size synaptic conductance), generating a 
more “subtractive” inhibition. GABAB responses turn 
on more slowly and persist for a longer time compared 
with GABAA responses.
Paradoxically, under some conditions, the activa-
tion of GABAA receptors in brain cells can cause exci-
tation. This is because the influx of Cl− after intense 
periods of stimulation can be so great that the intracel-
lular Cl− concentration increases substantially. It may 
even double. As a result, the Cl− equilibrium potential 
may become more positive than the resting potential. 
Under these conditions, the opening of Cl− channels 
leads to Cl− efflux and depolarization of the neuron. 
Such depolarizing Cl− responses occur normally in 
many neurons in newborn animals, where the intracel-
lular Cl− concentration tends to be high even at rest. 
This is because the K+-Cl− cotransporter responsible for 
maintaining low intracellular Cl− is expressed at low 
levels during early development (Chapter 9). Depo-
larizing Cl− responses may also occur in the distal 
dendrites of more mature neurons and perhaps also 
at their axon initial segment. Such excitatory GABAA 
receptor actions in adults may contribute to epileptic 
discharges in which large, synchronized, and depolar-
izing GABA responses are observed.
Some Synaptic Actions in the Central  
Nervous System Depend on Other  
Types of Ionotropic Receptors
A minority of fast excitatory synaptic actions in the 
brain are mediated by the neurotransmitter serotonin 
(5-HT) acting at the 5-HT3 class of ionotropic receptor-
channels. These pentameric receptors, which are made 
up of subunits with four transmembrane segments, 
are structurally similar to nicotinic ACh receptors. Like 
the ACh receptor-channels, 5-HT3 receptor-channels are 
permeable to monovalent cations and have a reversal 
potential near 0 mV.
Ionotropic receptors for adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) serve an excitatory function at other selected 
synapses and constitute a third family of transmitter-
gated ion channels. These so-called purinergic recep-
tors (named for the purine ring in adenosine) occur 
on smooth muscle cells innervated by sympathetic 
neurons of the autonomic ganglia as well as on cer-
tain central and peripheral neurons. At these synapses, 
ATP activates an ion channel that is permeable to both 
monovalent cations and Ca2+, with a reversal potential 
near 0 mV. Several genes coding for this family of iono-
tropic ATP receptors (termed the P2X receptors) have 
been identified. The amino acid sequence and subu-
nit structure of these ATP receptors are different from 
the other two ligand-gated channel families. An X-ray 
crystal structure of the P2X receptor reveals that it has 
an exceedingly simple organization in which three 
subunits, each containing only two transmembrane 
segments, surround a central pore (Figure 13–4C).
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synaptic Actions Are 
Integrated by Neurons Into a Single Output
Each neuron in the central nervous system is con-
stantly bombarded by an array of synaptic inputs 
from many other neurons. A single motor neuron, for 
example, may be the target of as many as 10,000 differ-
ent presynaptic terminals. Some are excitatory, others 
inhibitory; some are strong, others weak. Some inputs 
contact the motor cell on the tips of its apical dendrites, 
others on proximal dendrites, some on the dendritic 
shaft, others on the soma. The different inputs can rein-
force or cancel one another. How does a given neuron 
integrate these signals into a coherent output?
As we saw earlier, the synaptic potentials pro-
duced by a single presynaptic neuron typically are 
not large enough to depolarize a postsynaptic cell to 
the threshold for an action potential. The EPSPs pro-
duced in a motor neuron by most stretch-sensitive 
afferent neurons are only 0.2 to 0.4 mV in amplitude. If 
the EPSPs generated in a single motor neuron were to 
sum linearly, at least 25 afferent neurons would have to 
fire together and release transmitter to depolarize the 
trigger zone by the 10 mV required to reach threshold. 
But at the same time the postsynaptic cell is receiving 
excitatory inputs, it may also be receiving inhibitory 
inputs that prevent the firing of action potentials by 
either a subtractive or shunting effect.
The net effect of the inputs at any individual 
excitatory or inhibitory synapse will therefore depend 
on several factors: the location, size, and shape of the 
synapse; the proximity and relative strength of other 
synergistic or antagonistic synapses; and the rest-
ing potential of the cell. And, in addition, all of this 
is exquisitely dependent on the timing of the excita-
tory and inhibitory input. Inputs are coordinated in 
the postsynaptic neuron by a process called neuronal 
integration. This cellular process reflects the task that 
confronts the nervous system as a whole. A cell at any 
given moment has two options: to fire or not to fire 
an action potential. Charles Sherrington described 
the brain’s ability to choose between competing alter-
natives as the integrative action of the nervous system. 


===== Page 9 =====
292    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
He regarded this decision making as the brain’s most 
fundamental operation (see Chapter 56).
Synaptic Inputs Are Integrated at the Axon  
Initial Segment
In most neurons, the decision to initiate an action 
potential output is made at one site: the axon initial 
segment. Here, the cell membrane has a lower thresh-
old for action potential generation than at the cell 
body or dendrites because it has a higher density of 
voltage-dependent Na+ channels (Figure 13–13). With 
each increment of membrane depolarization, more Na+ 
channels open, providing a higher density of inward 
current (per unit area of membrane) at the axon initial 
segment than elsewhere in the cell.
At the initial segment, the depolarization incre-
ment required to reach the threshold for an action 
potential (−55 mV) is only 10 mV from the resting 
level of −65 mV. In contrast, the membrane of the cell 
body must be depolarized by 30 mV before reaching its 
threshold (−35 mV). Therefore, synaptic excitation first 
Figure 13–13  A synaptic potential 
arising in a dendrite can generate an 
action potential at the axon initial seg-
ment.  (Adapted, with permission, from 
Eckert et al. 1988.)
A. An excitatory synaptic potential origi-
nating in the dendrites decreases with 
distance as it propagates passively to the 
soma. Nevertheless, an action potential 
can be initiated at the trigger zone (the 
axon initial segment) because the density 
of the Na+ channels in this region is high 
and thus the threshold for an action poten-
tial is low.
B. Comparison of the threshold for initia-
tion of the action potential at different 
sites in the neuron (corresponding to 
drawing A). An action potential is gener-
ated when the amplitude of the synaptic 
potential exceeds the threshold. The 
dashed line shows the decay of the syn-
aptic potential if no action potential is gen-
erated at the axon initial segment.
A
B
Dendrites
Cell body
Trigger
zone
Myelin
sheath
Threshold
Action potential
Resting membrane potential
Distance from synapse
Synapse
–35
–45
–55
–65
Potential (mV)
Peak synaptic potential
discharges the region of membrane at the initial seg-
ment, also called the trigger zone. The action potential 
generated at this site then depolarizes the membrane 
of the cell body to threshold and at the same time is 
propagated along the axon .
Because neuronal integration involves the sum-
mation of synaptic potentials that spread to the trigger 
zone, it is critically affected by two passive membrane 
properties of the neuron (Chapter 9). First, the mem-
brane time constant helps determine the time course of 
the synaptic potential in response to the EPSC, thereby 
controlling temporal summation, the process by which 
consecutive synaptic potentials are added together in 
the postsynaptic cell. Neurons with a large membrane 
time constant have a greater capacity for temporal 
summation than do neurons with a shorter time con-
stant (Figure 13–14A). As a result, the longer the time 
constant, the greater is the likelihood that two consecu-
tive inputs will summate to bring the cell membrane to 
its threshold for an action potential.
Second, the length constant of the cell determines 
the degree to which the EPSP decreases as it spreads 


