===== Page 1 =====
788    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–3  Lamprey swimming.  The lamprey swims by 
means of a wave of muscle contractions traveling down one 
side of the body 180° out of phase with a similar traveling  
wave on the opposite side (A). This pattern is evident in elec-
tromyogram recordings from four locations along the animal 
during normal swimming (B). A similar pattern is recorded from 
four ventral roots in an isolated cord (C). (Data from S Grillner.)
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
3
4
1
2
Rhythm in intact animal
A
B
C
1
3
2
4
Rhythm in isolated cord
as to transport it forward. The general unit of measure 
of locomotion in limbed vertebrates is the step cycle, 
which is defined as the time between any two succes-
sive events (eg, foot or paw contact of a given limb). 
The step cycle is divided into a swing phase, when the 
foot is off the ground and being transferred forward, 
and a stance phase, when the foot is in contact with 
the ground and propelling the body forward. Based 
on measures of changes in joint angle, each of these 
phases can be further divided into a period of flexion 
(F) followed by an initial period of extension (E1) dur-
ing swing and two additional periods of extension (E2 
and E3) during stance (Figure 33–4A; see below).
Muscles within a single limb must be activated 
and coordinated in a precise spatiotemporal pattern 
(Figure 33–4B) so that the relative time of activation of 
different muscles, the duration of their activity, and the 
magnitude of that activity are coordinated to meet the 
demands of the environment (intralimb coordination).
In the hindlimb, swing is initiated by flexion of the 
knee produced by activation of muscles such as the 
semitendinosus, followed shortly by activation of hip 
and ankle flexors (the F phase). The hip flexors con-
tinue to contract throughout swing, but the activity in 
the knee and ankle flexors is arrested as the leg extends 
in preparation for contact with the support surface (the 
E1 phase). Activity in most extensor muscles begins at 
this stage, before the foot contacts the ground. This 
preparatory prestance phase signifies that the extensor 
muscle activity is centrally programmed and not sim-
ply the result of afferent feedback arising from contact 
of the foot with the ground.
Stance begins with contact of the foot or paw 
with the ground. During early stance (the E2 phase), 
the knee and ankle joints flex due to the acceptance 
of the weight of the body, causing extensor muscles 
to lengthen at the same time they are contracting 
strongly (eccentric contraction). The spring-like yield-
ing of these muscles as weight is accepted allows the 
body to move smoothly over the foot and is essential 
for establishing an efficient gait. During late stance (the 
E3 phase), the hip, knee, and ankle all extend as the 
extensor muscles provide a propulsive force to move 
the body forward.
There is also a requirement for interlimb coordination, 
the precise coupling between different limbs. The cou-
pling between the four legs in quadrupeds, for exam-
ple, can vary quite substantially, dependent on both 
the speed of locomotion and the adopted gait (a walk, 
pace, trot, gallop, or bound). This is particularly true 
of the pattern of coupling between muscles of limbs of 
the same side (homolateral limbs) and for the diagonal 
limbs. The relation between limbs can be characterized 
by the phase difference, with 0 reflecting limbs that 
move together in phase and 0.5 limbs that move fully 
out of phase (ie, in opposite directions). During walk-
ing, activity between the homolateral limbs varies by a 
phase value of 0.25, and three legs are always in contact 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    789
Figure 33–4  Stepping is produced 
by complex patterns of contrac-
tions in leg muscles.
A.  The step cycle is divided into 
four phases. The flexion (F) and first 
extension (E1) phases occur during 
the swing phase, when the foot is off 
the ground, whereas second exten-
sion (E2) and third extension (E3) occur 
during the stance phase, when the 
foot contacts the ground. E2 is char-
acterized by flexion at the knee and 
ankle as the leg begins to bear the 
animal’s weight. The contracting knee 
and ankle extensor muscles lengthen 
during this phase. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Engberg and Lundberg 
1969.)
B. Profiles of electrical activity in 
some of the hind leg flexor (yellow) 
and extensor (blue) muscles in the 
cat during stepping. Although flexor 
and extensor muscles are generally 
active during the swing and stance 
phases, respectively, the overall pat-
tern of activity is complex in both 
timing and amplitude. (Muscles: IP, 
iliopsoas; LG and MG, lateral and 
medial gastrocnemius; PB, posterior 
biceps; RF, rectus femoris; Sartm and 
Sarta, medial and anterior sartorius; 
SOL, soleus; ST, semitendinosus; 
TA, tibialis anterior; VL, VM, and 
VI, vastus lateralis, medialis, and 
intermedius.)
A  Four phases of the step cycle
Hip
Extension
Flexion
0.1 s
Knee
Ankle
B  Activity in hind leg muscles during the step cycle
140
120
100
80
60
40
Joint angle (degrees)
IP
RF
VL/VM/VI
VL/VM/VI
PB/ST
LG/MG
SOL
TA
Swing
F
Flexors:
E1
E2
E3
F
E1
E2
E3
Stance
Sartm
Sarta
IP
Extensors:
RF
LG/MG/SOL
ST/PB
TA
Sartm
Sarta
Swing
Stance
with the ground. During a trot, the diagonal limbs (eg, 
the left hindlimb and the right forelimb) are in phase, 
and the phase difference between homolateral limbs is 
0.5. Phase relationships between limbs of the same gir-
dle (ie, the forelimbs or hindlimbs) are more stable dur-
ing gaits produced by activation of alternating limbs, 
such as a walk or trot (generally out of phase by 0.5 
cycle), compared to synchronous locomotion like a gal-
lop or bound (generally in-phase).
The appropriate generation of the intra- and inter-
limb coordination of activity and the adaptation of 
these patterns of activity according to circumstance is 
one of the major functions of the central nervous sys-
tem during locomotion.


===== Page 3 =====
790    Part V / Movement
The Motor Pattern of Stepping Is Organized  
at the Spinal Level
While the entire nervous system is necessary for an 
animal to produce a rich behavioral repertory, the 
spinal cord is sufficient to generate both the rhythm 
underlying locomotion as well as much of the specific 
pattern of muscle activity required for intra- and inter-
limb coordination.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Graham 
Brown showed that the isolated spinal cord had the 
intrinsic capacity to generate a rudimentary alternat-
ing locomotor pattern around the ankle joint in the 
absence of sensory inputs to the spinal cord (Figure 
33–5). He proposed that locomotor networks control-
ling flexor and extensor activity in the spinal cord 
were organized as half-centers such that when half of 
the circuit was active it would inhibit the other half. 
The center would be released from inhibition through 
some sort of synaptic or neuronal fatigue.
This ground-breaking observation was mostly 
ignored until the mid-1960s and early 1970s, when 
there began a period of intense study of the mecha-
nisms by which the spinal cord could generate a 
rhythmical pattern of activity. Initial studies showed 
Tibialis
anterior
Tibialis anterior
Cut dorsal
roots
Gastrocnemius
Gastrocnemius
Transect
spinal cord
(dorsal roots cut)
Transect
spinal cord
5 s
Figure 33–5  Rhythmic stepping is 
generated by spinal networks.  The 
existence of intrinsic spinal networks 
was first demonstrated in 1911 by 
Thomas Graham Brown who developed 
an experimental preparation in which 
the dorsal roots were cut so that sen-
sory information from the limb could not 
reach the spinal cord. The lower figure 
shows an original record from Graham 
Brown’s study. Rhythmic alternating 
contractions of an ankle flexor (tibialis 
anterior) and an ankle extensor (gastroc-
nemius) are generated by the isolated 
spinal cord and persist for some time 
after the transection.
that stimulation of sensory fibers in spinal cats treated 
with L-DOPA (a precursor of the monoamine transmit-
ters dopamine and norepinephrine) and nialamide (a 
drug that prolongs the action of L-DOPA) could pro-
duce short sequences of rhythmic activity in flexor 
and extensor motor neurons. It was further found that 
groups of interneurons in the spinal cord were acti-
vated in a reciprocal flexor and extensor pattern. This 
organizational feature was consistent with Graham 
Brown’s theory that mutually inhibiting half-centers 
produced the alternating burst activity in flexor and 
extensor motor neurons.
In the half-center model, the spinal cord pro-
duces only the locomotor rhythm, while the pattern 
is sculpted by afferent feedback caused by the move-
ment. However, this view was changed by experiments 
that demonstrated that a well-organized locomotor 
pattern could be observed in decerebrate and spinal 
cats walking on a treadmill after section of the dor-
sal roots, thus removing the afferent feedback (Figure 
33–6A,B). Later experiments in chronic spinal cats in 
which rhythmic afferent feedback was abolished by 
preventing movement (Figure 33–6C) showed that spi-
nal circuits were not only able to intrinsically produce 
a locomotor rhythm but could also produce some of 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    791
the spatiotemporal details of the pattern of activity 
observed in the intact cat (Figure 33–6C).
These observations led to the important concept 
of a central pattern generator (CPG) that can generate 
both the rhythm and the pattern, independent of sen-
sory inputs. Subsequent experiments led to the idea 
that separate components of the CPG are responsible 
for generating the underlying rhythm of locomotion 
within a limb and the spatiotemporal pattern of mus-
cle action in the limb (Figure 33–6D). This notion was 
based on the observation that changes in rhythm and 
pattern can be influenced independently. Other stud-
ies have led to the concept that the CPG is modular, 
allowing independent control of activity around differ-
ent joints.
Experiments in a variety of species have suggested 
that there are probably separate CPGs for each limb. For 
example, experiments using split belts, in which either 
the fore- and hindlimbs or the left and right limbs walk 
on separate treadmill belts, show that animals can inde-
pendently modify step cycle duration in each pair of 
limbs. This organization would allow relatively simple 
descending commands to modify the coupling between 
each CPG and so to alter the pattern of the gait.
CPGs have now been identified and analyzed 
in many rhythmic motor systems, including those 
Figure 33–6  Spinal circuits generate both a rhythm and a 
pattern.
A. Even after removal of all sensory input to the spinal cord by 
cutting the dorsal roots, a decerebrate cat walking on a tread-
mill exhibits a complex motor pattern that is not just a simple 
alternation of flexor and extensor activity. (Abbreviations: l, left; 
EDB, extensor digitorum brevis; LG, lateral gastrocnemius; 
IP, iliopsoas; ST, semitendinosus.) (Adapted, with permission, 
from Grillner and Zangger 1984.)
B. Intravenous injection of L-DOPA and nialamide produces  
a well-organized locomotor pattern in an acute spinal cat with 
the dorsal roots cut. (Abbreviation: l, left; Q, quadriceps;  
r, right.) (Adapted with permission from Grillner and Zangger 
1979. Copyright © 1979 Springer Nature.)
C. Fictive locomotion in a chronic spinal paralyzed cat, demon-
strating the typical pattern of activity in the semitendinosus, 
tibialis anterior (TA), lateral gastrocnemius (LG), and sartorius 
(Sart) muscles in intact cats. (l, left; r, right.) (Adapted from 
Pearson and Rossignol 1991.)
D. Conceptual model of a spinal locomotor central pattern 
generator (CPG) based on studies in decerebrate cats. The 
CPG model is formed of separate rhythm- and pattern-
generating layers. Each of these layers can be modified 
by descending inputs and peripheral afferent information. 
(Adapted from Rybak et al. 2006.)
Rhythm
generator
Motor
neurons
Descending signals
Motor
pattern
Afferent
signals
Flex
Patterning
network
B  Spinal, deafferented, walking
C  Chronic spinal, paralyzed
D  Locomotor pattern generator
1 s
A  Decerebrate, deafferented, walking
ILG
IEDB
IIP
IST
1 s
rST
rSart
rTA
rLG
IQ
IST
rQ
rST
1 s
Ext


===== Page 5 =====
792    Part V / Movement
controlling over-ground locomotion, swimming, fly-
ing, respiration, and swallowing, in both invertebrates 
and vertebrates. In all vertebrates except higher pri-
mates and humans, a prominent locomotor pattern 
can be observed immediately after spinal transection 
when the spinal cord below the transection is activated 
with neuroactive drugs that function as a substitute for 
the descending drive that normally activates the spinal 
locomotor networks (Box 33–1).
The Spinal Circuits Responsible for Locomotion 
Can Be Modified by Experience
Lesion of the spinal cord in otherwise intact adult 
mammals leads to paralysis. In the absence of any fur-
ther intervention, such animals will regain only mini-
mal locomotion. However, when quadrupedal animals 
with complete lesions of the thoracic spinal cord are 
trained daily, they regain a remarkable ability to use 
their hindlimbs to walk on a treadmill.
A similar improvement in locomotion can also be 
obtained from the application of noradrenergic ago-
nists. Indeed, recordings of hindlimb joint angles and 
EMG activity from these animals show that the spinal 
cord isolated from all descending systems can gener-
ate most of the coordinating features in the hindlimb 
that are observed in intact animals. This training effect 
is believed to occur because of an activity-dependent 
reorganization of both internal spinal circuits and the 
modification of synaptic inputs from peripheral affer-
ents that is specific to the training regimen. Indeed, 
cats can be trained specifically to either support their 
weight or to walk, without a transfer of motor skills 
between the two behaviors.
Spinal Locomotor Networks Are Organized Into 
Rhythm- and Pattern-Generation Circuits
The question of how the spinal cord generates the 
complex activity underlying locomotion has been one 
of intense study that has followed three complemen-
tary paths. The earliest experiments directed at this 
issue were performed in the cat and provided impor-
tant information on the functional characteristics of 
different interneuronal populations. However, the 
complex nature of the mammalian spinal cord led 
researchers to identify models with fewer neurons 
in the spinal cord, such as the turtle and two aquatic 
preparations, the tadpole and the lamprey (Box 33–1). 
These latter two models have provided an excellent 
window into the organization of the spinal circuits 
involved in swimming and a foundation for studying 
rhythm and pattern generation in limbed animals. 
Last, the development of important molecular-genetic 
models in the mouse and the zebrafish has provided 
additional insights not available by more traditional 
methods.
The Swimming Central Pattern Generator
The lamprey—a jawless fish—swims like an eel with a 
wave of left–right bending traveling from front to back 
(Figure 33–3A). The spinal cord is made up of about 
100 spinal segments, each containing neurons that can 
generate the rhythm and produce alternation between 
the two sides of the body. The rhythm is generated 
by interconnected glutamatergic excitatory neurons 
endowed with active membrane properties support-
ing rhythm generation. These glutamatergic neurons, 
which are the kernel in the swimming network, excite 
commissural inhibitory neurons, local inhibitory neu-
rons, and motor neurons on the same side of the cord 
(Figure 33–7A).
The commissural interneurons, whose axons cross 
the midline, inhibit the contralateral interneurons 
involved in generating the alternating rhythm as well 
as contralateral motor neurons (Figure 33–7A). Cellu-
lar mechanisms contribute to phase switching in the 
network (Box 33–2). For example, Ca2+ entry triggered 
by bursting in glutamatergic neurons activates their 
calcium-activated K+ channels. The opening of these 
channels hyperpolarizes the cells and enables termi-
nation of the burst. The termination of bursting on 
one side activates the other side by the commissural 
interneurons, thus allowing the contralateral rhythm-
generating interneurons and motor neurons to become 
active. To enable coordination along the body, the seg-
mental networks are connected through long-distance 
descending projections of excitatory and inhibitory 
neurons. This basic organization of interconnected 
excitatory neurons, inhibitory commissural neurons, 
and a rostrocaudal connectivity gradient for interseg-
mental coordination is also found in the tadpole and is 
possibly common to other swimming species.
Molecular and genetic approaches have expanded 
our understanding of the functional organization of 
CPGs in fish and identified two groups of glutamater-
gic interneurons—a group of commissural neurons 
and a group of ipsilaterally projecting neurons—that 
are involved in rhythm generation but at different 
speeds of locomotion. In adult zebrafish, the rhythm-
generating circuit is composed of three functional 
classes of excitatory neurons that drive slow, interme-
diate, and fast pools of motor neurons that are selec-
tively recruited as the speed of swimming increases.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    793
The Quadrupedal Central Pattern Generator
The CPG controlling quadrupedal locomotion has added 
organizational complexity compared to the swimming 
CPG since it must generate both the rhythm and the pat-
tern that involves the sequential flexor-extensor alter-
nation of muscles around different joints within a limb 
(Figure 33–4B), as well as left–right coordination and 
coordination between the forelimbs and hindlimbs. Cir-
cuits controlling the forelimb are located in the cervical 
enlargement, whereas circuits controlling the hindlimb 
are located in the lower thoracic and lumbar spinal cord.
As in the CPG that generates rhythmical swim-
ming activity, glutamatergic excitatory interneurons 
are involved in quadrupedal rhythm generation. Using 
advanced mouse genetics together with a molecular 
code that builds on expression of gene-regulating tran-
scription factors that differentiate spinal neurons into 
classes with specific projection and transmitter pheno-
types (Box 33–3), it has now been shown that the core of 
the rhythm-generating circuits in rodents includes two 
nonoverlapping groups of molecularly distinct gluta-
matergic neurons (Shox2ON and Hb9; Figure 33–7B1).
The flexor (f) and extensor (e) rhythm-generating 
(R) circuits, which are connected by reciprocal inhibi-
tion (Figure 33–7B), drive other neurons in the locomo-
tor network into rhythmicity and provide the rhythmic 
excitation for motor neurons (Figure 33–7B). As has 
been observed in the swimming CPG, ionic channels 
are also likely to contribute to rhythm generation and 
phase switching in the quadrupedal CPG.
The Flexor and Extensor Coordination Circuit
Flexor and extensor activity must be coordinated 
around joints (eg, hip-knee-ankle-toe in the hindlimb) 
to control the limb movement in a precise manner. 
Accordingly, the flexor-extensor alternation around the 
different joints is not simultaneous but has a sequential 
pattern, which suggests that multiple flexor-extensor 
alternating circuits are needed to time muscle actions 
in a limb. The basic flexor-extensor alternation circuits 
are organized in flexor and extensor modules com-
posed of inhibitory and excitatory interneurons that 
are one synapse away from the flexor and extensor 
motor neurons they control (Figure 33–7B,B1).
Inhibitory and excitatory neurons in the mod-
ule provide alternating inhibition and excitation of 
motor neurons. The reciprocally connected inhibitory 
Ia interneurons (Chapter 32) are part of the flexor and 
extensor modules providing the direct motor neuron 
inhibition in a reciprocal fashion (rIa in Figure 33–7B1). 
The rIas belong to the molecularly defined inhibitory 
V1 and V2b neurons (Figure 33–7B1). The excitatory 
neurons that directly excite motor neurons during 
locomotion are likely to belong to multiple classes of 
neurons in the spinal cord, including V2a-Shox2ON and 
the dI3 neurons (Figure 33–7B1).
In this basic scheme, the flexor-extensor modules 
are driven by flexor (fR in Figure 33–7B1) and exten-
sor rhythm-generating circuits (eR in Figure 33–7B1), 
which themselves are reciprocally connected via inhib-
itory neurons (Figure 33–7B), resulting in their out-of-
phase activity.
Left–Right Coordination
Left–right alternation, for both swimming and over-
ground locomotion, depends on crossed inhibition 
produced in two ways: directly by inhibitory commis-
sural neurons or indirectly by excitatory commissural 
neurons, each of which acts on premotor inhibitory 
neurons (Figure 33–7B2). This dual inhibitory system 
has a counterpart in one specific neuronal population, 
the V0 commissural neurons (Figure 33–7B2). Ablation of 
V0 neurons results in loss of left–right alternation at all 
speeds of locomotion. The inhibitory dorsal class of V0 
neurons (V0D), which makes up about half of the V0 pop-
ulation, controls alternating locomotion during walking, 
whereas the excitatory ventral class of V0 neurons (V0V), 
which makes up the remaining half of V0 neurons, con-
trols alternating locomotion during trot. The dual system 
thus serves a speed-dependent role in coordinating alter-
nating gaits (walk and trot). Separate excitatory non-V0 
commissural neurons—possibly the ventral V3 neurons 
(Box 33–3)—are responsible for synchrony in gaits such 
as bound and gallop (Figure 33–7B2).
The dual-mode left–right alternating pathways 
are driven directly by the rhythm-generating neurons 
or indirectly by other non–rhythm-generating excita-
tory neurons, including the V2a-Shox2Off neurons that 
are recruited at high speeds of locomotion and syn-
aptically connect to the V0V neurons. The left–right 
synchronous pathways are active at higher speeds of 
locomotion when the alternating system is suppressed 
or less active.
The speed-dependent changes in the left–right 
alternation circuits in the rodent are an example of 
functional reorganization of the vertebrate locomotor 
network needed to produce diverse motor outputs. 
Similar dynamic circuit reorganization has also been 
demonstrated in zebrafish and in studies of rhythmic 
networks in invertebrates, such as the stomatogastric 
ganglion controlling gut movements in crustaceans, 
where different functional networks emerge from a 
common CPG network.


===== Page 7 =====
794    Part V / Movement
A  Swimming CPG: Rhythm and left–right coordination circuits
B  Quadrupedal CPG
IN
MN
Left-side
muscles
IN
V0D
V0V
Non-
V0
R
Right-side
muscles
CIN
CIN
EN
EN
MN
MN
MN
MN
MN
1  Flexor and extensor coordination
2  Left–right coordination
Midline
fR
fR
eR
eR
fMN
fR
eR
eMN
CINs
Walk
Trot
Bound
V2a-
Shox2ON
Shox2/
Hb9     
V2a-
Shox2OFF
rIa
V1-V2b
Flexor
Extensor
Right- 
side
muscles 
Left- 
side
muscles 
Dorsal
Rhythm
R


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    795
Figure 33–7  (Opposite) Spinal locomotor networks are 
organized into rhythm- and pattern-generation circuits with 
distinct cellular identities.
A. Circuit diagram of swimming central pattern generator (CPG) 
in the lamprey. Rhythm-generating circuits include excitatory 
interneurons (EN) that drive motor neurons (MN), inhibitory 
commissural interneurons (CIN) whose axons project to the 
other half of the cord, and local inhibitory interneurons (IN) with 
axons projecting on the same side of the cord. A single neu-
ron in the diagram represents multiple neurons in the animal. 
Gray neurons, inhibitory; red neurons, excitatory. The vertical 
dashed line indicates the midline. (Data from Grillner 2006.)
B. General circuit diagram for limbed locomotion. Rhythm- 
generating circuits (fR and eR) composed of excitatory neurons on 
either side of the spinal cord drive flexor and extensor muscles 
on the same side through a pattern-generating layer (empty 
box). Rhythm-generating flexor (fR) and extensor (eR) neurons 
are reciprocally connected via inhibitory neurons and are  
connected across the midline via commissural interneurons 
(not shown) that mediate left–right coordination. The diagram 
shows one spinal segment. (Abbreviation: MN, motor neurons.) 
(Data from Kiehn 2016.)
B1. Flexor and extensor alternation is controlled at multiple lev-
els in the locomotor network. One synapse away from flexor (f) 
and extensor (e) motor neurons (MN) are Ia-inhibitory interneu-
rons, which reciprocally innervate antagonist motor neurons 
and each other (Chapter 32). The rIa neurons belong to two 
major groups of molecularly defined inhibitory neurons, V1 and 
V2b, in the ventral spinal cord. Excitatory neurons with differ-
ent molecular markers (including V2a-Shox2ON) provide premo-
tor rhythmic excitation of motor neurons. Rhythm-generating 
Shox2ON or Hb9 neurons (fR and eR) drive both inhibitory and 
excitatory premotor neurons. (Data from Kiehn 2016.)
B2. Rhythm-generating circuits drive left–right coordinating 
circuits composed of a dual inhibitory pathway involved in 
alternation and a single excitatory pathway involved in syn-
chrony. The dual inhibitory pathway is composed of inhibitory 
V0D commissural neurons that directly inhibit rhythm genera-
tion on the other side and excitatory V0V commissural neu-
rons that indirectly inhibit locomotor networks on the other 
side. The inhibitory V0D commissural neuron pathway con-
trols the alternating gait walk. A population of V2a excitatory 
neurons is part of the left–right alternating circuit and con-
nects to V0V commissural neurons. This pathway controls the 
alternating gait trot. Rhythm-generation circuits also drive 
a left–right synchronizing circuit possibly involved in bound, 
composed of non-V0 neurons. Only the projections from the 
left to the right side are shown. (Data from Kiehn 2016.)
Interlimb Coordination
The organization of the networks that couple fore- and 
hindlimbs is not known in detail, but experiments 
using both lesion and genetic ablation suggest that 
these pathways involve both inhibitory and excitatory 
intersegmental connections.
Somatosensory Inputs From Moving Limbs 
Modulate Locomotion
Even though the CPG can produce the precise timing 
and phasing of the muscle activity needed to walk, this 
central pattern is normally modulated by sensory sig-
nals from the moving limbs. Two types of sensory input 
modulate the CPG activity: proprioceptive informa-
tion generated by the active movement of the limb and 
tactile information generated when the moving limb 
meets an obstacle in the surrounding environment.
Proprioception Regulates the Timing and 
Amplitude of Stepping
One of the clearest indications that somatosensory sig-
nals from moving limbs regulate the locomotor cycle 
is that the rate of locomotion in spinal and decerebrate 
cats matches the speed of the motorized treadmill belt 
on which they walk. As the stepping rate increases, the 
stance phase becomes shorter while the swing phase 
remains relatively constant.
This observation suggests that some form of sen-
sory input from the moving limb signals the end of 
the stance phase and thus leads to the initiation of the 
swing phase. The sensory information from the mov-
ing limb is generated by proprioceptors in the muscles 
and joints. These proprioceptors include stretch-sensitive 
muscle spindles in the hip and force-sensitive Golgi 
tendon organs in the ankle that are particularly impor-
tant for facilitating locomotor phase transition.
The influence from the hip was noticed already by 
Sherrington, who showed that rapid extension at the 
hip joint leads to contractions in the hip flexor mus-
cles of chronic spinal cats and dogs. More recent stud-
ies have found that preventing hip extension in a limb 
suppresses stepping in that limb, whereas rhythmically 
moving the hip in an immobilized cat can entrain the 
locomotor rhythm; that is, the stretching of the hip 
muscles causes the timing of the motor output to match 
the rhythm of the externally imposed movements  
(Figure 33–8A). The stretching also activates flexor 
muscle spindles and mimics the lengthening that occurs 
at the end of the stance phase, thus inhibiting extensor 
activity and facilitating activation of the flexor rhythm-
generating circuits in the spinal cord (Figure 33–8B).
Activation of sensory fibers from Golgi tendon 
organs and muscle spindles in ankle extensor muscles 
prolongs the stance phase, often delaying the onset of 


===== Page 9 =====
796    Part V / Movement
Neuronal membrane properties make an important con-
tribution to the function of the central pattern genera-
tor (CPG). Neurons have a variety of K+, Na+, and Ca2+ 
channels that determine their activity and response to 
synaptic inputs. Studies of CPGs in diverse experimental 
models have shown that ion channels may be important 
for promoting rhythmicity, through bursting properties, 
or patterning, through ion channels that affect phase 
transitions or the rate of neuronal discharge.
Bursting and Plateau Properties Amplify 
Cellular Responses
Membrane properties that produce bursting allow cells 
to produce sustained oscillations in the absence of syn-
aptic inputs. These properties are either intrinsic, as in 
cells in the sinusoidal node in the heart, or conditional, 
dependent on the presence of certain neurotransmitters. 
In some small motor CPGs (such as the pyloric network 
in the stomatogastric ganglion, which controls rhythmic 
movements in the gut of crustaceans), intrinsic bursting 
properties are essential for generating the rhythm.
Conditional bursting triggered by glutaminergic 
activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors 
has been described in spinal cord interneurons and 
motor neurons in lamprey, rodents, and amphibians. 
In the lamprey, bursting due to NMDA receptor activa-
tion plays a role in generating swimming. In mammals, 
it is as yet uncertain whether NMDA receptor–induced 
bursting is essential for rhythm generation, although it 
may facilitate excitatory synaptic inputs in the circuit.
Plateau potential is another membrane property that 
may cause a neuron’s membrane potential to jump to a 
depolarized state that will support action potential firing 
without further increase in the excitatory drive. Plateau 
properties amplify and prolong the effect of synaptic 
excitatory inputs and may promote rhythm generation 
and motor output. Plateau properties are generated by 
activation of slowly inactivating L-type Ca2+ channels or 
slowly inactivating Na+ channels. These channels have 
been found in vertebrate interneurons and motor neu-
rons. The expression of plateau properties mediated by 
L-type Ca2+ channels in motor neurons is controlled by 
neuromodulatory neurotransmitters, such as serotonin 
and norepinephrine. The slowly inactivating Na+ chan-
nels are generally not regulated by neurotransmitters. 
Blockage of these channels decreases rhythm generation.
Phase Transitions May Be Regulated by  
Voltage-Gated Ion Channel Activation
Reciprocal inhibition between neurons is a common 
design in locomotor circuits; ion channels activated in 
the subthreshold spike range may enhance or delay 
phase transitions by such inhibition. Three types of 
voltage-gated channels are involved: a transient low 
threshold Ca2+ channel, cation-nonselective permeable 
hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated 
(HCN) channels, and transient K+ channels.
The transient low-threshold Ca2+ channels are inac-
tivated at membrane potentials around rest. Transient 
inhibitory synaptic inputs remove the inactivation. 
When released from synaptic inhibition, activation of 
low-threshold Ca2+ channels will cause a short-lasting 
rebound excitation before the channels inactivate again. 
In the lamprey, spinal cord activation of metabotropic 
GABAB receptors depresses low-threshold Ca2+ channels 
involved in producing the swimming motor pattern. 
The suppression leads to a longer hyperpolarized phase 
and therefore to a slower alternation between antago-
nistic muscles, a possible mechanism for the slowing of 
swimming seen following GABAB receptor activation.
HCN channels are found in many CPG neurons and 
motor neurons and may help neurons escape from inhi-
bition. They are activated by hyperpolarization, such 
as occurs during synaptic inhibition. Their activation 
depolarizes the cell, counteracting the hyperpolariza-
tion. Finally, the kinetics of their activation and deacti-
vation are slow, so they stay open for some time after 
the hyperpolarization is released. The channel kinet-
ics affect the integrative properties of the cell in two 
important ways. First, the depolarization caused by the 
channel opening limits the effect of sustained inhibitory 
inputs and helps the cell escape from inhibition. Second, 
the slow closing following synaptic inhibition leads to a 
rebound excitation promoting the next burst.
Voltage-gated A-type transient K+ channels are 
usually inactivated at resting membrane potential. 
Hyperpolarization removes the resting inactivation, and 
subsequent depolarization will cause a transient activa-
tion of the channel. Their activation will therefore delay 
the onset of the next burst.
Regulation of Spiking Controls How Much 
Cells Are Activated
A number of different ion channels play a role in regu-
lating the firing rate of a cell. Activation and inactivation 
kinetics of Na+ channels are factors. Other important 
channels are sodium- and calcium-activated K+ chan-
nels. The effect of activation of these K+ channels is 
often seen as a slow after-hyperpolarization following 
an action potential or a train of action potentials. Activa-
tion of these channels therefore causes spike train adap-
tation and postactivation inhibition, which contribute to 
burst termination.
Box 33–2  Neuronal Ion Channels Contribute to Central Pattern Generator Function


