===== Page 1 =====
1268    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
In the presence of a female fruit fly, the adult male fly 
engages in a series of essentially stereotyped routines 
that usually culminate in copulation (Figure 51–6A). 
This elaborate male courtship ritual is encoded by a cas-
cade of gene transcription within the brain and periph-
eral sensory organs that masculinizes the underlying 
neural circuitry.
Sex determination in the fly does not depend on 
gonadal hormones as it does in vertebrates. Instead, 
it occurs cell autonomously throughout the body. In 
other words, sexual differentiation of the brain and 
the rest of the body is independent of gonadal sex. The 
male-specific Y chromosome of fruit flies does not bear 
a sex-determining locus. Instead, sex is determined 
by the ratio of X chromosome number to autosome 
number (X:A). A ratio of 1 is determinative for female 
differentiation, whereas a ratio of 0.5 drives male 
differentiation.
The X:A ratio sets into motion a cascade of gene 
transcription and alternative splicing programs that 
leads to the expression of sex-specific splice forms of 
two genes, doublesex (dsx) and fruitless (fru). The dsx gene 
encodes a transcription factor that is essential for sexual 
differentiation of the nervous system and the rest of the 
body, with the sex-specific splice variants responsible 
for male- and female-typical development.
The fru gene encodes a set of putative transcrip-
tion factors that are generated by multiple promoters 
and alternative splicing. In males, one particular mRNA 
(fruM) is translated into functional proteins. In female 
flies, alternative splicing results in the absence of such 
proteins.
Males carrying a genetically modified fru allele that 
can only be spliced in the female-specific manner (fruF) 
have essentially normal, dsx-dependent sexual differen-
tiation. These fruF males therefore resemble wild type 
males externally. However, the loss of FruM in these ani-
mals abolishes male courtship behavior directed toward 
females. These data indicate that FruM is required for 
male courtship and copulation.
Conversely, transgenic female flies carrying a fruM 
allele exhibit male mating behavior toward wild type 
females, indicating that fruM is sufficient to inhibit female 
sexual responses and promote male mating.
Intriguingly, fruF males do not court females and, 
like wild type females, do not reject mating attempts by 
wild type males or fruM females. Similarly, fruM females 
attempt to mate with both fruM and wild type females. 
These data suggest that fruM may also specify sexual 
partner preference, which in the case of wild type males 
would be directed to females.
In wild type females without fruM, the neural path-
ways are wired such that these flies exhibit sexually 
receptive behaviors toward males. When groups of fruF 
males (or fruM females) are housed together, they court 
each other vigorously, often forming long chains of flies 
attempting copulation.
To build the circuitry underlying male courtship 
rituals, fruM appears to initiate cell-autonomous male-
typical differentiation of the neurons in which it is 
expressed. This leads to overt neuroanatomic dimor-
phism in cell number or projections of many classes 
of neurons (Figure 51–6B). Some neurons that express 
fruM are not distributed in dimorphic patterns. In these 
neurons, fruM may regulate the expression of particular 
classes of genes whose products drive a male-specific 
program of physiology and function.
Are neurons that express fruM required for male 
courtship behavior? When synaptic transmission is 
genetically blocked in these neurons in adult males, all 
components of courtship behavior are abolished. Impor-
tantly, these males continue to exhibit normal move-
ment, flight, and other behaviors in response to visual 
and olfactory stimuli. These findings demonstrate that 
fruM appears to be expressed in a neural circuit that is 
essential for and dedicated to male fly courtship.
Box 51–1  Genetic and Neural Control of Mating Behavior in the Fruit Fly


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1269
Figure 51–6  Control of male courtship in the fruit fly 
Drosophila melanogaster.
A. Male flies (labeled with asterisk) engage in a stereotyped 
sequence of behavioral routines that culminate in attempted 
copulation. The male fly orients toward the female and then 
taps her with his forelegs. This is followed by wing extension 
in the male and a species-specific pattern of wing vibrations 
that is commonly referred to as the fly courtship song. If the 
female fly is sexually receptive, she slows down and permits 
the male to lick her genitalia. The female then opens her 
vaginal plates in order to allow the male to initiate copulation. 
All steps in the male mating ritual require the expression of a 
sex-specific splice variant of the fruitless (fru) gene. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Greenspan and Ferveur 2000.)
B. The fru gene encodes a male-specific splice variant that 
is necessary and sufficient to drive most steps in the male 
fly courtship ritual. Fru expression is visualized using a fluo-
rescent reporter protein (green) in transgenic flies. Neuronal 
clusters that express Fru are present in comparable num-
bers in the central nervous system of both male and female 
flies. However, there are regional sex differences in Fru 
expression. A cluster of Fru-expressing neurons is present 
in the male optic lobes (in the area within the white ellip-
ses) but absent in the corresponding regions in the female 
brain. The two male antennal lobe regions (areas within yel-
low ellipses) contain about 30 neurons each, whereas each 
female region has only four to five neurons. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Kimura et al. 2005.)
Tapping
*
Orienting
Female
brain
Male 
brain
Wing vibration
B
A
*
Licking
Attempted copulation
*
*
*


===== Page 3 =====
1270    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–7  Sexual dimorphism in the spinal nucleus of the 
bulbocavernosus muscle in the rat.
A. The spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB) is found in 
the male lumbar spinal cord but is greatly reduced in the female. 
The motor neurons of the nucleus are present in both sexes at 
birth, but the lack of circulating testosterone in females leads to 
death of the SNB neurons and their target muscles. It is thought 
that testosterone in the male circulation promotes the survival 
of the target muscles, which express the androgen receptor. In 
response to testosterone, the muscles provide trophic support 
to the innervating SNB neurons. This muscle-derived survival fac-
tor is likely to be ciliary neurotrophic factor or a related member 
of the cytokine family. Thus, testosterone acts on muscle cells to 
control the sexual differentiation of SNB neurons. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Morris, Jordan, and Breedlove 2004. 
Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.)
B. Dendritic branching of SNB neurons is regulated by  
circulating testosterone in adult male rats. In males, the 
dendrites arborize extensively within the spinal cord (upper 
photo). The fact that the arbors are pruned in adult castrated 
male rats (lower photo) is evidence that this dendritic branch-
ing depends on androgens. The spinal cord is shown in  
transverse section, and the SNB neurons and their dendrites 
are labeled by a retrograde tracer injected into target  
muscles. (From Cooke and Woolley 2005. Reproduced, with 
permission from D. Sengelaub.)
SNB motor neuron
Bulbocavernosus
muscle
Androgen receptor
Testosterone
Trophic 
factors
Trophic 
factors
Male
Female
Muscle atrophy,
motor neuron death
Viable muscle,
motor neuron survival
B
A
Nucleus
Castrated male
Intact male


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1271
Figure 51–8  Sexual dimorphism in the 
avian song circuit.
A. Songbirds have a dedicated neural circuit 
for song production and learning, with dis-
tinct components contributing to learning or 
production. Many of these components are 
sexually dimorphic in songbirds in which only 
one sex sings. For example, in zebra finches, 
only the male sings, and the male high vocal 
center (HVC), robust nucleus of the archistria-
tum (RA), lateral magnocellular nucleus of the 
anterior neostriatum (LMAN), and area X are 
larger in volume and contain more neurons 
than the comparable regions in the female. 
(Abbreviations: DLM, medial nucleus of the 
dorsolateral thalamus; nXIIts, hypoglossal 
nucleus.) (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Brainard and Doupe 2002. Copyright © 2002 
Springer Nature.)
B. In the male, the axons of HVC neurons 
terminate on neurons in the RA nucleus, 
whereas in females, the axons terminate in 
a zone surrounding the nucleus. The sexual 
dimorphism in cell number and connectivity 
of these regions is regulated by estrogen. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Morris, 
Jordan, and Breedlove 2004. Copyright © 
2004 Springer Nature.)
C. The pattern of termination of the axons 
of HVC neurons in the RA nucleus varies in 
males and females at different ages after 
hatching. (Reproduced, with permission,  
from Konishi and Akutagawa 1985. Copyright 
© 1985 Springer Nature.)
C
Day 25
Day 35
Male RA
Female RA
B
A
Female
HVC
RA
RA
HVC
Male
Song learning
Song learning
and production
RA
DLM
nXIIts
HVC
LMAN
Area X


===== Page 5 =====
1272    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Mating Behavior in Mammals Is Controlled 
by a Sexually Dimorphic Neural Circuit in the 
Hypothalamus
In many mammalian species, the preoptic region of the 
hypothalamus and a reciprocally connected region, the 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), play impor-
tant roles in sexually dimorphic mating behaviors 
(Chapter 41; Figure 51–4). In male rodents and mon-
keys, these areas are activated during mating behavior; 
surgical lesions that ablate the preoptic region or the 
BNST result in deficits in male sexual behavior in male 
rodents and, in the case of preoptic lesions, disinhibit 
female-type sexual receptivity in males.
Both the preoptic hypothalamus and the BNST 
are sexually dimorphic, containing more neurons in 
males compared to females. The sexually dimorphic 
nucleus of the preoptic area (SDN-POA) also contains 
significantly more neurons in the male. A male-specific 
perinatal surge of testosterone promotes survival 
of neurons in the SDN-POA and BNST, whereas in 
females, these same cells gradually die off in the early 
postnatal period. This development is similar to that 
in the sexually dimorphic nuclei of the rodent spinal 
cord and the songbird brain, suggesting that androgen 
control is a common mechanism for production of sex 
differences in the size of neuronal populations.
Curiously, the ability of brain testosterone to pro-
mote the survival of neurons is likely to be exerted via 
aromatization into estrogen and subsequent activation 
of the estrogen receptors (see Figures 51–3 and 51–4). 
How then is the neonatal female brain shielded from 
the effects of circulating estrogen? In newborn females, 
there is very little estrogen in the circulation, and the 
small amount present is easily sequestered by binding 
to α-fetoprotein, a serum protein. This explains why 
female mice lacking α-fetoprotein exhibit male-typical 
behaviors and reduced female-typical sexual receptiv-
ity. In this case, then, structural sexual dimorphism 
does not result from differential effects of androgens 
and estrogens, but rather from sex differences in the 
level of hormone available to the target tissue.
Environmental Cues Regulate Sexually 
Dimorphic Behaviors
Sex-specific behaviors are usually initiated in response 
to sensory cues in the environment. There are many 
such cues, and different species use distinct sensory 
modalities to elicit similar responses. Courtship ritu-
als can be triggered by species-specific vocalizations, 
visual signals, odors, and even, in the case of weakly 
electric fish, by electric discharges. Recent genetic and 
molecular studies have led to significant insight into 
how sensory experience controls some of these behav-
iors in rodents. Here, we discuss two examples: the 
regulation of partner choice by pheromones and the 
regulation of maternal behavior by experience during 
infancy.
Pheromones Control Partner Choice in Mice
Many animals rely on their sense of smell to move 
about, obtain food, and avoid predators. They also 
rely on pheromones—chemicals that are produced by 
an animal to affect the behavior of another member of 
the species. In rodents, pheromones can trigger many 
sexually dimorphic behaviors, including mate choice 
and aggression.
Pheromones are detected by neurons in two dis-
tinct sensory tissues in the vertebrate nose: the main 
olfactory epithelium (MOE) and the vomeronasal 
organ (VNO) (Figure 51–9A). It is thought that sensory 
neurons in the MOE detect volatile odors, whereas 
those in the VNO detect nonvolatile chemosensory 
cues. Removal of the olfactory bulb, the only synaptic 
target of neurons in the MOE and the VNO, abolishes 
mating as well as aggression in mice and other rodents. 
These and other studies indicate an essential role for 
olfactory stimulation in initiating mating and fighting.
Genetically engineered disruption of pheromone 
responsiveness in the MOE or VNO reveals that these 
sensory tissues have a surprisingly complex role in the 
mating behavior of mice. A functional MOE is essential 
to trigger male sexual behavior, and an intact VNO is 
required for sex discrimination and directing the male 
to mate with females.
Key to these experiments is the fact that olfactory 
neurons in the MOE and the VNO use different signal 
transduction cascades to convert olfactory input into 
electrical responses. The cation channel Trpc2 appears 
essential for pheromone-evoked signaling in VNO 
neurons; it is not expressed in MOE neurons, which 
use a different signal transduction apparatus. Thus, 
mice lacking the gene trpc2 have a nonfunctional VNO 
and an intact MOE. Mating behavior directed to ani-
mals of the opposite sex appears unaltered in trpc2 
mutant males as well as females.
However, both male and female trpc2 mutants 
often exhibit male sexual behavior with members of 
either sex. For example, trpc2 mutant females mate 
with females in a manner seemingly indistinguishable 
from wild type males, except of course the females can-
not ejaculate. These and other findings suggest that the 
VNO is used to discriminate among sexual partners. 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1273
Figure 51–9  Pheromonal and hormonal control of sexually 
dimorphic behavior in mice.
A. Odorants are detected by sensory neurons in the main olfac-
tory epithelium (MOE), which projects to the main olfactory 
bulb (MOB), and by neurons in the vomeronasal organ (VNO), 
which projects to the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB). Many of 
the central connections of the MOE and VNO pathway are ana-
tomically segregated. (Adapted, with permission, from Dulac 
and Wagner 2006.)
B. Female mice possess the neural circuitry that can activate 
either male (blue) or female (red) mating behaviors. In wild 
type females, pheromones activate female mating behavior and 
inhibit male-type mating. By contrast, in males, pheromones 
activate a circuitry that will initiate fights with males and mating 
with females. (Adapted, with permission, from Kimchi, Xu, and 
Dulac 2007.)
C. Testosterone activates male sexual behavior in male  
and female mice. The data are from a study in which the 
gonads of male and female mice were surgically removed in 
adulthood. None of the animals exhibited male sexual  
behavior with wild type females following surgery. After 
administration of testosterone, mating behavior was 
restored in castrated males, and females displayed  
male sexual behavior. This effect was dose-dependent;  
at the highest dose, male and female mice exhibited  
comparable levels of male-type mating behavior toward  
wild type females. (Adapted, with permission, from Edwards 
and Burge 1971. Copyright © 1971 Springer Nature.)
When the VNO is inactivated, animals can no longer 
distinguish between males and females, and mutants 
therefore exhibit male sexual behavior toward mem-
bers of both sexes. Similarly, adult wild type females 
treated with testosterone also exhibit male sexual 
behavior toward females (Figure 51–9C).
One implication of these studies is that female mice 
possess the neural circuitry for male sexual behav-
ior (Figure 51–9B). Activation of this neural circuit is 
inhibited in wild type females by sensory input from 
the VNO and by the lack of testosterone. Removal 
of the VNO or administration of testosterone activates 
male sexual behavior in females. Male pattern mating 
behavior has been observed in females of many spe-
cies, indicating that the findings in mice are likely to be 
of general relevance. Thus, neural pathways for male 
sexual behavior appear to be present in both sexes. 
Similarly, the female-typical behavior of male rats fol-
lowing hypothalamic lesions suggests that the neural 
pathway for female sexual behavior also exists in the 
Female
Male
Sexually receptive
to males
+
–
+
–
Fight if it is a male,
otherwise mount
C
B
A
Percent showing male sexual behavior
Testosterone (µg)
0
0
25
50
70
100
25
50
100
500
Male
Female
VNO
AOB
MOE
MOB
Pheromones
Odorants


===== Page 7 =====
1274    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–10  Epigenetic regulation of maternal behavior 
in rats. In a common lab rat strain, different mothers lick 
and groom their pups at low or high frequencies, resulting 
in distinct epigenetic modifications at the glucocorticoid 
receptor (GR) promoter. Mothers that lick and groom at high 
frequency raise progeny with low levels of DNA methylation 
at the GR promoter, resulting in higher levels of GR expres-
sion in the hippocampus. Females raised by these mothers 
exhibit higher frequencies of licking and grooming behavior 
with their own pups. Mothers that lick and groom at low 
frequency raise progeny with high DNA methylation levels 
at the GR promoter and lower levels of hippocampal GR 
expression. Females nursed by these mothers subsequently 
exhibit similar low levels of licking and grooming of their 
pups. Pharmacological reversal of the epigenetic modifica-
tions at the GR promoter results in a corresponding change 
in both GR expression and maternal behavior. (Adapted from 
Sapolsky 2004.)
male brain. In such cases, it is the differential regula-
tion of these circuits that underlies the sexually dimor-
phic expression of male and female sexual behaviors.
Early Experience Modifies Later Maternal Behavior
The preoptic area of the hypothalamus and the BNST 
are also important for another set of sexually dimorphic 
behaviors in females. Nursing rodents are good mothers, 
building a nest for their litter, crouching over the pups 
to keep them warm, and returning the pups to the nest 
when they happen to crawl away. Surgical lesioning or 
experimental stimulation of the preoptic region abolishes 
or activates these maternal behaviors, respectively.
Studies of these behaviors have shed light on 
variations among individual females and how these 
differences exert lifelong effects on behavior of the off-
spring. Female lab rats exhibit distinct, stable forms of 
maternal care: Some lick and groom (LG) their pups 
frequently (high-LG mothers), whereas others lick 
and groom less frequently (low-LG mothers). Female 
offspring of high-LG mothers display high-LG activ-
ity when they themselves become mothers compared 
to female offspring of low-LG mothers (Figure 51–10). 
Moreover, pups of high-LG mothers show less anxiety-
like behaviors in stressful conditions than do the pups 
of low-LG mothers.
These results suggested that levels of licking and 
grooming behavior and stress responses are genetically 
determined. However, studies by Michael Meaney 
and his colleagues provide an alternative explana-
tion. When female rat pups are transferred from 
Decreased methylation
of GR promoter
Glucocorticoid 
receptors
More frequent licking 
and grooming
GR
GR
Increased methylation
of GR promoter
Glucocorticoid 
receptors
Less frequent licking 
and grooming
More frequent licking 
and grooming
Less frequent licking 
and grooming
Pharmacologically
reversible
Maturation
Maturation
Offspring
Mother
Offspring
Mother


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 51 / Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System    1275
their mother to a foster mother at birth, their mater-
nal behavior and stress responses as adults resemble 
those of their foster mother rather than those of their 
biological mother. Thus, experience in infancy can lead 
to lifelong behavioral patterns. Because these patterns 
impact maternal behavior, their influence can endure 
over many generations.
How does brief and early experience lead to such 
long-lasting changes? One mechanism involves a 
covalent modification of the genome. Stress responses 
are coordinated by glucocorticoids acting on gluco-
corticoid receptors in the hippocampus. Throughout 
life, tactile stimulation, including grooming, leads to 
transcriptional activation of the glucocorticoid recep-
tor gene, which ultimately leads to reduced release of 
hypothalamic hormones that trigger stress responses. 
Tactile stimulation during early life also regulates the 
glucocorticoid receptor gene in a second way. A key 
site in the glucocorticoid receptor gene is methylated 
by the enzyme DNA methyltransferase, leading to 
gene inactivation. Initially, gene methylation occurs 
in all pups, but pups reared by high-LG mothers are 
selectively demethylated. Thus, in animals reared by 
high-LG mothers, the effects of adult experience are 
potentiated. This is an example of epigenetic modifi-
cation by which genes can be turned on or off more 
or less permanently. These animals exhibit blunted 
behavioral responses to stressful stimuli later in life.
What are the biological links between early expe-
rience and behavioral variation? A peptide hormone, 
oxytocin, plays a major role. Classic work showed that 
oxytocin regulates provision of milk by the mother, 
which occurs via reflex ejection in response to suck-
ling (milk let-down). Oxytocin is synthesized by neu-
rons in the hypothalamus and released into the general 
circulation through their projections in the posterior 
pituitary. It elicits smooth muscle contraction in the 
mammary gland, resulting in milk ejection. Oxytocin 
release from the pituitary is controlled by suckling, 
which provides a sensory stimulus that is conveyed to 
the hypothalamus by spinal afferent nerves.
Oxytocin and a related polypeptide hormone vas-
opressin also play important roles in regulating mater-
nal bonding and other social behaviors (Chapter 2). In 
these cases, experience appears to modulate behaviors 
by affecting both release of oxytocin and levels of the 
oxytocin receptor in specific brain areas. In both rats 
and voles, individual differences in the care females 
provide their offspring correlate with variations in 
oxytocin receptor level in specific brain areas. Espe-
cially noteworthy is that oxytocin receptor levels in 
several regions are higher in female offspring reared 
by high-LG mothers than in female progeny of low 
LG-mothers. Thus, sensory stimulation may affect 
activity of these polypeptide hormone systems, which 
in turn regulate maternal and other social behaviors.
A Set of Core Mechanisms Underlies Many Sexual 
Dimorphisms in the Brain and Spinal Cord
In the previous few sections, we described neural cir-
cuits that regulate several sexually dimorphic behav-
iors. Can we discern any common themes?
A variety of sexually dimorphic neural circuits, or 
wiring diagrams, can in principle generate sex differ-
ences in behavior (Figure 51–11). Although it is chal-
lenging to trace the chain of causality from genetic 
factors to dimorphic circuits to sex-specific behaviors, 
there are a few general possibilities. In one, a neural 
circuit, from sensory input to motor output, might be 
unique to one sex. In fact, this alternative is seldom 
encountered. Most behaviors are shared between the 
sexes, and even behaviors such as feeding, maternal 
retrieval of a pup by the scruff of its neck, or biting 
(during territorial scuffles between males) all call upon 
similar jaw movements. Consistent with this com-
monality, it appears that most sexual dimorphisms in 
behavior arise from sex differences in key neuronal 
populations within common circuits. The activity and 
connectivity of these populations alter behavioral out-
put in a male- or female-typical manner.
Estrogen can act not only during development 
but also in adults to periodically reconfigure presyn-
aptic connectivity within a hypothalamic neural cir-
cuit, ensuring that female mice only mate when they 
are ovulating and fertile. These studies paint a picture 
of dynamic neural circuits in the female brain: Wir-
ing diagrams are plastic and responsive to hormonal 
changes across the estrous cycle, which is analogous to 
the menstrual cycle in humans. Similarly, estrogen also 
exerts cycle-related effects on dendritic spine plasticity 
in other brain regions, although the behavioral conse-
quences in these instances are less well understood.
Another recurring theme in the developing brain 
is that masculinization is controlled by estrogen dur-
ing the organizational phase. This control has pro-
found enduring effects on social behaviors in adult life. 
Testosterone (which is aromatized into estrogen) or 
estrogen treatment of neonatal rodent females mascu-
linizes the brain. As adults, these females are no longer 
sexually receptive to males, and in fact display male-
typical social interactions, albeit at reduced intensity. 
Providing testosterone to these females, to mimic adult 
levels of testosterone in males, boosts the intensity of 
social behaviors, including territorial aggression (the 
propensity of animals to fight over territory or mates), 


===== Page 9 =====
1276    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 51–11  Possible circuit configurations that underlie 
sex differences in behavior. Neural circuit diagrams can be 
configured to generate sex differences in behaviors. Although 
it is possible to envision a neural circuit entirely exclusive to 
one or the other sex, most behaviors are shared between 
the sexes, and the current consensus is that sex differences 
in behavior or physiology reflect sexual dimorphisms in key 
neuronal populations embedded within an otherwise shared 
neural circuit. Such sexual dimorphisms have been found at 
the level of sensory neurons, motor neurons (as discussed for 
spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus neurons), or neurons 
interposed between sensory and motor pathways (such as the 
BNST and the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area).
to male-typical levels. Thus, the perinatal surge of testos-
terone acts largely via aromatization into estrogens to 
masculinize the brain, whereas in adult life, both tes-
tosterone and estrogen facilitate the display of male-
typical social interactions (Figure 51–12A).
These findings imply that male mice lacking andro-
gen receptor exclusively in the nervous system should 
not only have male genitalia but also exhibit male pat-
terns of social behavior, albeit at reduced intensity. This 
has in fact been borne out nicely by genetic engineering 
studies in mice; such mutant male mice indeed appear 
indistinguishable externally from control males, but 
they exhibit male-type sexual and aggressive behaviors 
with diminished intensity. However, there is growing 
evidence that the developmental control of masculini-
zation of the brain by estrogen has shifted during evo-
lution such that testosterone may be the predominant 
masculinizing agent in primates, including humans.
How do the actions of the limited number of sex 
hormones modulate the display of a large array of 
complex social interactions such as courtship vocali-
zations (similar to songbirds, many animals, including 
mice, vocalize as part of their mating ritual), sexual 
behavior, marking (the propensity of animals of many 
species to claim territory with pheromones secreted 
in bodily fluids), and aggression? As described earlier 
in this chapter, sex hormones bind to cognate recep-
tors to modulate gene expression in target cells. These 
steroids are available at different times, amounts, and 
places in the brain of the two sexes. Accordingly, sex 
hormone–regulated genes are expressed in sexually 
dimorphic patterns that are also different for different 
brain regions. These genes regulate differentiation and 
adult function of neural circuits along male- or female-
typical lines (Figure 51–12B).
Experimental inactivation of such sex hormone–
regulated genes reveals that individual genes influ-
ence only a subset of the sexually dimorphic social 
interactions without altering the entire behavioral pro-
gram of males and females. Thus, an additional emerg-
ing theme is that sex hormones control differentiation 
and function of neural circuits in a modular manner, 
with different sex hormone–regulated genes acting 
in distinct neuronal populations to regulate separate 
aspects of male- or female-typical behaviors. In short, 
there is no single neuronal population that governs 
Entire circuit
Sensory neurons
Motor neurons
Intermediary neurons
Male typical behaviors
A
B
Sensory
neurons
Motor
neurons
Intermediary
neurons
Sexual
dimorphism
Male circuitry
(activated)
Female circuitry
(not activated)


