===== Page 1 =====
636    Part IV / Perception
orientations within the plane of each saccular macula, 
but the maculae are oriented vertically in nearly parasag-
ittal planes. The saccules are therefore especially sensi-
tive to vertical accelerations. Certain saccular hair cells 
also respond to accelerations in the horizontal plane, in 
particular those along the anterior–posterior axis.
Central Vestibular Nuclei Integrate Vestibular, 
Visual, Proprioceptive, and Motor Signals
The vestibular nerve projects ipsilaterally from the 
vestibular ganglion mainly to four vestibular nuclei 
(medial, lateral, superior, and descending) in the dor-
sal part of the pons and medulla, in the floor of the 
fourth ventricle. Many vestibular nerve fibers also 
bifurcate, sending a direct projection to the fastigial 
nucleus, the nodulus and uvula, and the reticular for-
mation (Figure 27–8A). These nuclei integrate signals 
from the vestibular organs with signals from the spinal 
cord, cerebellum, and visual system.
The vestibular nuclei project, in turn, to many cen-
tral targets, including the oculomotor nuclei, reticular 
and spinal centers concerned with gaze and postural 
movement, and the thalamus (Figure 27–9). Many ves-
tibular nuclei neurons have reciprocal connections with 
the cerebellum, primarily in the floculo-nodular lobe, 
that form important regulatory mechanisms for eye 
movements, head movements, and posture (Figures 
27–8 and 27–9). The vestibular nuclei receive inputs 
from the premotor cortex, the accessory optic system 
(nucleus of the optic tract), the neural integrator nuclei 
(nucleus prepossitus hypoglossi and interstitial nucleus 
of Cajal), and the reticular formation (Figure 27–8). 
Further projections from the vestibular nuclei reach 
the rostral and caudal lateral medulla nuclei that are 
involved in regulation of blood pressure, heart rate, res-
piration, and bone remodeling, as well as the parabra-
chial nucleus for homeostasis modulation. Finally, there 
are projections from the vestibular nuclei to the medial 
geniculate (auditory) nuclei, as well as the supragenual 
nucleus and dorsal tegmental nucleus, which contribute 
to spatial orientation (Figure 27–9).
The superior and medial vestibular nuclei receive 
fibers predominantly from the semicircular canals in 
the medial regions and some otolith input in the lateral 
regions (Figure 27–8). They send fibers predominantly 
to the cerebellum, reticular formation, thalamus, ocu-
lomotor centers, and spinal cord (Figure 27–9). Ocu-
lomotor center outputs include the three oculomotor 
nuclei (abducens, oculomotor, trochlear), as well as 
the neural integrators for converting head velocity 
into head position signals in the nucleus hypoglossi 
(horizontal eye movements) and interstitial nucleus 
of Cajal (vertical eye movements). These nuclei are 
described in some detail later.
Another major output pathway concerned with 
gaze control arises from the medial vestibular nucleus 
(as well as lesser projections from the descending and 
lateral vestibular nuclei) and projects bilaterally to the 
cervical spinal cord through the medial vestibulospi-
nal tract (Figure 27–9; see Chapter 35). There are two 
categories of medial vestibulospinal fibers. Vestibulo-
spinal neurons project only to the spinal cord to control 
neck musculature. Vestibulo-ocular neurons project to 
both the spinal cord and the oculomotor nuclei and are 
involved in coordinated eye and head movements to 
maintain gaze stability.
The lateral vestibular nucleus (Deiters’ nucleus) 
receives fibers from the semicircular canals medially 
and the otolith organs laterally. There is a major output 
to all levels of the ipsilateral spinal cord through the lat-
eral vestibulospinal tract that is concerned principally 
with postural reflexes through modulation of limb 
and axial musculature (Figure 27–9). Lateral vestibu-
lar nuclei neurons also project heavily to the reticular 
formation. The descending vestibular nucleus receives 
predominantly otolithic input, but also receives semi-
circular canal fibers medially, and projects to the cer-
ebellum, reticular formation, and spinal cord (medial 
vestibulospinal tract). The primary neurotransmitters 
for excitatory vestibular nuclear projections include 
glutamate, whereas the inhibitory projections are 
either glycine or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Vestibu-
lar projections to the spinal systems are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 36.
The Vestibular Commissural System Communicates 
Bilateral Information
Many of these vestibular nuclei neurons receive con-
vergent motion information from the opposite ear 
through an inhibitory commissural pathway that uses 
GABA as a neurotransmitter (Figure 27–8B). The com-
missural pathway is highly organized according to the 
type of receptor from which information is received. 
For example, cells receiving signals from the ipsilat-
eral horizontal excitatory canal will also receive sig-
nals from the contralateral horizontal canal through an 
inhibitory interneuron. Due to the directional selectiv-
ity of the receptors in each ear, the contralateral hori-
zontal canal input will always be decreased during 
an ipsilateral head turn, in effect “disinhibiting” the 
inhibitory input from the contralateral side.
The effect of the commissural system is to increase 
the response of the vestibular nuclei neuron and 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    637
Figure 27–8  Afferent fiber and central projections to the 
vestibular nuclei.
A. Afferent fibers from vestibular receptors terminate in the 
brain stem and cerebellum. Fibers from semicircular canals 
project primarily to the medial portions of the superior and 
medial vestibular nuclei, the descending vestibular nucleus, the 
cerebellum (nodulus and uvula), and the reticular formation. Fib-
ers from the otoliths primarily project to the lateral portions of 
all vestibular nuclei, the nodulus and uvula, and the reticular for-
mation. (Adapted, with permission, from Gacek and Lyon 1974.)
B. Central projections to the vestibular nuclei arise from a 
number of cortical, brain stem, and spinal cord regions. These 
include the premotor and multisensory cortices, accessory 
optic nuclei, cerebellum, neural integrator nuclei, reticular for-
mation, spinal cord, and commissural fibers from the contralat-
eral vestibular nuclei.
A Afferent projections
to vestibular nuclei
B Central projections 
to vestibular nuclei
Superior 
nucleus
Fibers from
horizontal 
and anterior 
canals
Fibers from
posterior
canals
Fibers
from
utricle
Fibers
from
saccule
Lateral
nucleus
Descending
nucleus
Medial
nucleus
Medial
nucleus
Neural
integrator
Reticular
formation
Premotor and
multisensory
cortex
Accessory
optic nuclei
Spinal
proprioceptor
Cerebellum
Vestibular
nuclei
Vestibular
nuclei
Commissural
ﬁbers
Reticular
formation
Cerebellum


===== Page 3 =====
638    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–9  (Left) Output projections from the vestibular 
nuclei.  The vestibular nuclei project to a number of brain 
regions below the cortical level. Two separate descending 
pathways project through the lateral and medial vestibulospinal 
tracts (LVST, MVST) to terminate in the spinal cord. The ves-
tibular nuclei also project to the reticular formation and the lat-
eral medullary nuclei in the brain stem. Ascending projections 
to the supragenual nucleus, the dorsal tegmental nucleus, the 
oculomotor nuclei (abducens, oculomotor, and trochlear), and 
the neural integrator nuclei are very prominent (red line, excita-
tory; gray line, inhibitory), as are projections to the cerebellum 
(nuclei, nodulus, and uvula). Other prominent vestibular projec-
tions terminate in the geniculate nuclei and the thalamus (ven-
tral lateral, posterior, and intralaminar thalamic regions).
decrease noise from the incoming afferent signal, giv-
ing rise to a “push-pull” vestibular function. From an 
engineering point of view, the “push-pull” set point 
in the nuclei neurons constantly updates canal signals 
from the opposing ear to act as a comparator junction 
and can explain the relatively high spontaneous fir-
ing rate of canal afferents at nearly 100 spikes/s. For 
example, during a leftward head turn, left brain stem 
nuclei neurons receive high firing rate signals from the 
left horizontal canal and low firing rate signals from 
the right horizontal canal. The comparison of activity 
is interpreted as a left head turn (Figure 27–5). Simi-
lar comparisons between signals also occur for inputs 
from the anterior semicircular canal on one side and 
the posterior semicircular canal on the opposite ear 
side. Thus, for rotational motion in any head plane, the 
comparator is able to determine the direction of move-
ment with great specificity.
Any disruption of the normal balance between left 
and right ear canal inputs (eg, from trauma or disease in 
the receptor organs or nerve) will be interpreted by the 
brain as a head rotation, even though the head is sta-
tionary. These effects often lead to illusions of spinning 
or rotating that can be quite upsetting and may produce 
nausea or vomiting. However, over time, the commissural 
fibers provide for vestibular compensation, a process by 
which the loss of unilateral vestibular receptor function 
is partially restored centrally and behavioral responses 
such as the vestibulo-ocular reflex mostly recover.
Combined Semicircular Canal and Otolith Signals 
Improve Inertial Sensing and Decrease Ambiguity 
of Translation Versus Tilt
In some instances, the vestibular input from a single 
receptor may be ambiguous. For example, Einstein 
(1908) showed that linear accelerations are equivalent 
whether they arise from translational motion or tilts of 
the head relative to gravity. The otolith receptors cannot 
Vestibular
nuclei
Thalamus
Dorsal
tegmental
nucleus
Reticular
formation
Neural
integrator
Cerebellum
LVST
Geniculate
nuclei
Oculomotor
nuclei
Cervical
spinal cord
Lower
spinal cord
Supragenual
nucleus
Rostral and caudal
lateral medulla nuclei
MVST


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    639
Figure 27–10  Vestibular inputs signaling body posture and 
motion can be ambiguous.  The postural system cannot dis-
tinguish between tilt and linear acceleration of the body based 
on otolithic inputs alone. The same shearing force acting on 
vestibular hair cells can result from tilting of the head (left), 
which exposes the hair cells to a portion of the acceleration (a) 
owing to gravity (Fg), or from horizontal linear acceleration of 
the body (right).
discriminate between the two: So how is it that we can 
tell the difference between translating rightward and 
tilting leftward, where the linear acceleration signaled 
by the otolith afferents is the same (Figure 27–10)?
It is now well established that convergent vestib-
ular nuclei and cerebellar neurons use combined sig-
nals from both the semicircular canals and the otolith 
receptors and some simple computations to discrimi-
nate between tilt and translation. As a result, some 
central vestibular and cerebellar cells encode head 
tilt, whereas other cells encode translational motion, 
which, as we will see, is extremely important for the 
control of head and eye movements.
Vestibular Signals Are a Critical Component of 
Head Movement Control
An important discovery is the differing responses in 
some vestibular nuclei neurons to actively versus 
Fg
Subject tilts to his left
a
Subject is moved right
a
Increased ﬁring 
of afferents
Increased ﬁring 
of afferents
passively generated head movements. Specifically, 
in contrast to vestibular afferents, some neurons in 
the vestibular nuclei and cerebellum well known 
for responding to vestibular stimuli during passive 
movement lose or reduce their sensitivity during 
self-generated movement. The preferential response 
to passive motion, or to the passive components of 
combined active and passive motion, has been inter-
preted as sensory prediction error signals: The brain 
predicts how self-generated motion activates the ves-
tibular organs and subtracts these predictions from 
afferent signals. Such error signals are important for 
the on-line control of head movement, as well as head 
movement estimation.
Computationally, these properties have been 
interpreted quantitatively using concepts common 
to all sensorimotor systems; that is, active and pas-
sive motion signals are processed by internal models 
of the motion sensor (ie, the canals, otolith organs, 
and neck proprioceptors). The brain uses an inter-
nal representation of the laws of physics and sen-
sory dynamics (which can be elegantly modeled as 
forward internal models of the sensors) to process 
vestibular signals. Without such error signals, accu-
rate self-motion estimation would be severely com-
promised. These computational insights suggest that, 
unlike early interpretations, vestibular signals remain 
critically important when coupled to self-motion esti-
mation and head movement control during actively 
generated head movements.
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Stabilize the Eyes 
When the Head Moves
In order to see clearly and maintain focus on visual 
objects during head motion, the eyes maintain foveal 
fixation through a series of vestibulo-ocular reflexes 
(VORs). If you shake your head back and forth while 
reading, you can still discern words because of the 
VORs. If instead you move the book at a similar speed 
while holding your head steady, you can no longer 
read the words.
In the latter instance, vision provides the brain 
with the only corrective feedback for stabilizing of the 
image on the retina, and visual processing in verte-
brates is much slower (around 100 ms latency) and less 
effective than vestibular processing (around 10 ms) 
for image stabilization. The vestibular apparatus sig-
nals how fast the head is rotating, and the oculomotor 
system uses this information to stabilize the eyes to fix 
visual images on the retina.


===== Page 5 =====
640    Part IV / Perception
There are two components of VORs. The rotational 
VOR compensates for head rotation and receives its 
input predominantly from the semicircular canals. The 
translational VOR compensates for linear head move-
ment. These two VOR responses arise from connec-
tions from vestibular nuclei neurons to the abducens, 
oculomotor, and trochlear nuclei (Figure 27–9).
The Rotational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 
Compensates for Head Rotation
When the semicircular canals sense head rotation in 
one direction, the eyes rotate in the opposite direc-
tion at equal velocity in the orbits (Figure 27–11). This 
compensatory eye rotation is called the vestibular 
slow phase, although it is not necessarily slow: The 
eyes may reach speeds of more than 200 degrees per 
second if the head’s rotation is fast. During fast head 
movements, the VOR must act quickly to maintain sta-
ble gaze. A trisynaptic pathway, the three-neuron arc, 
connects each semicircular canal to the appropriate eye 
muscle (Figure 27–11).
The rotational VOR represents a phylogenetically 
old reflex. Many invertebrates and all vertebrate spe-
cies, from amphibians, reptiles, fish, and birds to non-
human primates, have the ability to reflexively rotate 
their eyes opposite to the direction of head rotation, 
thus keeping the visual world stable on the retina. 
Primary afferents from the horizontal semicircular 
canals send excitatory signals through the vestibular 
nuclei and the medial longitudinal fasciculus to the 
contralateral abducens nucleus (Figure 27–11). Abdu-
cens motor neurons send impulses via cranial nerve 
VI to excite the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. At the 
same time, abducens interneurons send excitatory sig-
nals to motor neurons in the contralateral oculomotor 
nucleus, which innervates the medial rectus muscle 
(see Chapter 35 for details on other projections).
The three-synapse pathway illustrated in Figure 
27–11 is not sufficient to elicit appropriate compen-
satory eye movements. This is because the afferent 
signal from the semicircular canals is proportional to 
head velocity, while the compensatory eye movement 
requires eye position changes. To convert velocity to 
position requires temporal integration (simple calcu-
lus) that occurs through neural networks in the brain 
stem nuclei for most head motion speeds. However, at 
high rotation frequencies, the viscoelastic properties of 
the eyeball, eye muscles, and surrounding tissues pro-
vide an additional integration step. Thus, the rotational 
VOR is thought to consist of two parallel processes.
The first process consists of the direct neural path-
way known as the three-neuron arc (Figure 27–11). 
The second neural integrator process consists of 
additional parallel pathways that ensure that the cor-
rect proportion of velocity and position commands 
are delivered to the oculomotor nuclei to move the 
eye appropriately (Figure 27–9 and see Chapter 35). 
Without this second indirect integrator pathway, the 
response to a head rotation would initially bring the 
eye to the correct position, but the eye would drift 
away from that position since the oculomotor neurons 
would lack the tonic input to compensate for the elas-
tic restoring forces of the eyeball (Chapter 35). This is 
exactly what happens after lesions of brainstem and 
cerebellar structures that are thought to participate in 
this neural integration (eg, the prepositus hypoglossi 
and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal; Figure 27–9). It 
is generally thought that the integrator pathway is 
shared by all conjugate eye movement systems (sac-
cades, smooth pursuit, and the VOR), although the 
direct pathway is at least partly segregated for dif-
ferent types of eye movements (ie, VOR, smooth pur-
suit, saccades).
With continued head rotation, the eyes eventually 
reach the limit of their orbital range and stop moving. 
To prevent this, a rapid saccade-like movement called 
a quick phase displaces the eyes to a new point of fixa-
tion in the direction of head rotation.
If rotation is prolonged, the eyes execute alter-
nating slow and quick phases called nystagmus  
(Figure 27–12). Although the slow phase is the primary 
response of the rotational VOR, the direction of nys-
tagmus is defined in clinical practice by the direction 
of its quick phase. Since prolonged rightward rotation 
excites the right horizontal canal and inhibits the left 
horizontal canal, leftward slow phases and a right-
beating nystagmus result.
If the angular velocity of the head remains con-
stant, the inertia of the endolymph is eventually over-
come, as in the earlier coffee cup example. The cupula 
relaxes and vestibular nerve discharge returns to its 
baseline rate. As a consequence, slow-phase velocity 
decays and the nystagmus stops, although the head is 
still rotating.
In fact, the nystagmus lasts longer than would be 
expected based on cupular deflection. By a process 
called velocity storage, a brain stem network provides 
a velocity signal to the oculomotor system, although 
the vestibular nerve no longer signals head movement. 
Eventually, however, the nystagmus does decay and 
the sense of motion vanishes in darkness. Further, the 
same rotation in the presence of a visual surround acti-
vates the optokinetic reflex (Chapter 35) and elicits a 
steady-state nystagmus pattern that is sustained indef-
initely. The interactions between canal and optokinetic 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    641
Figure 27–11  The horizontal vestibulo-ocular reflex. Similar 
pathways connect the anterior and posterior canals to the verti-
cal recti and oblique muscles.
A. Leftward head rotation excites hair cells in the left hori-
zontal canal, thus exciting neurons that evoke rightward eye 
movement. The vestibular nuclei include two populations of 
first-order neurons. One lies in the medial vestibular nucleus 
(M); its axons cross the midline and excite neurons in the right 
abducens nucleus and nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (P). The 
other population is in the lateral vestibular nucleus (L); its axons 
ascend ipsilaterally in the tract of Deiters and excite neurons in 
the left oculomotor nucleus, which project in the oculomotor 
nerve to the left medial rectus muscle.
   The right abducens nucleus has two populations of neurons. 
A set of motor neurons projects in the abducens nerve and 
excites the right lateral rectus muscle. The axons of a set of 
interneurons cross the midline and ascend in the left medial 
longitudinal fasciculus to the oculomotor nucleus, where they 
excite the neurons that project to the left medial rectus muscle. 
These connections facilitate the rightward horizontal eye move-
ment that compensates for leftward head movement. Other 
nuclei shown are the superior (S) and descending (D) vestibular 
nuclei.
B. During counterclockwise head movement, leftward 
eye movement is inhibited by sensory fibers from the left 
horizontal canal. These afferent fibers excite neurons in 
the medial vestibular nucleus that inhibit motor neurons 
and interneurons in the left abducens nucleus. This action 
reduces the excitation of the motor neurons for the left lat-
eral and right medial rectus muscles. The same head move-
ment results in a decreased signal in the right horizontal 
canal (not shown), which has similar connections. The weak-
ened signal results in decreased inhibition of the right lateral 
and left medial rectus muscles and decreased excitation of 
the left lateral and right medial rectus muscles. (Adapted 
from Sugiuchi et al. 2005.)
A  Excitatory connections
Head
turns
left
Left
medial
rectus
Oculomotor
nerve (N. III)
Oculomotor
nucleus
Vestibular
nuclei
Right
lateral
rectus
Eyes
move
right
Leftward
eye movement
inhibited
L
D
M
P
S
B  Inhibitory connections
Left
horizontal
canal
Endolymph
Ascending
tract of
Deiters
Left medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Abducens
nerve (N. VI)
Abducens
nucleus
Left
lateral
rectus
Right
medial
rectus


===== Page 7 =====
642    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–12  Vestibular nystagmus.  The trace shows the 
eye position of a subject in a chair rotated counterclockwise at 
a constant rate in the dark. At the beginning of the trace, the 
eye moves slowly at the same speed as the chair (slow phase) 
and occasionally makes rapid resetting movements (quick 
phase). The speed of the slow phase gradually decreases until 
the eye no longer moves regularly. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Leigh and Zee 2015.)
Eye
position 40°
R
L
5 s
Quick phase
Slow phase
signals during rotation occurs through the velocity 
storage network.
If head rotation stops abruptly, the endolymph 
continues to be displaced in the same direction that 
the head had formerly rotated. With rightward rota-
tion, this inhibits the right horizontal canal and excites 
the left horizontal canal, resulting in a sensation of left-
ward rotation and a corresponding left-beating nys-
tagmus. However, this occurs only in darkness. In the 
light, optokinetic reflexes suppress postrotatory nys-
tagmus since there is no visual motion stimulus.
The Translational Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex 
Compensates for Linear Motion and Head Tilts
When the head rotates, all images move with the same 
velocity on the retina. When the head moves sideways, 
however, the image of a close object moves more rap-
idly across the retina than does the image of a distant 
object. This can be understood easily by consider-
ing what happens when a person looks out the side 
window of a moving car. Objects near the side of the 
road move out of view almost with the speed of the 
car, whereas distant objects disappear more slowly. To 
compensate for linear head movement, the vestibular 
system must take into account the distance to the object 
being viewed—the more distant the object, the smaller 
the needed eye movement. During linear movements 
that do not involve head rotation, an appropriate trans-
lational VOR is elicited, driven by input from the oto-
lith organs. Neurons in the vestibular nuclei, including 
some different from those providing the main drive to 
the rotational VOR, carry this signal to the extraocular 
motor neuron pools.
Side-to-side head movements result in a horizon-
tal eye movement in a direction opposite to the head 
movement. Vertical displacements of the body, such as 
during walking or running, elicit oppositely directed 
vertical eye movements to stabilize gaze. However, in 
contrast to the rotational VOR where a head rotation 
is compensated by an equal but opposite eye rotation, 
horizontal displacement must be compensated by an 
eye rotation that depends on the viewed object dis-
tance, a nontrivial computation. For example, during a 
lateral head displacement, nearby objects move on the 
retina more rapidly than distant ones. So, in order to 
stabilize a nearby object on the retina, the eyes need to 
rotate by a larger amount than is needed for a distant 
object. Thus, the horizontal compensatory eye move-
ments that are elicited during lateral motion scale with 
target distance; the closer the target, the larger is the 
compensatory eye movement. Similarly, as in the rota-
tional VOR, compensatory responses to translation 
occur at relatively short latency (10–12 ms).
Fore-aft translations produce converging and 
diverging eye movements that bring the eyes together 
or move them apart. The amount of convergence or 
divergence is also dependent upon visual target dis-
tance, such that close visual objects produce large eye 
movements and distant visual objects produce little 
eye movements. Further, the amount of relative left 
and right eye movement is dependent upon visual 
object eccentricity relative to straight ahead. Unlike the 
rotational VOR that is a full-field image stabilization 
reflex, the goal of the translational VOR is to selec-
tively stabilize visual objects on the fovea. In general, 
the two eyes move disjunctively, consisting of either a 
pure vergence movement or a combination of vergence 
and conjugate eye movements. In practice, although 
the direction of the evoked eye movement is typically 
consistent with geometrical predictions, the primate/
human translational VOR typically undercompensates 
for near-target viewing, with gains of only about 0.5.
The translational VOR differs from the rotational 
VOR in the ability to generate compensatory eye 
movements during translation that optimize visual 
acuity on the central retina. These abilities appear to 
be specific to frontal-eyed animals, such as primates. 
Many lateral-eyed species, like the rabbit, do not gen-
erate eye movements that compensate for the visual 
consequences of translation during self-motion.
Because gravity exerts a constant linear accelera-
tion force on the head, the otolith organs also sense 
the orientation of the head relative to gravity. When 
the head tilts away from the vertical in the roll plane—
around the axis running from the occiput to the nose—
the eyes rotate in the opposite direction to reduce the 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 27 / The Vestibular System    643
tilt of the retinal image. This ocular counter-rolling 
reflex—the ability to use a gravity-sensing mechanism 
to maintain gaze relative to the horizon—is of para-
mount importance for lateral-eyed, afoveate species 
that typically lack a well-developed saccadic system. 
But such functional utility for these tilt responses has 
lost its advantage in the primate oculomotor system, 
where static ocular counter-rolling and counter-pitching 
in humans have a gain of less than 0.1.
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflexes Are Supplemented by 
Optokinetic Responses
The VORs compensate for head movement imperfectly. 
They are best at sensing the onset or abrupt change of 
motion; they compensate poorly for sustained motion 
at constant speed during translation or constant angu-
lar velocity during rotation. In addition, they are insen-
sitive to very slow rotations or low-amplitude linear 
accelerations.
Thus, vestibular responses during prolonged 
motion in the light are supplemented by visual stabili-
zation reflexes that maintain nystagmus when vestib-
ular input ceases: optokinetic nystagmus, a full-field 
stabilization system, and ocular following, a foveal sta-
bilization system. Although the two classes of reflexes 
are distinct, their pathways overlap.
The Cerebellum Adjusts the  
Vestibulo-Ocular Reflex
As we have seen, the VOR keeps the gaze constant 
when the head moves. There are times, however, when 
the reflex is inappropriate. For example, when you 
turn your head while walking, you want your gaze to 
follow. The rotational VOR, however, would prevent 
your eyes from turning with your head. To prevent this 
sort of biologically inappropriate response, the VOR is 
under the control of the cerebellum and cortex, which 
suppress the reflex during volitional head movements.
In addition, the VOR must be continuously cali-
brated to maintain its accuracy in the face of changes 
within the motor system (fatigue, injury to vestibular 
organs or pathways, eye-muscle weakness, or aging) 
and differing visual requirements (wearing correc-
tive lenses). Indeed, the VOR is a highly modifiable 
reflex. The brain continuously monitors its perfor-
mance by evaluating the clarity of vision during head 
movements. When head turns are consistently asso-
ciated with image motion across the retina, the VOR 
undergoes gain changes in the direction appropriate 
to improve the compensatory ability of the reflex. For 
example, when viewing the world through spectacles 
that magnify or miniaturize the visual scene, the rota-
tional VOR gain (in darkness) increases or decreases 
accordingly. The reflex behavior can adapt over sev-
eral minutes, hours, and days. This is accomplished 
by sensory feedback that modifies the motor output. 
If the reflex is not working properly, the image moves 
across the retina. The motor command to the eye mus-
cles must be adjusted until the gaze is again stable, 
rotational retinal image motion is zero, and there is  
no error.
Anyone who wears eyeglasses depends on this 
plasticity of the VOR. Because lenses for nearsighted-
ness shrink the visual image, a smaller eye rotation is 
needed to compensate for a given head rotation, and 
the gain of the VOR must be reduced. Conversely, 
glasses for farsightedness magnify the image, so the 
VOR gain must increase during their use. More com-
plicated is the instance of bifocal or progressive specta-
cles, in which the reflex must use different gains for the 
different magnifications. In the laboratory, the reflex 
can be conditioned by altering the visual consequences 
of head motion. For example, if a subject is rotated for 
a period of time while wearing magnifying glasses, the 
reflex gain gradually increases (Figure 27–13A).
This process requires changes in synaptic trans-
mission in both the cerebellum and the brain stem. If 
the flocculus and paraflocculus of the cerebellum are 
lesioned, the gain of the VOR can no longer be modu-
lated. Mossy fibers carry vestibular, visual, and motor 
signals from the pontine and vestibular nuclei to the 
cerebellar cortex; the granule cells, with their parallel 
fiber axons, relay these signals to the Purkinje cells 
(Figure 27–13B). The synaptic efficacy of parallel fiber 
input to a Purkinje cell could be modified by the concur-
rent action of climbing fiber input. Indeed, the climbing 
fiber input to the cerebellum carries a retinal error sig-
nal, thought to serve as a “teaching” signal enabling the 
cerebellum to correct the error in the VOR. This adap-
tation requires long-term plasticity of multiple mecha-
nisms through multiple sites (Chapter 37).
In addition to the Purkinje cell, plasticity is also 
found in the vestibular nuclei, in a particular class of 
neurons known as flocculus target neurons, which 
receive GABAergic inhibitory input from Purkinje 
cells in the flocculus as well as direct inputs from ves-
tibular sensory fibers. During adaptation of the VOR, 
these neurons change their sensitivity to the vestibular 
inputs in the appropriate way, and after adaptation, 
they can maintain those changes without further input 
from the cerebellum. The importance of the cerebellum 
in calibrating eye movements is also evident in patients 
with cerebellar disease, who are often characterized by 
a VOR response of abnormal amplitude or direction.


===== Page 9 =====
644    Part IV / Perception
Figure 27–13  The vestibulo-ocular reflex is adaptable.
A. For several days, the monkey continuously wears magnifying 
spectacles that double the speed of the retinal-image motion 
evoked by head movement. Each day, the gain of the vestibulo-
ocular reflex—the amount the eyes move for a given head 
movement—is tested in the dark so that the monkey cannot 
use retinal motion as a clue to modify the reflex. Over a period 
of 4 days, the gain increases gradually (left). It quickly returns 
to normal when the spectacles are removed (right). (Adapted, 
with permission, from Miles and Eighmy 1980.)
B. Adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex occurs in cerebel-
lar and brain stem circuits. A visual error signal, triggered by 
motion of the retinal image during head movement, reaches 
the inferior olivary nucleus. The climbing fiber transmits this 
error signal to the Purkinje cell, affecting the parallel fiber–
Purkinje cell synapse. The Purkinje cell transmits changed 
information to the floccular target cell in the vestibular nucleus, 
changing its sensitivity to the vestibular input. After the 
reflex has been adapted, the Purkinje cell input is no longer 
necessary.
Purkinje 
cell
Parallel ﬁber
Granule
cell
Mossy
ﬁber
Climbing 
ﬁber
Vestibular 
nucleus
Abducens 
nucleus
Motor 
neuron
+
–
Eye
movement
Horizontal 
canal
Head 
rotation
A  Adaptability of the vestibulo-ocular reﬂex
B  Sites of adaptive learning
Reﬂex gain
×2.0
Spectacles
on
×2.0
Spectacles
off
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (days)
Cerebellar 
ﬂocculus
1st
2nd 
3rd  
Exposure:
Vestibular 
nucleus
Cerebellar 
ﬂocculus
Inferior 
olivary
nucleus
Target neuron 
sensitivity altered
Purkinje cell 
output modiﬁed
Visual 
error signal


