===== Page 1 =====
38
The Basal Ganglia
Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal Ganglia Have 
Been Highly Conserved
Action Selection Is a Recurring Theme in  
Basal Ganglia Research
All Vertebrates Face the Challenge of Choosing One 
Behavior From Several Competing Options
Selection Is Required for Motivational, Affective, 
Cognitive, and Sensorimotor Processing
The Neural Architecture of the Basal Ganglia Is 
Configured to Make Selections
Intrinsic Mechanisms in the Basal Ganglia  
Promote Selection
Selection Function of The Basal Ganglia  
Questioned
Reinforcement Learning Is an Inherent Property of a 
Selection Architecture
Intrinsic Reinforcement Is Mediated by Phasic Dopamine 
Signaling Within the Basal Ganglia Nuclei
Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by 
Operating in Afferent Structures
Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is Under  
Goal-Directed and Habitual Control
Diseases of the Basal Ganglia May Involve Disorders of 
Selection
A Selection Mechanism Is Likely to Be Vulnerable to 
Several Potential Malfunctions
Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a Failure to 
Select Sensorimotor Options
Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional Imbalance 
Between the Direct and Indirect Pathways
Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General Failure 
to Suppress Nonselected Options
The Basal Ganglia Network Consists of Three Principal Input 
Nuclei, Two Main Output Nuclei, and One Intrinsic Nucleus
The Striatum, Subthalamic Nucleus, and Substantia 
Nigra Pars Compacta/Ventral Tegmental Area Are the 
Three Principal Input Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia
The Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata and the Internal 
Globus Pallidus Are the Two Principal Output Nuclei of 
the Basal Ganglia
The External Globus Pallidus Is Mostly an Intrinsic 
Structure of the Basal Ganglia
The Internal Circuitry of the Basal Ganglia Regulates How 
the Components Interact
The Traditional Model of the Basal Ganglia Emphasizes 
Direct and Indirect Pathways
Detailed Anatomical Analyses Reveal a More  
Complex Organization
Basal Ganglia Connections With External Structures Are 
Characterized by Reentrant Loops
Inputs Define Functional Territories in the  
Basal Ganglia
Output Neurons Project to the External Structures That 
Provide Input
Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle of Basal 
Ganglia Circuitry
Physiological Signals Provide Further Clues to Function in 
the Basal Ganglia
The Striatum and Subthalamic Nucleus Receive Signals 
Mainly from the Cerebral Cortex, Thalamus,  
and Ventral Midbrain
Ventral Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Receive Input 
From External Structures and Other Basal Ganglia Nuclei
Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of  
Basal Ganglia Output


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    933
Figure 38–1  The basal ganglia and surrounding structures.   
The nuclei of the basal ganglia are identified on the right in this 
coronal section of a human brain. (Adapted from Nieuwenhuys, 
Voogd, and van Huijzen 1981.)
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Tourette 
Syndrome May Also Be Characterized by Intrusions of 
Nonselected Options
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Reflects the Presence of 
Pathologically Dominant Options
Addictions Are Associated With Disorders of 
Reinforcement Mechanisms and Habitual Goals
Highlights
T
he traditional view that the basal  ganglia 
play a role in movement arises primarily because 
diseases of the basal ganglia, such as Parkinson 
and Huntington disease, are associated with prominent 
disturbances of movement, and from the belief that 
basal ganglia neurons send their output exclusively to 
the motor cortex by way of the thalamus. However, we 
now know that the basal ganglia also project to wide 
areas of the brain stem and via the thalamus to non-
motor areas of the cerebral cortex and limbic system, 
thereby providing a mechanism whereby they contrib-
ute to a wide variety of cognitive, motivational, and 
affective operations. This understanding also explains 
Thalamus
Internal
capsule
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Basal
ganglia
Subthalamic
nucleus
Substantia nigra
Globus pallidus:
  External segment
  Internal segment
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
why diseases of the basal ganglia are frequently associ-
ated with complex cognitive, motivational, and affec-
tive dysfunction in addition to the better-known motor 
disturbances.
This chapter provides a perspective on the funda-
mental contributions of the basal ganglia (Figure 38–1) 
to overall brain function. Recent advances in the fields 
of artificial neural networks and robotics emphasize that 
behavioral function is an emergent property of signal 
processing in physically connected networks (Chapter 5). 
Thus, how components of networks are connected and 
how their input signals are transformed into output sig-
nals impose important constraints on final behavioral 
outputs. We first describe the principal anatomical and 
physiological features of the basal ganglia network and 
consider the constraints these might impose on their 
function. We consider the extent to which the basal gan-
glia have been conserved during vertebrate brain evo-
lution and, based on these insights, review evidence 
suggesting that the basal ganglia’s normal functions are 
to select between incompatible behaviors and to medi-
ate reinforcement learning. We conclude by examining 
important insights into how the system can malfunction 
in some of the major diseases involving the basal ganglia.


===== Page 3 =====
934    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–2  The principal input, intrinsic, and 
output connections of the mammalian basal 
ganglia.  The main input nuclei are the striatum 
(STR), subthalamic nucleus (STN), and substantia 
nigra pars compacta (not shown). They receive 
input directly from the thalamus, cerebral cortex, 
and limbic structures (amygdala and hippocampus). 
The main output nuclei are the substantia nigra 
pars reticulata (SNr) and internal globus pallidus/
entopeduncular nucleus (not shown). The external 
globus pallidus (GP) is classified as an intrinsic 
nucleus as most of its connections are with other 
basal ganglia nuclei. Structures are shown on a 
sagittal schematic of the rodent brain. Red and 
dark gray arrows denote excitatory and inhibitory 
connections, respectively.
The Basal Ganglia Network Consists of Three 
Principal Input Nuclei, Two Main Output 
Nuclei, and One Intrinsic Nucleus
The striatum (a collective term for the caudate nucleus 
and putamen; see Figure 38–1), subthalamic nucleus, 
and substantia nigra pars compacta/ventral tegmental 
area are the three major input nuclei of the basal ganglia, 
receiving signals directly and indirectly from structures 
distributed throughout the neuraxis (Figure 38–2).
The Striatum, Subthalamic Nucleus, and Substantia 
Nigra Pars Compacta/Ventral Tegmental Area Are the 
Three Principal Input Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia
The striatum is the largest nucleus of the basal gan-
glia. It receives direct input from most regions of the 
cerebral cortex and limbic structures, including the 
amygdala and hippocampus. Important input from 
sensorimotor and motivational regions of the brain 
stem is relayed indirectly via the thalamus. In rodents, 
the number of contacts received in the striatum from 
the cerebral cortex and thalamus are approximately 
equivalent. Finally, important modulatory input to the 
striatum comes from the substantia nigra pars com-
pacta (dopamine), midbrain raphe (serotonin), and 
pedunculopontine nucleus (acetylcholine).
The striatum is subdivided functionally on the basis 
of the organization of input connections, principally the 
topographically organized afferents from the cerebral 
cortex. Limbic, associative, and sensorimotor terri-
tories are generally recognized along a ventromedial-
dorsolateral continuum. This diversity of input shows 
that the basal ganglia receive signals from brain regions 
involved in different motivational, emotional, cognitive, 
and sensorimotor processes, implying that whatever 
Cortex
Tectum
Thalamus
Hippocampus
STR
GP
STN
SNr
Amygdala
Reticular
formation
the basal ganglia are doing, they are doing it for a wide 
range of brain processes.
An additional architectural feature of the striatum 
suggests that the basal ganglia are performing more or 
less the same operations on their inputs from function-
ally diverse afferent structures. Specifically, within each 
of the striatum’s functional territories, the cellular archi-
tecture is remarkably similar. In all regions, inhibitory 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic medium spiny neu-
rons are the principal cell type (>90% of all neurons). 
In addition, in all functionally defined regions, the 
medium spiny neurons are separated into two popula-
tions according to the relative expression of neuroactive 
peptides (substance P and dynorphin versus enkepha-
lin) or the expression of D1 and D2 dopamine receptors, 
which are thought to positively and negatively modu-
late cyclic adenosine monophosphate signaling in these 
neurons. These populations contribute differentially to 
different efferent projections of the striatum. In addition 
to these long-range inhibitory connections to other basal 
ganglia nuclei, medium spiny neurons also send local 
collaterals to adjacent cells. Colocalized GABAergic and 
peptidergic neurotransmission provides local mutu-
ally inhibitory and excitatory influences. The remain-
ing 5% to 10% of neurons in the striatum are purely 
GABAergic and cholinergic interneurons, which can 
be distinguished according to neurochemical, electro-
physiological, and in some cases morphological charac-
teristics. The fact that this local cellular architecture is 
present in all functional regions suggests that neurons 
in the striatum are applying the same or similar compu-
tations on functionally diverse afferent pathways.
The subthalamic nucleus has traditionally been 
considered an important internal relay in the “indi-
rect output pathway” from the striatum to the basal 
ganglia output nuclei (see below). It is now also recog-
nized as a second important input nucleus of the basal 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    935
ganglia. Topographically organized inputs derive not 
only from large parts of frontal cortex, but also from 
various thalamic and brain stem structures. The sub-
thalamic nucleus is the only component of the basal 
ganglia that has excitatory (glutamatergic) output con-
nections. These project to both output nuclei and to the 
intrinsic external globus pallidus.
The substantia nigra pars compacta/ventral teg-
mental area contain an important population of dopa-
minergic neurons. These neurons represent the third 
major input station of the basal ganglia and give rise to 
the nigrostriatal and mesolimbic/mesocortical dopa-
mine projections. They receive significant afferent con-
nections from other basal ganglia nuclei (the striatum, 
globus pallidus, and subthalamus), but also from many 
structures in the brain stem (eg, superior colliculus, 
rostromedial tegmental region, raphe nuclei, pedun-
culopontine nucleus, and parabrachial area). Other 
afferent connections are from the frontal cortex and the 
amygdala. This pattern of connectivity is important 
because it suggests the most important direct influence 
over the dopaminergic neurons arises from evolution-
arily ancient parts of the brain (see below).
Individual dopaminergic neurons have highly 
branching axons that project into extensive regions of 
not only the other basal ganglia nuclei but also exter-
nal structures (eg, frontal cortex, septal area, amygdala, 
habenula). This suggests that their important modula-
tory signals are widely broadcast throughout targeted 
structures. The highest concentration of dopaminergic 
terminals is found in the striatum, where synaptic and 
nonsynaptic contacts are formed with both medium 
spiny cells and interneurons. The existence of nonsyn-
aptic contacts gives rise to what has been called volume 
transmission. This occurs when neurotransmitters dif-
fuse through the brain’s extracellular fluid from release 
points that may be remote from targeted cells. Conse-
quently, volume transmission typically has a longer 
time course than synaptic neurotransmission. Deploy-
ment of volume transmission in targeted structures is 
further evidence for the idea that the effects of dopamine 
in targeted structures are widely broadcast and spatially 
imprecise. Variable proportions of GABAergic neurons 
(substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area) and 
glutamatergic neurons (ventral tegmental area) contrib-
ute to local processing in these structures.
The Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata and the 
Internal Globus Pallidus Are the Two Principal 
Output Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia
The internal globus pallidus/entopeduncular nucleus 
is one of the two principal output nuclei. It receives 
inputs from other basal ganglia nuclei and projects 
to external targets in the thalamus and brain stem. 
GABAergic input from the striatum and external 
globus pallidus are inhibitory, while input from the 
subthalamic nucleus is glutamatergic and excitatory. 
Neurons of the internal globus pallidus are themselves 
GABAergic and have high levels of tonic activity. 
Under normal circumstances, this imposes powerful 
inhibitory effects on targets in the thalamus, lateral 
habenula, and brain stem.
The substantia nigra pars reticulata is the second 
principal output nucleus. It also receives afferents from 
other basal ganglia nuclei and provides efferent con-
nections to the thalamus and brain stem. Inhibitory 
(GABAergic) inputs come from the striatum and globus 
pallidus (external) and excitatory input from the sub-
thalamus. Pars reticulata neurons are also GABAergic 
and impose strong inhibitory control over parts of the 
thalamus and brain stem, including the superior colli-
culus, pedunculopontine nucleus, and parts of the mid-
brain and medullary reticular formation.
The External Globus Pallidus Is Mostly an Intrinsic 
Structure of the Basal Ganglia
Most connections of the globus pallidus are with other 
basal ganglia nuclei, including inhibitory (GABAergic) 
input from the striatum and excitatory (glutamatergic) 
input from the subthalamus, and the globus pallidus 
provides inhibitory efferent connections to all the basal 
ganglia’s input and output nuclei. This pattern of con-
nections suggests that that the external globus palli-
dus is an essential regulator of internal basal ganglia 
activity.
Having described the core components of the basal 
ganglia, we will now consider in more detail how they 
are connected, first with each other and then with 
external structures in the brain.
The Internal Circuitry of the Basal Ganglia 
Regulates How the Components Interact
The Traditional Model of the Basal Ganglia 
Emphasizes Direct and Indirect Pathways
An influential interpretation of the intrinsic circuitry 
of the basal ganglia was proposed in the late 1980s by 
Roger Albin and colleagues (Figure 38–3A). In their 
scheme, signals originating in the cerebral cortex are 
distributed to two populations of medium spiny out-
put neurons in the striatum.
Neurons containing substance P and a preponder-
ance of D1 dopamine receptors make direct inhibitory 


===== Page 5 =====
936    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–3  Intrinsic connections within the basal ganglia.
A. The influential proposal by Roger Albin and colleagues (1989) 
is presented, where output of the basal ganglia is determined 
by the balance between a direct pathway from the striatum to 
the output nuclei (internal globus pallidus [Gpi] and substantial 
nigra pars reticulata [SNr]), which promotes behavior, and an 
indirect pathway from the striatum to the output nuclei via 
relays in the external globus pallidus (GPe) and subthalamic 
nucleus (STN), which suppresses behavior. The balance 
between the direct and indirect projections was thought to 
be regulated by afferent dopaminergic signals from substantia 
nigra pars compacta (SNc) acting on differentially distributed D1 
and D2 dopamine receptors.
B. More recent anatomical investigations have revealed a rather 
more complex organization where the transformations of basal 
ganglia inputs that generate outputs are less easy to predict.
A  Internal circuitry proposed by Albin et al. (1989)
GPe
STN
GPi/SNr
SNc
Dopamine
Direct
Indirect
GABA
Glutamate
Thalamus
Striatum
D1
D2
B  Contemporary view of internal circuitry
Cortex
GPi/SNr
SNc
Thalamus
Striatum
D1
D2
GPe
STN
Cortex
contact with the basal ganglia output nuclei—the 
direct pathway. In contrast, striatal neurons containing 
enkephalin and expressing mainly D2 dopamine recep-
tors make excitatory contact with the output nuclei via 
relays in the globus pallidus and subthalamus—the 
indirect pathway. Basal ganglia output was thought to 
reflect a cortically determined balance between these 
inhibitory and excitatory projections terminating on 
the two output structures (the internal globus pallidus 
and substantia nigra pars reticulata). In this model, a 
behavior would be promoted when the direct pathway 
was dominant and inhibited when the indirect path-
way was dominant.
Detailed Anatomical Analyses Reveal a More 
Complex Organization
Recent anatomical observations show that the inter-
nal circuitry of the basal ganglia is more complex than 
originally envisaged (Figure 38–3B). The main findings 
have been that: (1) medium spiny neurons of the direct 
pathway also provide collateral input to the globus 
pallidus; (2) globus pallidus neurons also make direct 
contact with the output nuclei in addition to the tradi-
tional indirect connections to the subthalamus—often 
with branching collaterals to all three structures; (3) the 
globus pallidus also projects back to the striatum and 
to structures outside the basal ganglia; (4) the subtha-
lamic nucleus also projects back to the external globus 
pallidus, in addition to the feedforward connections 
to the two basal ganglia output nuclei; and (5) major 
inputs to the subthalamic nucleus originate from both 
cortical and subcortical structures external to the basal 
ganglia. Consequently, the subthalamus is now consid-
ered a major input structure of the basal ganglia (see 
above), rather than a simple relay in the intrinsic indi-
rect projection. A modern appreciation of this complex 
organization within the basal ganglia suggests it is no 
longer possible to intuit how a particular input might 
be transformed by the basal ganglia to generate a spe-
cific output. For this reason, computational modeling 
of the internal circuitry of the basal ganglia has become 
increasingly important.
Although the overall pattern of intrinsic circuitry is 
complex (Figure 38–3B), connections between compo-
nents of the basal ganglia are topographically ordered 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    937
throughout. Some of these projections are compara-
tively focused (eg, the striatonigral projection), while 
others are more diffuse (eg, the subthalamonigral 
projection). Significant reductions in the comparative 
numbers of neurons in afferent structures, the stria-
tum, and the output nuclei suggest a dramatic com-
pression of information as it is processed within the 
basal ganglia.
Basal Ganglia Connections With External 
Structures Are Characterized by  
Reentrant Loops
Inputs Define Functional Territories in the  
Basal Ganglia
The functional status of inputs to the striatum from 
the cerebral cortex, limbic structures, and thalamus pro-
vides the rationale for classifying functional territories 
within the basal ganglia nuclei (limbic, associative, 
and sensorimotor). However, the manner in which the 
afferent projections make contact with neurons of the 
basal ganglia nuclei suggests important functional dif-
ferences. For example, axons arriving in the striatum 
from the cerebral cortex and central lateral thalamic 
nucleus appear to make few contacts with many stri-
atal neurons. In contrast, inputs from other regions, 
principally the parafascicular thalamic nucleus, have 
axons that make many contacts with fewer individual 
striatal neurons. Afferent connections to the subtha-
lamic nucleus, at least from cerebral cortex, are also 
topographically organized according to the limbic, 
associative, and sensorimotor classification. However, 
there is no evidence of the same kind of precise topo-
graphical input from external structures to SNc and 
VTA dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain.
Output Neurons Project to the External  
Structures That Provide Input
Basal ganglia output neurons project to regions of the 
thalamus (the intralaminar and ventromedial nuclei) 
that project back to basal ganglia input nuclei as well 
as to those regions of cortex that provided the original 
inputs to the striatum. Similarly, outputs from the basal 
ganglia to the brain stem tend to target those regions 
that provide input to the striatum via the thalamic 
midline and intralaminar nuclei. Importantly, projec-
tions from the basal ganglia output nuclei to the thala-
mus and brain stem are also topographically ordered.
Finally, many output projections of the basal ganglia 
are extensively collateralized, thereby simultaneously 
contacting targets in the thalamus, midbrain, and 
hindbrain. An example of the functional consequences 
of this organization is that a subset of neurons in the 
substantia nigra pars reticulata associated with oral 
behavior can simultaneously influence the activity in 
the specific regions of the thalamus/cortex, midbrain, 
and hindbrain that interact during the production of 
oral behavior.
Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle  
of Basal Ganglia Circuitry
Spatial topographies associated with input projec-
tions, intrinsic connections, and outputs of the 
basal ganglia provided the basis for the influen-
tial organizational principle suggested by Garrett  
Alexander and colleagues in 1989. Connections between 
the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia can be viewed as 
a series of reentrant parallel projecting, partly segre-
gated, cortico-striato-nigro-thalamo-cortical loops or 
channels (Figure 38–4). Thus, an important component 
of the projections from different functional areas of 
cerebral cortex (eg, limbic, associative, sensorimotor) 
makes exclusive contact with specific regions of the 
basal ganglia input nuclei. This regional separation 
is maintained in forward projections throughout the 
internal circuitry. Focused output signals from func-
tional territories represented in the basal ganglia 
output nuclei are returned, via appropriate thalamic 
relays, to the cortical regions providing the original 
input signals.
The concept of parallel projecting reentrant loops 
through the basal ganglia has been extended to their 
connections with sensorimotor and motivational struc-
tures in the brain stem, including the superior col-
liculus, periaqueductal gray, pedunculopontine, and 
parabrachial nuclei. This implies that the reentrant 
loop architecture through the basal ganglia must have 
predated the evolutionary expansion of the cerebral 
cortex. An important difference is that for the cortical 
loops the thalamic relay is on the output side of the 
loop, whereas for the subcortical loops, the thalamic 
relay is on the input side (Figure 38–5). Further work 
will be required to test whether projections from dif-
ferent brain stem structures, as they pass through the 
thalamic and basal ganglia relays, are functionally dis-
tinct channels.
In summary, the partially segregated reentrant loop 
organization is one of the dominant features character-
izing the connections between the basal ganglia and 
external structures. This pattern of connections pro-
vides important clues as to the role played by the basal 
ganglia nuclei in overall brain function. However, at 


===== Page 7 =====
938    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–4  Connections between the basal ganglia and 
cerebral cortex.
A. The connections between the cerebral cortex and basal 
ganglia can be viewed as a series of parallel projecting, largely 
segregated loops or channels. Functional territories repre-
sented at the level of cerebral cortex are maintained throughout 
the basal ganglia nuclei and thalamic relays. However, for each 
loop, the relay points in the cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus 
offer opportunities for activity inside the loop to be modified by 
signals from outside the loop. Red and dark gray arrows rep-
resent excitatory and inhibitory connections, respectively.
B. Spatially segregated rostral-caudal gradient of human frontal 
cortical connectivity in caudate, putamen, and pallidum. The 
color-coded ring denotes regions of cerebral cortex in the sagit-
tal plane. (Reproduced, with permission, from Draganski et al. 
2008. Copyright © 2008 Society for Neuroscience.)
Figure 38–5  Cortical and subcortical sensorimotor loops 
through the basal ganglia.
A. For cortical loops, the position of the thalamic relay is  
on the return arm of the loop.
B. In the case of all subcortical loops, the position of the 
thalamic relay is on the input side of the loop. Red indicates 
predominantly excitatory regions and connections, while  
dark gray indicates inhibitory regions and connections.  
(Abbreviations: SN/GPi, substantia nigra/globus pallidus;  
Thal, thalamus.)
Caudate
Putamen
Pallidum
A
B
Cerebral cortex
Limbic
Associative
Sensory
Motor
Striatum
Pallidum/nigra
Thalamus
M
ot
or
 c
or
te
x
Pr
e
m
ot
o
r 
c
o
rt
e
x
Pr
ef
ro
nt
al
 c
o
rt
e
x
D
or
so
la
te
ra
l
 M
ed
ia
l 
an
d 
or
bi
ta
l
S
e
n
s
or
i
m
ot
or
 c
or
te
x
Pa
ri
et
al
 c
or
te
x
A  Cortical loops
Motor
output
Sensory
input
Cerebral
cortex
Thalamus
Striatum
SN/GPi
B  Subcortical loops
Motor
output
Sensory
input
Subcortical
structures
SN/GPi
Thalamus
Striatum


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    939
this point, it is important not to think of the reentrant 
loop architecture as comprising a series of independ-
ent and isolated functional channels. At each node 
or relay point in the loop (eg, in the cortex, the input 
nuclei, the output nuclei, and the thalamus), there is 
the opportunity for information flow within the loop to  
be modified by information from outside the loop (see 
the section on reinforcement learning below).
At the beginning of this chapter, we stated that 
behavior is an emergent property of signal processing 
within a neural network. Having specified the systems-
level network of the basal ganglia, we now consider 
the signals that are being processed within this system.
Physiological Signals Provide Further Clues  
to Function in the Basal Ganglia
The Striatum and Subthalamic Nucleus Receive 
Signals Mainly from the Cerebral Cortex,  
Thalamus, and Ventral Midbrain
Signals received by the striatum from the cerebral 
cortex and thalamus are conveyed by excitatory glu-
tamatergic neurotransmission. These fast, phasically 
active excitatory inputs are mediated predominantly 
by α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic 
acid (AMPA) and kainate receptors when the medium 
spiny neurons are near resting potential; N-methyl-
d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a greater role 
when the neurons are depolarized. Glutamatergic 
inputs from both cerebral cortex and thalamus also 
impinge on striatal interneurons.
It is important to appreciate that these signals 
come from external structures that are simultaneously 
generating a wide range of behavioral options. Since 
these options could not all be expressed at the same 
time, these inputs to the basal ganglia are thought to 
be in competition with each other. Another important 
signal to the striatum is an efference copy of the out-
put activity from the external structures that generate 
behavioral responses. For example, the sensorimotor 
territories of the dorsolateral striatum receive collat-
eral fibers from motor cortex axons that send signals 
to the spinal cord.
The effects of dopaminergic inputs from the ven-
tral midbrain on striatal neuronal activity are com-
plicated, with many conflicting results. In part, this 
is due to the problem of evoking normal patterns of 
input activity in slice and anaesthetized preparations. 
However, recent developments in optogenetic technol-
ogy in alert, active animals have enabled investigators 
both to record and manipulate dopamine signals to 
the striatum in a temporally controlled manner. Con-
sequently, current evidence suggests dopamine can 
increase signal-to-noise ratios in the striatum, enhanc-
ing the effects of strong external inputs while suppress-
ing weak ones. There is further evidence that dopamine 
can increase the excitability of medium spiny neurons 
in the direct pathways while at the same time decreas-
ing the excitability of those in the indirect pathway.
Finally, dopamine input is necessary for both long-
term potentiation and long-term depression of gluta-
matergic inputs to striatal medium spiny neurons from 
both cortex and thalamus. This latter point is of great 
significance for the role played by the basal ganglia 
in reinforcement learning (see below). Dopamine can 
also influence the activity of GABAergic and cholin-
ergic interneurons. Although anatomically significant, 
much less is known about the role(s) of serotoninergic 
inputs to the basal ganglia.
The main external sources of input to the striatum 
also provide parallel inputs to the subthalamic nucleus. 
The subthalamus therefore receives phasic excitatory 
(glutamatergic) signals from the cerebral cortex, thala-
mus, and brain stem. Following cortical activation, 
short-latency excitatory effects in the subthalamus are 
thought to be mediated via these “hyperdirect” con-
nections, whereas longer-latency suppressive effects 
are more likely to come from indirect inhibitory inputs 
from other basal ganglia nuclei, principally the exter-
nal globus pallidus. The subthalamus receives short-
latency excitatory sensory input from the brain stem 
(eg, the superior colliculus); it is also influenced by 
dopaminergic, serotonergic, and cholinergic modula-
tory inputs.
Ventral Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Receive  
Input From External Structures and Other  
Basal Ganglia Nuclei
Afferent signals to the dopaminergic neurons in the 
ventral midbrain come from a wide variety of auto-
nomic, sensory, and motor areas and operate over 
a range of time scales. For example, laterally located 
neurons in the substantia nigra receive short-latency 
excitatory inputs from cortical and subcortical senso-
rimotor regions, while more medially positioned neu-
rons receive both short-latency sensory signals and 
autonomic-related inputs from the hypothalamus over 
longer time scales.
Important inhibitory control over dopaminergic 
neurons is exercised by GABAergic neurons, both local 
and distant from areas like the rostromedial tegmen-
tum. However, the densest inputs to the dopaminergic 
neurons are inhibitory inputs from the striatum and 


===== Page 9 =====
940    Part V / Movement
Figure 38–6  The diagram illustrates the principle of selec-
tion operating at the level of the basal ganglia output 
nuclei.  Throughout the figure, the relative levels of activity 
within the competing channels are represented by the thick-
ness of projections, and for clarity, the indirect pathway and 
the return connections of the loops via the thalamus have been 
omitted. One of the competing inputs to the striatum (the mid-
dle one) is more active than its competitors. Relative activities 
in the direct inhibitory pathways (shown here) differentially sup-
press activity in the different channels within the output nuclei. 
Because output nuclei neurons are also inhibitory and tonically 
active, the selected channel will be the one with the strong-
est inhibitory input from the striatum. Tonic inhibitory output is 
maintained on the nonselected channels. This selective disin-
hibitory mechanism operating at the level of the output nuclei 
means that selection will be an emergent property of the entire 
reentrant network. Disinhibition of selected external targets 
will allow them to direct movement, while nonselected targets 
remain inhibited and unable to influence behavior. Red, excita-
tory; gray, inhibitory.
globus pallidus and excitatory signals from the sub-
thalamic nucleus. The midbrain raphe nuclei provide 
important modulatory serotonergic input, while both 
the pedunculopontine nucleus and lateral dorsal teg-
mental nucleus provide cholinergic and glutamatergic 
inputs. An important functional question concerning 
the wide range of afferent signals to dopaminergic 
neurons is whether dopamine performs a highly inte-
grative role or performs an essential function that is 
accessed by numerous different systems at different 
times.
Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of Basal 
Ganglia Output
The basal ganglia exercise influence over external 
structures by the fundamental processes of inhibition 
and disinhibition (Figure 38–6). GABAergic neurons 
in the basal ganglia output nuclei typically have high 
tonic firing rates (40–80 Hz). This activity ensures that 
target regions of the thalamus and brain stem are main-
tained under a tight and constant inhibitory control.
Focused excitatory inputs from external structures 
to the striatum can impose focused suppression (medi-
ated via direct pathway GABAergic inhibitory con-
nections) on subpopulations of output nuclei neurons. 
This focused reduction of inhibitory output effectively 
releases or disinhibits targeted regions in the thalamus 
(eg, ventromedial nucleus) and brain stem (eg, supe-
rior colliculus) from normal inhibitory control. This 
sudden release from tonic inhibition allows activity 
in the targeted region to influence behavioral output, 
which in the case of the midbrain superior colliculus is 
to elicit saccadic eye movements.
The patterns of signaling within the basal ganglia 
architecture provide important insights into what the 
overall functional properties of these networks might 
be (see below). Further constraints on the likely core 
functions of the basal ganglia also become apparent 
when considering the evolutionary history of the ver-
tebrate brain.
Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal 
Ganglia Have Been Highly Conserved
Detailed comparisons between the mammalian basal 
ganglia and those found in phylogenetically ancient 
vertebrates (eg, the lamprey) have found striking simi-
larities in their individual components, internal organ-
ization, inputs from external structures (the cortex/
pallium and thalamus), and the efferent projections 
of their output nuclei. For example, both direct and 
Selective disinhibition
Cortex
Striatum
Output
nucleus
indirect pathways from striatal medium spiny neurons 
have been observed in the lamprey. Similarly, tonically 
active GABAergic output neurons are present in the 
lamprey internal globus pallidus and substantia nigra 
pars reticulata. The neurotransmitters and membrane 
properties of basal ganglia neurons are also remarkably 
similar in evolutionarily ancient and modern species.
This high degree of morphological and neuro-
chemical conservation implies that the architecture and 
operation of basal ganglia circuits have been retained 
for more than 500 million years. The basal ganglia are 
therefore an essential component of brain architecture 


