===== Page 1 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 2 =====
Part VII


===== Page 3 =====
Preceding Page
Transgenic labeling of a single type of retinal ganglion cell in the mouse retina. Colors 
represent depth through the retina, with axons at the surface in blue and the deep-
est dendrites in red. Incompletely understood guidance mechanisms result in J-RGC 
dendrites “pointing” ventrally, resulting in their preferential response to ventral motion. 
J-RGC axons are guided to the optic nerve through which they travel to the rest of the 
brain. (Reproduced, with permission, from Jinyue Liu and Joshua Sanes. Reproduced, 
with permission, from Journal of Neuroscience. Cover of issue 37(50), December 13, 
2017; for Liu J, Sanes JR. 2017. Cellular and molecular analysis of dendritic morpho-
genesis in a retinal cell type that senses color contrast and ventral motion. J Neurosci 
37:12247–12262.)


===== Page 4 =====
VII
Development and the Emergence 
of Behavior
T
he innumerable behaviors controlled by the mature nerv-
ous system—our thoughts, perceptions, decisions, emotions, 
and actions—depend on precise patterns of synaptic connectiv-
ity among the billions of neurons in our brain and spinal cord. These 
connections form during embryonic and early postnatal life but can 
then be remodeled throughout life. In this section, we describe how 
the nervous system develops and matures.
The history of developmental neurobiology is long and illus-
trious. Nearly 150 years ago, Santiago Ramón y Cajal undertook 
a comprehensive series of anatomical studies on the structure and 
organization of the nervous system and then set out to probe its 
development. The only method available to him was light micro-
scopic analysis of fixed tissue, but from his observations, he deduced 
many developmental principles that are still recognized as correct. 
During the first half of the 20th century, other anatomists followed 
in his footsteps. Progress then accelerated as new methods became 
available—first electrophysiology and electron microscopy and, 
more recently, molecular biology, genetics, and live imaging. We 
now know a great deal about molecules that determine how nerve 
cells acquire their identities, how they extend axons to target cells, 
and how these axons choose appropriate synaptic partners once they 
have arrived at their destinations.
It is useful to divide the numerous steps that compose neural 
development into three epochs, which are conceptually distinct even 
though they overlap temporally to some extent. The first, beginning 
at the earliest stages of embryogenesis, leads to the generation and 
differentiation of neurons and glia. One can think of this epoch as 
devoted to producing the components from which neural circuits 
will be assembled: the hardware. These steps depend on the expres-
sion of particular genes at particular times and places. Some of the 
molecules that control these spatial and temporal patterns are tran-
scription factors that act at the level of DNA to regulate gene expres-
sion. They act within the differentiating cells and are therefore called 
cell-autonomous factors. Other factors, called cell non-autonomous, 
include cell surface and secreted molecules that arise from other cells. 


===== Page 5 =====
They act by binding to receptors on the differentiating cells and gen-
erating signals that regulate the activity of the cell-autonomous tran-
scriptional programs. The interaction of these intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors is critical for the proper differentiation of each nerve cell.
A second epoch encompasses the steps by which neurons wire up: 
the migration of their somata to appropriate places, the guidance of 
axons to their targets, and the formation of synaptic connections. The 
complexity of the wiring problem is staggering—axons of many neu-
ronal types must navigate, often over long distances, and then choose 
among a hundred or more potential synaptic partners. Nonetheless, 
progress has been encouraging. A major factor has been the ability to 
address the problem through the analysis of simple and genetically 
accessible organisms such as the fruit fly Drosophila and the nematode 
worm Caenorhabditis elegans. It turns out that many of the key mol-
ecules that control the formation of the nervous system are conserved 
in organisms separated by millions of years of evolution. Thus, despite 
the great diversity of animal forms, the developmental programs that 
govern body plan and neural connectivity are conserved throughout 
phylogeny. 
In the third epoch, the genetically determined patterns of con-
nectivity (the hardware) are molded by activity and experience (the 
software). Unfortunately for investigators, these steps in mammals 
are shared to a very limited degree with invertebrates and lower 
vertebrates. A newly hatched bird or fly is not remarkably different 
in its behavioral repertoire from its adult self, but no one could say 
that about a person. This is largely because our nervous system is 
something of a rough draft at birth. The hardwired circuits that lay 
out its basic plan are modified over a prolonged postnatal period by 
experience, acting via neural activity. In this way, the experience of 
each individual can leave indelible imprints on his or her nervous 
system and the cognitive abilities of the brain can be enhanced by 
learning. These processes act in all mammals, and neuroscientists 
now use mice to probe the mechanisms that underlie them—but 
they are especially prominent and prolonged in humans. It may be 
that the prolonged period during which experience can sculpt the 
human nervous system is the most important single factor in making 
its capabilities unique among all species. 
As our understanding of development increases, it is increas-
ingly informing neurology and psychiatry. Many genes that regulate 
the first two epochs have now been implicated as susceptibility fac-
tors for, or even causes of, some neurodegenerative and behavioral 
disorders. Thus, studies of neural development are beginning to pro-
vide insights into the etiology of neurological diseases and to sug-
gest rational strategies for restoring neural connections and function 
after disease or traumatic injury. More recently, as we learn about the 
cellular and molecular changes that underlie experience-dependent 
remodeling, we can hope to understand how, for example, the plas-
ticity that is so evident during early life can be recruited in adults to 


===== Page 6 =====
improve rehabilitative therapy after injury, stroke, or neurodegenera-
tive disease. Moreover, there is increasing reason to believe that some 
behavioral disorders, such as autism or schizophrenia, may result in 
part from defects in the experience-dependent tuning of neural cir-
cuits during early postnatal life. 
Part VII summarizes these epochs in a sequential manner. Begin-
ning with the early stages of neural development, we concentrate on 
the factors that control the diversity and survival of nerve cells, guide 
axons, and regulate the formation of synapses. We then explain how 
interactions with the environment, both social and physical, modify 
or consolidate the neural connections formed during early develop-
ment. Finally, we examine ways in which developmental processes 
can be harnessed in adults and how factors such as steroid hor-
mones mold the brain, affecting sexual and gender identity. The last 
steps—changes that occur as the brain ages—are covered in Section 
IX (Chapter 64).
Part Editor: Joshua R. Sanes 
Part VII
Chapter 45	
Patterning the Nervous System
Chapter 46	
Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells
Chapter 47	
The Growth and Guidance of Axons
Chapter 48	
Formation and Elimination of Synapses
Chapter 49	
Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic 
Connections
Chapter 50	
Repairing the Damaged Brain
Chapter 51	
Sexual Differentiation of the Nervous System


===== Page 7 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 8 =====
45
Patterning the Nervous System
Inductive Signals and Transcription Factor Gradients 
Establish Regional Differentiation
Afferent Inputs Also Contribute to Regionalization
Highlights
A
 vast array of neurons and glial cells is 
produced during development of the verte-
brate nervous system. Different types of neu-
rons develop in discrete anatomical positions, acquire 
varied morphological forms, and establish connec-
tions with specific populations of target cells. Their 
diversity is far greater than that of cells in any other 
organ of the body. The retina, for example, has dozens 
of types of interneurons, and the spinal cord has more 
than a hundred types of motor neurons. At present, 
the true number of neuronal types in the mamma-
lian central nervous system remains unknown, but it 
is surely more than a thousand. The number of glial 
types is even less clear; unexpected heterogeneity is 
being discovered in what was thought, until recently, 
to be rather homogeneous classes of astrocytes and 
oligodendrocytes.
The diversity of neuronal types underlies the 
impressive computational properties of the mamma-
lian nervous system. Yet, as we describe in this chapter 
and those that follow, the developmental principles 
that drive the differentiation of the nervous system are 
begged and borrowed from those used to direct the 
development in other tissues. In one sense, the devel-
opment of the nervous system merely represents an 
elaborate example of the basic challenge that pervades 
The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm
Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate
Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by Signals 
From the Organizer Region
Neural Induction Is Mediated by Peptide Growth Factors 
and Their Inhibitors
Rostrocaudal Patterning of the Neural Tube Involves 
Signaling Gradients and Secondary Organizing Centers
The Neural Tube Becomes Regionalized Early  
in Development
Signals From the Mesoderm and Endoderm Define the 
Rostrocaudal Pattern of the Neural Plate
Signals From Organizing Centers Within the Neural Tube 
Pattern the Forebrain, Midbrain, and Hindbrain
Repressive Interactions Divide the Hindbrain  
Into Segments
Dorsoventral Patterning of the Neural Tube Involves Similar 
Mechanisms at Different Rostrocaudal Levels
The Ventral Neural Tube Is Patterned by Sonic Hedgehog 
Protein Secreted from the Notochord and Floor Plate
The Dorsal Neural Tube Is Patterned by Bone 
Morphogenetic Proteins
Dorsoventral Patterning Mechanisms Are Conserved 
Along the Rostrocaudal Extent of the Neural Tube
Local Signals Determine Functional Subclasses  
of Neurons
Rostrocaudal Position Is a Major Determinant of Motor 
Neuron Subtype
Local Signals and Transcriptional Circuits Further 
Diversify Motor Neuron Subtypes
The Developing Forebrain Is Patterned by Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Influences


===== Page 9 =====
1108    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
all of developmental biology: how to convert a single 
cell, the fertilized egg, into the highly differentiated 
cell types that characterize the mature organism. Only 
at later stages, as the neurons form complex circuits 
and experience modifies their connections, do prin-
ciples of neural development diverge from those in 
other organs.
Early developmental principles are conserved not 
only among tissues but also across species and phyla. 
Indeed, much of what we know about the cellular and 
molecular bases of neural development in vertebrates 
comes from genetic studies of so-called simple organ-
isms, most notably the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster 
and the worm Caenorhabditis elegans. Nevertheless, 
because a main goal of studying neural development 
is to explain how the assembly of the nervous system 
underlies both human behavior and brain disorders, 
our description of the rules and principles of nervous 
system development focus primarily on vertebrate 
organisms.
The Neural Tube Arises From the Ectoderm
The vertebrate embryo arises from the fertilized egg. 
Cell divisions initially form a ball of cells, called the 
morula, which then hollows out to form the blastula. 
Next, infoldings and growth generate the gastrula, a 
structure with polarity (dorsal-ventral and anterior-
posterior) and three layers of cells—the endoderm, 
mesoderm, and ectoderm (Figure 45–1A).
The endoderm is the innermost germ layer that 
later gives rise to the gut, as well as to the lungs, 
pancreas, and liver. The mesoderm is the middle germ 
layer that gives rise to muscle, connective tissues, and 
much of the vascular system. The ectoderm is the out-
ermost layer. Most of the ectoderm gives rise to the 
skin, but a narrow central strip flattens out to become 
the neural plate (Figure 45–1B). It is from the neural 
plate that the central and peripheral nervous systems 
arise.
Soon after the neural plate forms, it begins to 
invaginate, forming the neural groove. The folds then 
deepen and eventually separate from the rest of the 
ectoderm to form the neural tube, through a process 
called neurulation (Figure 45–1C,D). The caudal 
region of the neural tube gives rise to the spinal cord, 
whereas the rostral region becomes the brain. As the 
neural tube closes, cells at its junction with the over-
lying ectoderm are set aside to become the neural 
crest, which eventually gives rise to the autonomic 
and sensory nervous systems, as well as several non-
neural cell types (Figure 45–1E).
Secreted Signals Promote Neural Cell Fate
As with other organs, the emergence of the nervous 
system is the culmination of a complex molecular pro-
gram that involves the tightly orchestrated expression 
of specific genes. For the nervous system, the first step 
is the formation of the neural plate from a restricted 
region of the ectoderm. This step reflects the outcome 
of an early choice that ectodermal cells have to make: 
whether to become neural or epidermal cells. This deci-
sion has been the subject of intense study for nearly 
100 years.
Much of this work has focused on a search for sig-
nals that control the fate of ectodermal cells. We now 
know that two major classes of proteins work together 
to promote the differentiation of an ectodermal cell 
into a neural cell. The first are inductive factors, signal-
ing molecules that are secreted by nearby cells. Some 
of these factors are freely diffusible and exert their 
actions at a distance, but others are tethered to the cell 
surface and act locally. The second are surface recep-
tors that enable cells to respond to inductive factors. 
Activation of these receptors triggers the expression of 
genes encoding intracellular proteins—transcription 
factors, enzymes, and cytoskeletal proteins—that push 
ectodermal cells along the pathway to becoming neu-
ral cells.
The ability of a cell to respond to inductive signals, 
termed its competence, depends on the exact repertoire 
of receptors, transduction molecules, and transcrip-
tion factors that it expresses. Thus, a cell’s fate is deter-
mined not only by the signals to which it is exposed—a 
consequence of when and where it finds itself in the 
embryo—but also by the profile of genes it expresses 
as a consequence of its prior developmental history. 
We will see in subsequent chapters that the interaction 
of localized inductive signals and intrinsic cell respon-
siveness is evident at virtually every step throughout 
neural development.
Development of the Neural Plate Is Induced by 
Signals From the Organizer Region
The discovery that specific signals are responsible for 
triggering the formation of the neural plate was the 
first major advance in understanding the mechanisms 
that pattern the nervous system. In 1924, Hans Spemann 
and Hilde Mangold made the remarkable observation 
that the differentiation of the neural plate from uncom-
mitted ectoderm depends on signals secreted by a  
specialized group of cells they called the organizer 
region.


