===== Page 1 =====
1020    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Submucosal
artery
Muscularis
mucosae
Mucosal
plexus
Mucosa
Longitudinal
plexus
Deep
muscular
plexus
Circular
smooth
muscle
Myenteric
plexus
B  Layers of wall
Myenteric
plexus
Submucous
plexus
C  Laminar distribution of neurons within the intestinal wall
To prevertebral 
sympathetic ganglia
Mucosa
Deep muscular plexus
Extrinsic sympathetic and 
parasympathetic afferents
ACh, ATP, NO, VIP
NO, VIP, ATP
ACh,  5-HT
ACh, VIP, 
CCK, ENK
ACh, Tk
(+)
(–)
ACh, Tk, ENK
ACh, Tk
ACh, Tk
Oral
Entero-endocrine cells
ACh, Tk
Gland
(–)
ACh, DYN
ACh, NPY, CCK, 
CGRP, SOM
Arteriole
(+)
VIP, PACAP, GAL
NO, VIP, ATP
ACh, SOM
Myenteric 
plexus
Circular 
smooth
muscle
Submucous 
plexus
Anal
Longitudinal 
smooth
muscle
Submucous
plexus
Motor 
neuron
Sensory 
neuron
Interneuron
Mucosa
A  Cross section of intestinal wall
Extrinsic efferent 
and afferent nerves 
and vasculature
Figure 41–6  Organization of the enteric plexuses in the 
guinea pig.  The myenteric plexus and submucous plexus lie 
between the layers of intestinal wall (A and B). At least 14 types 
of neurons have been identified within the enteric system based 
on morphology, chemical coding, and functional properties (C). 
Four sets of motor neurons provide excitatory (+) and inhibitory 
(–) inputs to two smooth muscle layers. Three additional groups 
of motor neurons control secretions from the mucosa and pro-
duce vasodilation. The network also includes two major classes 
of intrinsic sensory neurons. (Abbreviations: ACh, acetylcholine; 
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CCK, cholecystokinin; CGRP, 
calcitonin gene-related polypeptide; DYN, dynorphin; ENK, 
enkephalin; GAL, galanin; NO, nitric oxide; NPY, neuropeptide 
Y; PACAP, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating peptide; SOM, 
somatostatin; Tk, tachykinin; VIP, vasoactive intestinal peptide; 
5-HT, serotonin.) (Parts A and B adapted, with permission, from 
Furness and Costa 1980; part C reproduced, with permission, 
from Furness et al. 2004. Copyright © 2004 Elsevier Ltd.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1021
Table 41–2  Autonomic Neurotransmitters and Their Receptors
Transmitter
Receptor
Responses
Norepinephrine
α1
Stimulates smooth muscle contraction in arteries, urethra,  
gastrointestinal tract, iris (pupillary dilation), uterine contractions  
during pregnancy, ejaculation; glycogenolysis in liver; glandular  
secretion (salivary glands, lacrimal glands).
 
α2
Presynaptic inhibition of transmitter release from sympathetic  
and parasympathetic nerve terminals; stimulates contraction  
in some arterial smooth muscle.
 
β1
Increases heart rate and strength of contraction.
 
β2
Relaxes smooth muscle in airways and gastrointestinal  
tract; stimulates glycogenolysis in liver.
 
β3
Stimulates lipolysis in white adipocytes and thermogenesis  
in brown adipocytes; inhibits bladder contraction.
Acetylcholine
Nicotinic
Fast EPSP in autonomic ganglion cells.
 
Muscarinic: M1, M2, M3
Glandular secretion; ocular circular muscle (pupillary constriction);  
ciliary muscles (focus of lens); stimulates endothelial production  
of NO and vasodilation; slows EPSPs in sympathetic neurons;  
slows heart rate; presynaptic inhibition at cholinergic nerve  
terminals; bladder contraction; salivary gland secretion.
Neuropeptide Y
Y1, Y2
Stimulates arterial contraction and potentiates responses  
mediated by α1-adrenergic receptors; presynaptic inhibition  
of transmitter release from some postganglionic sympathetic  
nerve terminals.
NO
Diffuses through  
membranes; often acts  
to stimulate intracellular  
soluble guanylate cyclase
Vasodilation, penile erection, urethral relaxation.
Vasoactive  
intestinal peptide
VIPAC1, VIPAC2
Glandular secretion and dilation of blood vessels  
supplying glands.
ATP
P2X, P2Y
Fast and slow excitation of smooth muscle in bladder,  
vas deferens, and arteries.
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential; NO, nitric oxide.
at the postganglionic synapse. For example, ACh and 
vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) are frequently 
co-released from neurons that control glandular 
secretion (Figure 41–7C). In salivary glands, the two 
transmitters act directly to evoke secretion. In addi-
tion, VIP causes dilation of the blood vessels supply-
ing the gland. Because cotransmitters can be released 
in varying proportions that depend on the frequency 
of presynaptic firing, different patterns of activity can 
regulate the volume of secretions, their protein and 
water content, and their viscosity. This regulation 
operates both through a direct effect on the gland cells 
and through indirect effects on the glandular blood 
flow that provides the water contained in secretions. 
Understanding the pharmacology of these receptors 
and the second-messenger signaling pathways they 
control is important in the treatment of numerous 
medical conditions, including hypertension, heart 
failure, asthma, emphysema, allergies, sexual dys-
function, and incontinence.
Autonomic Responses Involve Cooperation 
Between the Autonomic Divisions
To survive, animals and humans must have “fight-or-
flight” responses in order to stand and fight a preda-
tor or run away and live to see another day. Walter 
Cannon, in addition to introducing the concept of 


===== Page 3 =====
1022    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–7  Synaptic transmission in the peripheral auto-
nomic system.
A. In sympathetic ganglia, acetylcholine (ACh) can activate both 
nicotinic and muscarinic receptors to produce fast and slow 
postsynaptic potentials, respectively.
B. At neurovascular junctions, norepinephrine can simultane-
ously activate postsynaptic α1-adrenergic receptors to produce 
vasoconstriction and presynaptic α2-adrenergic receptors to 
inhibit further transmitter release.
C. Cotransmission involves the co-activation of more than one 
type of receptor by more than one transmitter. Parasympathetic 
postganglionic nerve terminals in the salivary glands release 
both ACh and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) to control 
secretion. At some autonomic synapses with end organs, three 
or more receptor types are activated.
Muscarinic 
ACh
receptor
VIP
receptor
Vasoactive
intestinal
peptide
α1-adrenergic
receptor
α2-
adrenergic
receptor
Nicotinic
receptor
Muscarinic
receptor
A  Acetylcholine
B  Norepinephrine
C  Acetylcholine + VIP
Norepinephrine
ACh
ACh
Secretomotor
junction
Neurovascular
junction
Ganglionic
synapse
homeostasis, also appreciated that this fight-or-flight 
response is a critical sympathetic function.
Two important ideas underlie this insight. First, the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems play comple-
mentary, even antagonistic, roles; the sympathetic sys-
tem promotes arousal, defense, and escape, whereas the 
parasympathetic system promotes eating and procrea-
tion. Second, actions of the sympathetic system are rela-
tively diffuse; they influence all parts of the body and 
once turned on can persist for some time. These ideas 
are behind the popular notion of the “adrenaline rush” 
produced by excitement, as by a roller coaster ride.
We now know that extreme sympathetic responses 
such as “fight-or-flight” can have long-term pathologi-
cal consequences resulting in the syndrome known as 
post-traumatic stress disorder (Chapter 61). This disor-
der was first recognized in soldiers during World War 
I, when it was referred to as “shell shock.” A variety of 
life-threatening experiences, ranging from sexual abuse 
and domestic violence to aircraft disasters, can also 
induce post-traumatic stress disorder, which affects 
millions of people in the United States alone.
Because the fight-or-flight model assumes antago-
nistic roles for the sympathetic and parasympathetic 
systems, Cannon’s model led to an overemphasis on 
the extremes of autonomic behavior. Actually, during 
everyday life, the different divisions of the autonomic 
system are tightly integrated. In addition, we now 
know that the sympathetic system is less diffusely 
organized than first envisioned by Cannon. Even 
within the sympathetic division, subsets of neurons 
control specific targets, and these pathways can be 
activated independently.
As in the somatic motor system, reflexes in the 
autonomic motor system are elicited through sen-
sory pathways and are hierarchically organized. An 
important feature of this organization is that it allows 
for coordination between the different divisions of the 
autonomic system. The interplay between different 
systems in simple autonomic behaviors is analogous 
to the role of antagonist muscles in locomotion. To 
walk, one must alternately contract antagonist mus-
cles that flex and extend a joint. Similarly, the sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic systems are often partners 
in the regulation of end organs. In most cases, ranging 
from the simplest reflexes to more complex behaviors, 
all three peripheral divisions of the autonomic system 
work together. We illustrate this organization with two 
examples: control of the bladder (micturition reflex) 
and regulation of blood pressure.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1023
Bladder Control
The micturition reflex is an example of a physiologi-
cal cycle resulting from coordination between sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic systems. In this cycle, the 
bladder is emptied by the parasympathetic pathway, 
which contracts the bladder and relaxes the urethra. 
The sympathetic system allows the bladder to fill by 
stimulating the urethra and inhibiting the parasym-
pathetic pathway, thus inhibiting the reflex for blad-
der emptying. The sensory feedback required for this 
behavior is integrated with the motor outflow at both 
spinal and supraspinal levels (Figure 41–8).
Spinal components of the reflex are most influen-
tial during the storage phase of the micturition cycle, 
when sympathetic and somatic motor effects predomi-
nate. When the bladder is full, its distension triggers 
a sensory signal sufficient to activate the pontine mic-
turition center (PMC). Descending signals from the 
PMC then increase parasympathetic outflow. Somatic 
control of the external urinary sphincter, which con-
sists of striated muscle, contributes to both phases 
of the micturition cycle and is a voluntary behavior 
that originates through forebrain mechanisms (Figure 
41–8). Patients with spinal cord injuries at the cervi-
cal or thoracic levels retain the reflex but not voluntary 
control of urination, because the connections between 
the bladder and the pons are severed.
Blood Pressure Regulation
The baroreceptor reflex is one of the simplest mecha-
nisms for regulating blood pressure and further illus-
trates coordinated homeostatic control by antagonist 
sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways. It pre-
vents orthostatic hypotension and fainting by com-
pensating for rapid hydrostatic effects produced by 
changes in posture. When a recumbent person stands 
up, the sudden elevation of the head above the heart 
causes a transient decrease of cerebral blood pressure 
that is rapidly sensed by baroreceptors in the carotid 
sinus in the neck (Figure 41–9). Other important pres-
sure sensors are located in the aortic arch and in the 
pulmonary circulation.
When neurons in the ventrolateral medulla detect 
the decrease in afferent baroreceptor activity produced 
by low blood pressure, they produce a reflexive sup-
pression of parasympathetic activity to the heart and 
stimulation of sympathetic activity to the heart and vas-
cular system. These changes in autonomic tone restore 
blood pressure by increasing heart rate, the strength 
of cardiac contractions, and the overall vascular resist-
ance to blood flow through arterial vasoconstriction.
Under the converse condition of elevated arte-
rial pressure, the increase in baroreceptor activity 
enhances parasympathetic inhibition of the heart and 
decreases sympathetic stimulation of cardiac function 
and vascular resistance. In general, the parasympa-
thetic component of the baroreceptor reflex has a more 
rapid onset and is briefer than the sympathetic compo-
nent. Consequently, parasympathetic activity is criti-
cal for the rapid response of baroreceptor reflexes but 
less important than sympathetic activity for long-term 
blood pressure regulation.
Visceral Sensory Information Is Relayed to the 
Brain Stem and Higher Brain Structures
Visceral sensory information reaches the brain mainly 
through two cranial nerves (IX and X), which end in 
caudal segments of the nucleus of the solitary tract 
(NTS), and through the abdominal splanchnic nerves, 
which end in the spinal cord (Chapter 40). The splanch-
nic information is transmitted to the brain through the 
spinothalamic tract (Chapter 4), which branches out 
along the way and also sends afferents to the NTS and 
lateral parabrachial nucleus.
The NTS relays sensory information in two differ-
ent directions. First, it projects to networks in the brain 
stem and spinal cord that control and coordinate auto-
nomic reflexes (as we saw for the baroreceptor reflex). 
In this way, visceral sensory signals relayed through 
the NTS regulate vagal motor control of the heart and 
gastrointestinal tract directly. Some neurons in the 
NTS project to neurons in the ventrolateral medullary 
reticular formation that control blood pressure by dif-
ferentially regulating blood flow in particular vascular 
beds (Figure 41–9). Second, the NTS sends ascending 
projections to the forebrain, relaying visceral informa-
tion to higher structures (Figure 41–10A). These higher 
structures, including the hypothalamus, use this infor-
mation to coordinate autonomic, neuroendocrine, and 
behavioral responses.
Visceral sensory information is relayed from 
the NTS to the forebrain via direct and indirect pro-
jections (Figure 41–10A). The major indirect path-
way involves the lateral parabrachial nucleus, which 
receives afferents from the NTS and sends efferents 
to higher structures, including the amygdala, hypo-
thalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, insular 
cortex, and infralimbic/prelimbic cortex. The direct 
projections from the NTS target many of these same 
forebrain sites. The rostral NTS is an important part 
of the afferent taste pathway (Chapter 29). Information 


===== Page 5 =====
Periaqueductal 
gray matter
Pontine 
micturition center
(Barrington’s nucleus)
Pons
Lumbar 
spinal cord
Sacral 
spinal cord
Onuf's nucleus
Sacral
parasympathetic
nucleus
Dorsal root
ganglion
Sympathetic inferior
mesenteric ganglion
Pelvic nerve
Parasympathetic
bladder ganglion
Pelvic nerve
Pudendal nerve
Hypogastric nerve
Urinary bladder- 
smooth muscle
Detrusor
Urethra
External 
sphincter
+
–
GABA
+ Nic
+ M3, + P2X
– NO
+
+
+
+
– α2
– β3
+ α1
–
+
+
GABA
+
+
Figure 41–8  The micturition reflex requires interplay 
between the parasympathetic and sympathetic divisions of 
the autonomic system. (Adapted from DeGroat, Booth, and 
Yoshimura 1993.)
    When bladder volume is low, urinary outflow is inhibited 
because activity in the sympathetic pathway is greater than activ-
ity in the parasympathetic pathway. Mild distension of the detru-
sor (storage portion of the bladder) initiates a low level of sensory 
activity, which reflexively activates spinal preganglionic neurons. 
The resulting low level of preganglionic activity is effectively 
transmitted and amplified by the sympathetic inferior mesenteric 
ganglion but filtered out by the parasympathetic bladder ganglion 
because of differences in patterns of synaptic convergence in 
the two ganglia. The resulting predominance of sympathetic tone 
keeps the detrusor relaxed and the urethra constricted. Sympa-
thetic postganglionic fibers also reduce parasympathetic activity 
by inhibiting preganglionic release of acetylcholine. In addition to 
their effects on the autonomic outflow, the sensory signals are 
sufficient to keep the external urinary sphincter closed.
     When filling causes the bladder to reach a critical volume, 
the associated increase in sensory activity reaches a thresh-
old that allows impulses to pass through the pontine micturi-
tion center (Barrington’s nucleus). Descending activity from 
this nucleus then further excites the parasympathetic outflow. 
The resulting increase in parasympathetic preganglionic fir-
ing promotes summation of fast excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials and initiation of postsynaptic action potentials in 
the bladder ganglion as it switches to its “on” state. During 
the emptying process, descending pathways also inhibit the 
sympathetic and somatic outflows through inhibitory spinal 
interneurons. Inhibition of somatic motor neurons in Onuf’s 
nucleus causes relaxation and opening of the external sphinc-
ter. In this figure, the sacral spinal cord is enlarged relative to 
the other slices.
    (Abbreviations: α1, alpha-1 adrenergic receptor, α2, alpha-2 
adrenergic receptor, β3, beta-3 adrenergic receptor, GABA, 
γ-aminobutyric acid; M3, muscarinic ACh receptor 3; nic, nico-
tinic receptor; NO, nitric oxide; P2X, purinergic receptor.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1025
Figure 41–9  The baroreceptor reflex behaves as a negative 
feedback loop with gain. Arterial blood pressure is sensed 
by baroreceptors, a type of stretch receptor neuron, in the 
carotid sinus near the base of the brain. After integration in the 
medulla, this information provides negative feedback control 
of the cardiovascular system. The sympathetic component of 
the circuit includes outputs that stimulate the heart’s pump-
ing capacity (cardiac output) by increasing heart rate and the 
strength of contractions. In addition, sympathetic stimulation 
causes arteries to contract, which raises the hydraulic resist-
ance to blood flow. Together, the effects of increased cardiac 
output and increased vascular resistance raise mean arterial 
blood pressure. Inhibitory projections from the caudal to the 
rostral ventral lateral medulla create negative feedback so 
that an increase in blood pressure inhibits sympathetic activ-
ity, whereas a decrease raises sympathetic activity. Although 
omitted for simplicity, parasympathetic neurons in the cardiac 
ganglion also contribute to the reflex by creating an inhibitory 
cardiac input that is functionally antagonistic to the sympathetic 
pathway (Figure 41–10). During baroreceptor reflexes, para-
sympathetic activity within the heart is therefore increased by 
hypertension and reduced by hypotension.
+
Nucleus of the
 solitary tract 
Descending 
vasomotor 
pathways
Caudal ventral 
lateral medulla
Baroreceptor neurons 
in nodose ganglion
Rostral ventral 
lateral medulla
Heart
Stellate 
ganglion
Paravertebral 
sympathetic 
chain ganglia
Arterial 
resistance 
vessels
Spinal 
preganglionic 
sympathetic 
cell column
+
+
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
in this pathway is relayed via the medial parabrachial 
nucleus to the taste area of insular cortex.
Central Control of Autonomic Function Can 
Involve the Periaqueductal Gray, Medial 
Prefrontal Cortex, and Amygdala
The periaqueductal gray, which surrounds the cerebral 
aqueduct in the midbrain, receives inputs from most 
parts of the central autonomic network and projects to 
the medullary reticular formation to initiate integrated 
behavioral and autonomic responses. For example, 
in the defensive “fight-or-flight” response, the peri-
aqueductal gray helps redirect blood flow from the 
digestive system to the hind limbs, thus enhancing 
running (Figure 41–10B).
The medial prefrontal cerebral cortex is a visceral 
sensory-motor region. It includes two functional areas 
that interact with each other: the rostral insular cortex 
and the rostromedial tip of the cingulate gyrus (also 
referred to as the infralimbic and prelimbic areas). 
Stimulation here can produce a variety of autonomic 
effects including contractions of the stomach and 
changes in blood pressure. These visceral sensory and 
motor areas of cortex send descending projections to 
the parts of the central autonomic network in the brain 
stem discussed above.
Finally, visceral regions of cortex, along with 
many subcortical parts of the central autonomic 


===== Page 7 =====
1026    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
B  Efferent pathways
A  Afferent pathways
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Cortex
Amygdala
Hypothalamus
Nucleus ambiguus
Ventrolateral
medulla
Gut
Heart
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Cortex
Parasympathetic
input
Sympathetic
input
Amygdala
Hypothalamus
Nucleus ambiguus
Ventrolateral
medulla
Intermediolateral
cell column
Heart
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Parabrachial
nucleus
Parabrachial
nucleus
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Figure 41–10  The central autonomic network. Nearly all of 
the cell groups illustrated here are interconnected with one 
another, forming the central autonomic network.
A. Visceral information (solid lines) is distributed to the brain 
from the nucleus of the solitary tract and from ascending 
spinal pathways activated by the splanchnic nerves (from the 
gut, for example). The nucleus of the solitary tract distributes 
this information to preganglionic parasympathetic neurons 
(the dorsal motor vagal nucleus and nucleus ambiguus), to 
regions of the ventrolateral medulla that coordinate auto-
nomic and respiratory reflexes, and to more rostral parts 
of the central autonomic network in the pons (parabrachial 
nucleus), midbrain (periaqueductal gray), and forebrain. The 
parabrachial nucleus also projects to many of the more ros-
tral components of the central autonomic network, including 
visceral and gustatory nuclei of the thalamus (dotted lines). 
Other pathways from the spinal cord (not shown) also  
transmit visceral information to many parts of the central 
autonomic network, including the nucleus of the solitary 
tract, parabrachial nucleus, periaqueductal gray, hypothala-
mus, amygdala, and cortex. The spinal cord also projects to 
the main somatosensory nucleus of the thalamus  
(ventral posterolateral nucleus).
B. All of the efferent pathways shown here (except perhaps for 
the periaqueductal gray) project directly to autonomic pregangli-
onic neurons. In the hypothalamus, the descending division of 
the paraventricular nucleus and three cell clusters in the lateral 
zone project heavily to both parasympathetic and sympathetic 
preganglionic neurons. Other pathways (not shown) arise from 
certain monoaminergic cell groups in the brain stem, including 
noradrenergic neurons in the A5 region and serotonergic neu-
rons in the raphe nuclei.
network, interact with the amygdala. Complex path-
ways between certain amygdalar cell groups under-
lie certain conditioned emotional responses—learned 
associations between specific stimuli and behaviors 
with accompanying autonomic responses. When a 
rat learns that a mild electric shock follows an audi-
tory cue, the auditory cue alone comes to produce 
the elevated heart rate and freezing that was origi-
nally elicited by the shock alone (Chapters 42 and 53). 
Such learned responses are prevented by selective 
lesions of the amygdalar region, which projects to the 
hypothalamus and lower brain stem parts of the cen-
tral autonomic network.
The Neuroendocrine System Links the Brain to 
Physiological Responses Through Hormones
Another effector arm of the hypothalamus is the neu-
roendocrine system, which controls secretion of hor-
mones by the pituitary gland. The pituitary has two 
functionally and anatomically distinct subdivisions, 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1027
Figure 41–11  The paraventricular nucleus in the hypothalamus is 
a microcosm of neuroendocrine, autonomic, and sensory-motor 
integration.  The three structural-functional divisions of the paraven-
tricular nucleus are shown. The magnocellular neuroendocrine division 
comprises two distinct although partly interdigitated pools of neurons 
that normally release vasopressin (VAS) or oxytocin (OXY). Their axons 
course through the internal zone of the median eminence and terminate 
in the posterior pituitary. Two other populations of magnocellular vaso-
pressin and oxytocin neurons lie in the supraoptic nucleus along the 
base of the brain.
  The parvocellular neuroendocrine division includes three major,  
separate (although partly interdigitated) pools of neurons that control 
anterior pituitary hormone secretion. Their axons end in the external 
zone of the median eminence, where they release their peptide  
neurotransmitters—somatostatin (SS), growth hormone-inhibiting 
hormone (GIH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or corticotropin-
releasing hormone (CRH)—into the hypophysial portal veins.
   The descending division has three parts—dorsal (d), lateral (l), and 
ventral (v)—each comprising topographically organized conventional 
neurons that project to the brain stem and spinal cord. Their axons 
terminate in many parts of the central autonomic network in the brain 
stem (Figure 41–10), the marginal zone (lamina I) of the dorsal horn of 
the spinal cord and spinal trigeminal nucleus, and a number of regions 
in the brain stem reticular formation and periaqueductal gray matter. 
The descending division modulates autonomic outflow (and inflow), the 
inflow of nociceptive information, and eating and drinking behaviors. 
Appropriate integration of magnocellular neuroendocrine, parvocellular 
neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral responses is mediated 
primarily by external inputs rather than by interneurons or extensive 
recurrent axon collaterals of projection neurons. Circulating steroid and 
thyroid hormones also produce selective effects on particular types of 
neurons in the paraventricular nucleus.
the anterior and posterior pituitary. The posterior 
pituitary is an extension of the brain and contains 
hormone-secreting axon terminals of hypothalamic 
neurons. These terminals secrete vasopressin or oxy-
tocin directly into the systemic circulation. The anterior 
pituitary, on the other hand, is entirely nonneuronal 
and is composed of five types of endocrine cells. Hor-
mone secretion from these cells is controlled by stimu-
latory and inhibitory factors released by hypothalamic 
neurons into a specialized circulatory system that 
carries blood from the base of the brain (median emi-
nence) to the anterior pituitary.
Hypothalamic Axon Terminals in the Posterior 
Pituitary Release Oxytocin and Vasopressin Directly 
Into the Blood
Large neurons in the paraventricular and supraop-
tic nuclei form the magnocellular component of the 
SS
TRH
l
CRH
d
Neuroendocrine 
divison:
Paraventricular
nucleus
Median
eminence
Brain stem and
spinal cord
Posterior
pituitary
v
VAS
OXY
Descending 
division
Parvocellular
Magnocellular
neuroendocrine motor system of the hypothalamus 
(Figure 41–11). The magnocellular neurons send their 
axons through the hypothalamo-hypophysial tract to 
the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis (Figure 41–12). 
Approximately one-half of these neurons synthesize 
and secrete vasopressin (the antidiuretic hormone) 
into the general circulation; the other half synthesize 
and secrete oxytocin, a structurally similar hormone. 
Both hormones circulate to organs, where vasopressin 
controls blood pressure and water reabsorption by the 
kidney and oxytocin controls uterine smooth muscle 
and milk release.
Vasopressin and oxytocin are nine-amino acid pep-
tide hormones. Like other peptide hormones, they are 
synthesized in the cell body as larger prohormones 
(Chapter 16) and then cleaved within Golgi transport 
vesicles before traveling down the axon to release sites in 
the posterior pituitary. The genes for these peptides have 
similar sequences and probably arose by duplication.


===== Page 9 =====
1028    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–12  The hypothalamus controls the pituitary 
gland both directly and indirectly through neuroendocrine 
neurons. Neurons in the magnocellular neuroendocrine sys-
tem (blue) send their axons directly to the posterior pituitary 
(neurohypophysis) where they release the peptides vasopres-
sin and oxytocin into the general circulation. Neurons in the 
parvocellular neuroendocrine system (yellow) send their axons 
to the hypophysial portal system in the median eminence and 
pituitary stalk. Portal veins transport hypothalamic hormones 
(peptides and dopamine) to the anterior pituitary (adenohy-
pophysis) where they increase the release of hormones from 
five classic types of endocrine cells (Figure 41–11). The output 
of neuroendocrine neurons is regulated in large part by inputs 
from other regions of the brain. (Adapted from Reichlin 1978, 
and Gay 1972.)
Hypothalamus
Pituitary stalk
Inferior hypophysial
artery
Superior hypophysial
artery
Long portal
vessels
Short portal vessels
Median eminence
Adenohypophysis
(Anterior pituitary)
Neurohypophysis
(Posterior pituitary)
Endocrine Cells in the Anterior Pituitary Secrete 
Hormones in Response to Specific Factors Released 
by Hypothalamic Neurons
In the 1950s, Geoffrey Harris proposed that the ante-
rior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, is regulated indi-
rectly by the hypothalamus. He showed that the 
hypophysial portal veins, which carry blood from the 
hypothalamic median eminence to the anterior pitui-
tary, transport factors released from hypothalamic 
neurons that control anterior pituitary hormone 
secretion (Figure 41–12). In the 1970s, Andrew 
Schally, Roger Guillemin, and Wylie Vale determined 
the structure of a group of hypothalamic peptide hor-
mones that control pituitary hormone secretion from 
the five classic endocrine cell types in the anterior 
pituitary. These hormones, which are released into 
the median eminence by hypothalamic neurons, fall 
into two classes: releasing hormones and release-
inhibiting hormones. Only one anterior pituitary hor-
mone, prolactin, is under predominantly inhibitory 
control (mediated by dopamine).
The parvocellular neuroendocrine motor zone of 
the hypothalamus is centered along the wall of the 
third ventricle (Figure 41–2A) and contains neu-
rons that project to and release their hormones into 
the median eminence. The parvocellular neurons 
releasing gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) are 
atypical in that they are scattered in a continuum 
extending from the medial septum through to the 
mediobasal hypothalamus. They are controlled by 
upstream neurons that release kisspeptin. The remain-
ing parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons lie within 
the paraventricular and arcuate nuclei and the short 
periventricular region between them (Figures 41–2 
and 41–11).
Distinct pools of neurons in and around the para-
ventricular nucleus release corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or 
somatostatin (or growth hormone release-inhibiting 
hormone) (Figure 41–11). The CRH neurons control 
the release of anterior pituitary adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH), which in turn controls the release 
of cortisol (glucocorticoids) from the adrenal cortex. 
Thus, this pool of CRH neurons is the “final com-
mon pathway” for all centrally mediated glucocorti-
coid stress hormonal responses. The arcuate nucleus 
contains two pools of parvocellular neuroendocrine 
neurons. One group releases growth hormone–releasing  
hormone (GHRH) and the other dopamine, which 
inhibits prolactin secretion. Some of the dopaminergic 
neurons are distributed dorsally as far as the paraven-
tricular nucleus.
The axons of all these parvocellular neuroendo-
crine neurons travel in the hypothalamo-hypophysial 
tract and end in the specialized proximal end of the 
pituitary stalk, the median eminence (Figure 41–12). 
There, in a region of capillary loops in the external 
zone of the median eminence, the axon terminals 
release the various hypophysiotropic factors. While 
the median eminence is within the brain, it is con-
sidered outside the blood–brain barrier. This is due 
to the fenestrated nature of the median eminence 


