===== Page 1 =====
276    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Two morphological types of synapses are common 
in the brain: Gray types I and II (named after E. G. 
Gray, who described them using electron microscopy). 
Most type I synapses are glutamatergic and excitatory, 
whereas most type II synapses are GABAergic and 
inhibitory. Type I synapses have round synaptic vesi-
cles, an electron-dense region (the active zone) on the 
presynaptic membrane, and an even larger electron-
dense region in the postsynaptic membrane opposed 
to the active zone (known as the postsynaptic density), 
which gives type I synapses an asymmetric appear-
ance. Type II synapses have oval or flattened synaptic 
vesicles and less obvious presynaptic membrane spe-
cializations and postsynaptic densities, resulting in a 
more symmetric appearance (Figure 13–2). (Although 
type I synapses are mostly excitatory and type II inhib-
itory, the two morphological types have proved to be 
only a first approximation to transmitter biochemistry. 
Immunocytochemistry affords much more reliable dis-
tinctions between transmitter types, as discussed in 
Chapter 16).
Although dendrites are normally postsynap-
tic and axon terminals presynaptic, all four regions 
of the nerve cell—axon, presynaptic terminals, cell 
body, and dendrites—can be presynaptic or post-
synaptic sites of chemical synapses. The most com-
mon types of contact, illustrated in Figure 13–2, are 
axodendritic, axosomatic, and axo-axonic (by con-
vention, the presynaptic element is identified first). 
Excitatory synapses are typically axodendritic and 
occur mostly on dendritic spines. Inhibitory syn-
apses are normally formed on dendritic shafts, the 
cell body, and the axon initial segment. Dendroden-
dritic and somasomatic synapses are also found, but 
they are rare.
As a general rule, the proximity of a synapse 
to the axon initial segment is thought to determine 
its effectiveness. A given postsynaptic current gen-
erated at a site near the cell body will  produce a 
greater change in membrane potential at the trigger 
zone of the axon initial segment, and therefore have 
a greater influence on action potential output than an 
equal current generated at more remote sites in the 
dendrites. This is because some of the charge enter-
ing the postsynaptic membrane at a remote site will 
leak out of the dendritic membrane as the synaptic 
potential propagates to the cell body (Chapter 9). 
Some neurons compensate for this effect by placing 
Figure 13–2  The two most com-
mon morphological types of 
synapses in the central nervous 
system are Gray type I and  
type II.  Type I is usually excitatory, 
whereas type II is usually inhibi-
tory. Differences include the shape 
of vesicles, the prominence of pre-
synaptic densities, total area of the 
active zone, width of the synaptic 
cleft, and presence of a dense 
basement membrane. Type I syn-
apses typically contact specialized 
dendritic projections, called spines, 
and less commonly contact the 
shafts of dendrites. Type II  
synapses contact the cell body 
(axosomatic), dendritic shaft (axo-
dendritic), axon initial segment 
(axo-axonic), and presynaptic 
terminals of another neuron (not 
shown).
Spine
Spine
synapse
Shaft
synapse
Axodendritic
synapse
Type I
Type II
Type II
Axosomatic
synapse
Type II
Axo-axonic
synapse
Type I
Dense
basement
membrane
Round 
synaptic
vesicles
Wide
synaptic
cleft
Postsynaptic
density
Large active
zone
Type II
Flattened 
synaptic
vesicles
Modest
basement
membrane
Small active
zone
Prominent
presynaptic
dense 
projections
Less obvious
dense 
projections
Narrow
synaptic
cleft
Postsynaptic
density


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     277
more glutamate receptors at distal synapses than at 
proximal synapses, ensuring that inputs at different 
locations along the dendritic tree will have a more 
equivalent influence at the initial segment. In con-
trast to axodendritic and axosomatic input, most axo-
axonic synapses have no direct effect on the trigger 
zone of the postsynaptic cell. Instead, they affect neu-
ral activity by controlling the amount of transmitter 
released from the presynaptic terminals (Chapter 15).
Excitatory Synaptic Transmission Is Mediated 
by Ionotropic Glutamate Receptor-Channels 
Permeable to Cations
The excitatory transmitter released from the pre-
synaptic terminals of the stretch-receptor sensory 
neurons is the amino acid l-glutamate, the major 
excitatory transmitter in the brain and spinal cord. 
Eccles and his colleagues discovered that the EPSP in 
spinal motor cells results from the opening of iono-
tropic glutamate receptor-channels, which are per-
meable to both Na+ and K+. This ionic mechanism is 
similar to that produced by ACh at the neuromuscu-
lar junction described in Chapter 12. Like the ACh 
receptor-channels, glutamate receptor-channels con-
duct both Na+ and K+ with nearly equal permeabil-
ity. As a result, the reversal potential for current flow 
through these channels is 0 mV (see Figure 12–7).
Glutamate receptors can be divided into two 
broad categories: ionotropic receptors and metabo-
tropic receptors (Figure 13–3). There are three major 
types of ionotropic glutamate receptors: AMPA, 
kainate, and NMDA, named according to the types 
of pharmacological agonists that activate them 
(α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic 
acid, kainate, and N-methyl-d-aspartate, respec-
tively). These receptors are also differentially sensi-
tive to antagonists. The NMDA receptor is selectively 
blocked by the drug APV (2-amino-5-phosphono-
valeric acid). The AMPA and kainate receptors are 
not affected by APV, but both are blocked by the 
drug CNQX (6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione). 
Because of this shared pharmacological sensitivity, 
these two types are sometimes called the non-NMDA 
receptors. Another important distinction between 
NMDA and non-NMDA receptors is that the NMDA 
receptor channel is highly permeable to Ca2+, whereas 
most non-NMDA receptors are not. There are several 
types of metabotropic glutamate receptors, most of 
which can be activated by trans-(1S,3R)-1-amino-1,3- 
cyclopentanedicarboxylic acid (ACPD).
Figure 13–3  Different classes of glutamate receptors regu-
late excitatory synaptic actions in neurons in the spinal 
cord and brain.
A. Ionotropic glutamate receptors directly gate ion channels 
permeable to cations. The AMPA and kainate types bind the 
glutamate agonists AMPA or kainate, respectively; these recep-
tors contain a channel that is permeable to Na+ and K+. The 
NMDA receptor binds the glutamate agonist NMDA; it contains 
a channel permeable to Ca2+, K+, and Na+. It has binding sites 
for glutamate, glycine, Zn2+, phencyclidine (PCP, or angel dust), 
MK801 (an experimental drug), and Mg2+, each of which regu-
lates the functioning of the channel differently.
B. Binding of glutamate (Glu) to metabotropic glutamate recep-
tors indirectly gates ion channels by activating a GTP-binding 
protein (G protein), which in turn interacts with effector mol-
ecules that alter metabolic and ion channel activity (Chapter 11).
P
P
P
Effector
AMPA or kainate
NMDA
Glu
Glu
Na+
Na+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Mg2+
Zn2+
PCP
K+
Glu
Gly
Receptor
B  Metabotropic glutamate receptor
A  Ionotropic glutamate receptor
G protein
K+
The action of all ionotropic glutamate receptors is 
excitatory or depolarizing because the reversal poten-
tial of their ionic current is near zero, causing channel 
opening to produce a depolarizing inward current at 
negative membrane potentials. In contrast, metabo-
tropic receptors can produce either excitation or inhi-
bition, depending on the reversal potential of the ionic 
currents that they regulate and whether they promote 
channel opening or channel closing.


===== Page 3 =====
278    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
The Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors Are Encoded 
by a Large Gene Family
Over the past 30 years, a large variety of genes cod-
ing for the subunits of all the major neurotransmitter 
receptors have been identified. In addition, many of 
these subunit genes are alternatively spliced, gener-
ating further diversity. This molecular analysis dem-
onstrates evolutionary linkages among the structure 
of receptors that enable us to classify them into three 
distinct families (Figure 13–4).
The ionotropic glutamate receptor family includes 
the AMPA, kainate, and NMDA receptors. The genes 
encoding the AMPA and kainate receptors are more 
closely related to one another than are the genes 
encoding the NMDA receptors. Surprisingly, the glu-
tamate receptor family bears little resemblance to the 
Figure 13–4  The three families of ionotropic receptors.
A. The nicotinic ACh, GABAA, and glycine receptor-channels are 
all pentamers composed of several types of related subunits. 
As shown here, the ligand-binding domain is formed by the 
extracellular amino-terminal region of the protein. Each  
subunit has a membrane domain with four membrane-spanning 
α-helixes (M1–M4) and a short extracellular carboxyl terminus. 
The M2 helix lines the channel pore.
B. The glutamate receptor-channels are tetramers, often com-
posed of two different types of closely related subunits (here 
denoted 1 and 2). The subunits have a large extracellular amino 
terminus, a membrane domain with three membrane-spanning 
α-helixes (M1, M3, and M4), a large extracellular loop connect-
ing the M3 and M4 helixes, and an intracellular carboxyl termi-
nus. The M2 segment forms a loop that dips into and out of the 
cytoplasmic side of the membrane, contributing to the selectiv-
ity filter of the channel. The glutamate binding site is formed by 
residues in the extracellular amino terminus and in the M3–M4 
extracellular loop.
C. The adenosine triphosphate (ATP) receptor-channels  
(or purinergic P2X receptors) are trimers. Each subunit  
possesses two membrane-spanning α-helixes (M1 and M2) 
and a large extracellular loop that binds ATP. The M2 helix lines 
the pore.
γ
α
β
δ
α
β
α
γ
β
α
β
α
α
β
α
A  ACh, GABA, and glycine
 
receptor-channels
B  Glutamate receptor-channels
C  ATP receptor-channels
NH2
NH2
COOH
M2
NH2
ACh
GABAA
Glycine
AMPA / Kainate / NMDA
P2X
1
1
2
2
COOH
M1M2
M1
M3M4
M1M2M3M4
Ligand 
binding
Ligand 
binding
Ligand 
binding
COOH
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
two other gene families that encode ionotropic recep-
tors (one of which encodes the nicotinic ACh, GABA, 
and glycine receptors, and the other the ATP receptors, 
as described later).
The AMPA, kainate, and NMDA receptors are 
tetramers composed of two or more types of related 
subunits, with all four subunits arranged around a 
central pore. The AMPA receptor subunits are encoded 
by four separate genes (GluA1–GluA4), whereas the 
kainate receptor subunits are encoded by five differ-
ent genes (GluK1–GluK5). Autoantibodies to the GluA3 
subunit of the AMPA receptor are thought to play an 
important role in some forms of epilepsy. These anti-
bodies actually mimic glutamate by activating GluA3-
containing receptors, resulting in excessive excitation 
and seizures. NMDA receptors, on the other hand, are 
encoded by a family consisting of five genes that fall 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     279
into two groups: The GluN1 gene encodes one type 
of subunit, whereas four distinct GluN2 genes (A–D) 
encode a second type. Each NMDA receptor contains 
two GluN1 subunits and two GluN2 subunits.
Glutamate Receptors Are Constructed From a Set of 
Structural Modules
All ionotropic glutamate receptor subunits share a com-
mon architecture with similar motifs. Eric Gouaux and 
colleagues have provided important insights into the 
structure of the ionotropic glutamate receptors, initially 
through an X-ray crystallographic model of an AMPA 
receptor composed of four GluA2 subunits. The sub-
units have a large extracellular amino-terminal domain, 
which is followed in the primary amino acid sequence 
by an extracellular ligand-binding domain and a trans-
membrane domain (Figures 13–4B and 13–5). The 
transmembrane domain contains three transmembrane 
α-helixes (M1, M3, and M4) and a loop (M2) between 
the M1 and M3 helixes that dips into and out of the cyto-
plasmic side of the membrane. This M2 loop resembles 
the pore-lining P loop of K+ channels and helps form the 
selectivity filter of the channel (see Figure 8–12).
Both extracellular domains are homologous to bac-
terial amino acid binding protein domains. The ligand-
binding domain is a bi-lobed clamshell-like structure 
(Figure 13–5A), whereas the amino-terminal domain 
is homologous to the glutamate-binding domain of 
metabotropic glutamate receptors but does not bind 
glutamate. Instead, in the ionotropic glutamate recep-
tors, this domain is involved in subunit assembly, the 
modulation of receptor function by ligands other than 
glutamate, and/or the interaction with other synaptic 
proteins to regulate synapse development.
The ligand-binding domain is formed by two dis-
tinct regions in the linear sequence of the protein. One 
region comprises the end of the amino-terminal domain 
up to the M1 transmembrane helix; the second region is 
formed by the large extracellular loop connecting the M3 
and M4 helixes (Figure 13–5A). In the ionotropic recep-
tors, the binding of a molecule of glutamate within the 
clamshell triggers the closure of the lobes of the clam-
shell; competitive antagonists also bind to the clamshell 
but fail to trigger clamshell closure. This suggests that 
the conformational change associated with clamshell 
closure is important for opening the ion channel.
In addition to the core subunits that form the 
receptor-channel, AMPA receptors contain additional 
(or auxiliary) subunits that regulate receptor trafficking 
to the membrane and function. One important class of 
auxiliary subunits comprises the transmembrane AMPA 
receptor regulatory proteins (TARPs). A TARP subunit 
has four transmembrane domains, and its association 
with the pore-forming AMPA receptor subunits enhances 
the surface membrane trafficking, synaptic localization, 
and gating of the AMPA receptors. The first TARP fam-
ily member to be identified was stargazin, which was 
isolated through a genetic screen in the stargazer mutant 
mouse, so named because these animals have a tendency 
to tip their heads backward and stare upward. Loss of 
stargazin leads to a complete loss of AMPA receptors 
from cerebellar granule cells, which results in cerebellar 
ataxia and frequent seizures. Other members of the TARP 
family are similarly required for AMPA receptor traffick-
ing to the surface membrane in other types of neurons.
High-resolution cryo-electron microscopy has 
revealed the structure of TARP subunits in association 
with the AMPA receptor subunits (Figure 13–5D,E). 
These studies suggest that interactions between a 
TARP subunit and the ligand-binding domain clam-
shell of an AMPA receptor can stabilize the receptor 
in the glutamate-bound open state, thereby enhancing 
the channel open time, single-channel conductance, 
and affinity for glutamate.
Given the homology among the various subtypes 
of glutamate receptors, it is not surprising that the 
overall structure of the kainate and NMDA receptors is 
similar to that of the homomeric GluA2 receptor. How-
ever, there are some important differences that give 
rise to the distinct physiological functions of the dif-
ferent receptors. The high permeability of the NMDA 
receptor-channels to Ca2+ has been localized to a single 
amino acid residue in the pore-forming M2 loop. All 
NMDA receptor subunits contain the neutral residue 
asparagine at this position in the pore. In most types 
of AMPA receptor subunits, the residue at this position 
is the uncharged amino acid glutamine; in the GluA2 
subunit, however, the corresponding M2 residue is 
arginine, a positively charged basic amino acid. Inclu-
sion of even a single GluA2 subunit prevents the AMPA 
receptor-channel from conducting Ca2+ (Figure 13–6B), 
most likely as a result of strong electrostatic repulsion by 
the arginine. The opening of AMPA receptor-channels 
in cells that lack the GluA2 subunit can produce a sig-
nificant Ca2+ influx because the pores of these receptors 
lack the positively charged arginine residue.
Interestingly, the DNA of the GluA2 gene does not 
encode an arginine residue at this position in the M2 
loop but rather codes for a glutamine residue. After 
transcription, the codon for glutamine in the GluA2 
mRNA is replaced with one for arginine through an 
enzymatic process termed RNA editing (Figure 13–6A). 
The importance of this RNA editing was investigated 
using a genetically modified mouse whose GluA2 gene 
was engineered so that the relevant nucleotide in the 


===== Page 5 =====
Figure 13–5  Atomic structure of an ionotropic glutamate 
receptor.
A. Schematic organization of the ionotropic glutamate recep-
tors. The receptors contain a large extracellular amino terminus, 
a transmembrane domain containing three membrane-spanning 
α-helixes (M1, M3, and M4), and a loop that dips into the cyto-
plasmic side of the membrane (M2). The ligand-binding domain 
is formed by the extracellular region of the receptor on the 
amino-terminal side of the M1 segment and by the extracellular 
loop connecting M3 and M4. These two regions intertwine to 
form a clamshell-like structure that binds glutamate and various 
pharmacological agonists and competitive antagonists. A simi-
lar structure is formed at the extreme amino terminus of the 
receptor. In ionotropic glutamate receptors, this amino-terminal 
domain does not bind glutamate but is thought to modulate 
receptor function and synapse development. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Armstrong et al. 1998.)
B. Three-dimensional X-ray crystal structure of a single AMPA 
receptor GluA2 subunit. This side view shows the amino-terminal, 
ligand-binding, and transmembrane domains (compare to 
panel A). The M1, M3, and M4 transmembrane α-helixes are 
indicated, as is a short α-helix in the M2 loop. A molecule of 
a competitive antagonist of glutamate bound to the ligand-
binding domain is shown (red space-filling representation). 
The cytoplasmic loops connecting the membrane α-helixes 
were not resolved in the structure and have been drawn as 
dashed lines. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sobolevsky, 
Rosconi, and Gouaux 2009.)
C. This side view shows the structure of a receptor assembled 
from four identical GluA2 subunits (the subunits are colored 
differently for illustrative purposes). The subunits associate 
through their extracellular domains as a pair of dimers (two-
fold symmetry). In the amino-terminal domain, one dimer is 
formed by the blue and yellow subunits, the other dimer by 
the red and green subunits. In the ligand-binding domain, the 
subunits change partners. In one dimer, the blue subunit asso-
ciates with the red subunit, whereas in the other dimer, the 
yellow subunit associates with the green subunit. In the trans-
membrane region, the subunits associate as a four-fold sym-
metric tetramer. The significance of this highly unusual subunit 
arrangement is not fully understood. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Sobolevsky, Rosconi, and Gouaux 2009.)
D. Cartoon side view of auxiliary TARP subunits (blue) associated 
with pore-forming GluA2 subunits. For simplicity, only the trans-
membrane and ligand-binding domain of two of the four GluA2 
subunits is shown. Two of four TARP subunits are also shown. Bind-
ing of glutamate causes the clamshell-like ligand-binding domain 
to close, leading to a conformational change in the transmembrane 
domain that opens the pore. An electrostatic interaction between 
TARP and GluA2 stabilizes the receptor in the open state. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Mayer 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.)
E. Three-dimensional structure of the TARP-GluA2 complex. The 
α-helixes are shown as cylinders. The four TARP subunits are 
shown in blue. Transmembrane and ligand-binding domains of 
GluA2 subunits are shown in yellow and green. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Mayer 2016. Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd.)
COOH
COOH
A
C
B
M1
M3
M4
M2
Amino
terminal
domain
Ligand-
binding
domain
Ligand-
binding
domain
Transmembrane
domain
Transmembrane
domain
NH2
M1
M3
M4
M2
Glutamate
antagonist
– – –
– – –
+++
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+++
+
+
+
Activation
Na+
E
D
TARP
TARP
Resting state
Active state
Glutamate


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     281
NMDA and AMPA Receptors Are Organized by a 
Network of Proteins at the Postsynaptic Density
How are the different glutamate receptors localized and 
arranged at excitatory synapses? Like most ionotropic 
receptors, glutamate receptors are normally clustered at 
postsynaptic sites in the membrane, precisely opposed 
to glutamatergic presynaptic terminals. The vast major-
ity of excitatory synapses in the mature nervous system 
contain both NMDA and AMPA receptors, whereas in 
early development, synapses containing only NMDA 
receptors are common. The pattern of receptor locali-
zation and expression at individual synapses depends 
on a large number of regulatory proteins that constitute 
the postsynaptic density and help organize the three- 
dimensional structure of the postsynaptic cell membrane.
The postsynaptic density (PSD) is a remarkably 
stable structure, permitting its biochemical isolation, 
purification, and characterization. Electron micro-
scopic studies of intact and isolated PSDs provide 
a strikingly detailed view of their structure (Figure 
13–7A). By using gold-labeled antibodies, it is possible 
to identify specific protein components of the postsyn-
aptic membrane, including the location and number of 
glutamate receptors. A typical PSD is around 350 nm 
in diameter and contains about 20 NMDA receptors, 
which tend to be localized near the center of the PSD, 
and 10 to 50 AMPA receptors, which are less centrally 
localized. The metabotropic glutamate receptors are 
located on the periphery, outside the main area of the 
PSD. All three receptor types interact with a wide array 
of cytoplasmic and membrane proteins to ensure their 
proper localization (Figure 13–7C).
One of the most prominent proteins in the PSD 
important for the clustering of glutamate receptors 
is PSD-95 (PSD protein of 95 kD molecular weight). 
PSD-95 is a membrane-associated protein that contains 
three repeated regions—the so-called PDZ domains—
important for protein–protein interactions. (The PDZ 
domains are named after the three proteins in which 
they were first identified: PSD-95, the DLG tumor sup-
pressor protein in Drosophila, and a protein termed 
ZO-1.) The PDZ domains bind to specific sequences 
at the carboxy terminus of a number of proteins. In 
PSD-95, the PDZ domains bind the NMDA receptor 
and Shaker-type voltage-gated K+ channels, thereby 
localizing and concentrating these channels at post-
synaptic sites. PSD-95 also interacts with the postsyn-
aptic membrane protein neuroligin, which contacts 
the presynaptic membrane protein neurexin in the 
synaptic cleft, an interaction important for synapse 
development. Mutations in neuroligin are thought to 
contribute to some cases of autism.
Figure 13–6  Determinants of calcium ion permeability of 
the AMPA receptor-channel.
A. Comparison of amino acid sequences in the M2 region of 
the AMPA receptor-channel coded by the GluA2 gene before 
and after RNA editing. The unedited transcript codes for the 
polar residue glutamine (Q, the single-letter amino acid nota-
tion), whereas the edited transcript codes for the positively 
charged residue arginine (R). In adults, the GluA2 protein exists 
almost exclusively in the edited form.
B. AMPA receptor-channels expressed from unedited tran-
scripts conduct Ca2+ (left traces), whereas those expressed 
from edited transcripts do not (right traces). The traces show 
currents elicited by glutamate with either extracellular Na+ (top) 
or Ca2+ (bottom) as the predominant permeant cation. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Sakmann 1992. Copyright © 1992 
Elsevier.)
Arginine
residue
Glutamine
residue
N
A
B
C
Unedited
Edited
300 µM Glu
300 µM Glu
100 ms
Na+
Ca2+
100 pA
M1
M2
M3
M4
Receptor-channel
from unedited gene
Ca2+
+
...F G I F N S L W F S L G A F M Q Q G...
...F G I F N S L W F S L G A F M R Q G...
300 µM Glu
Ca2+
Na+
300 µM Glu
100 ms
5 pA
Receptor-channel
from edited gene
glutamine codon could no longer be changed to argi-
nine. Such mice develop seizures and die within a few 
weeks after birth, presumably because the high Ca2+ 
permeability of all the AMPA receptors results in an 
excess of intracellular Ca2+.


===== Page 7 =====
282    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Neuroligin
GKAP
Homer
Shank
AMPA 
receptor
NMDA 
receptor
Metabotropic
glutamate 
receptor
PSD-95
AMPA receptors
NMDA receptors
PSD-95
A  Puriﬁed postsynaptic densities
C  Molecular organization of synapse at dendritic spine
B  Distribution of receptors
TARP
Figure 13–7  The postsynaptic cell membrane is organized 
into a macromolecular complex at excitatory synapses.  Pro-
teins containing PDZ domains help organize the distribution of 
AMPA and NMDA glutamate receptors at the postsynaptic den-
sity. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sheng and Hoogenrad 
2007. Micrographs provided by Thomas S. Reese and Xiaobing 
Chen; National Institutes of Health, USA.)
A. Electron microscope images of biochemically purified 
post-synaptic densities, showing organization of the protein 
network. The membrane lipid bilayer is no longer present. Left: 
View of postsynaptic density from what would normally be 
the outside of the cell. This image consists of the extracellular 
domains of various receptors and membrane proteins. Right: 
View of a postsynaptic density from what would normally be 
the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. White dots show 
immunolabeled guanylate kinase anchoring protein, an impor-
tant component of the postsynaptic density.
B. The distribution of NMDA receptors, AMPA receptors, and 
PSD-95, a prominent postsynaptic density protein, at a synapse.
C. The network of receptors and their interacting proteins in 
the postsynaptic density. PSD-95 contains three PDZ domains 
at its amino terminus and two other protein-interacting motifs 
at its carboxyl terminus, an SH3 domain and guanylate kinase 
(GK) domain. Certain PDZ domains of PSD-95 bind to the car-
boxyl terminus of the GluN2 subunit of the NMDA receptor. 
PSD-95 does not directly interact with AMPA receptors but 
binds to the carboxyl terminus of the TARP family of membrane 
proteins, which interact with the AMPA receptors as auxiliary 
subunits. PSD-95 also acts as a scaffold for various cytoplasmic 
proteins by binding to GK-associated protein (GKAP), which 
interacts with Shank, a large protein that associates into a 
meshwork linking the various components of the postsynaptic 
density. PSD-95 also interacts with the cytoplasmic region of 
neuroligin. The metabotropic glutamate receptor is localized on 
the periphery of the synapse where it interacts with the protein 
Homer, which in turn binds to Shank.
Although PSD-95 does not directly bind to AMPA 
receptors, it does interact with the TARP subunits. The 
proper localization of AMPA receptors in the postsyn-
aptic membrane depends on the interaction between 
the carboxy terminus of the TARP subunit and PSD-95. 
AMPA receptors also bind to a distinct PDZ domain 
protein called GRIP, and metabotropic glutamate 
receptors interact with yet another PDZ domain pro-
tein called Homer. In addition to interacting with 
receptors, proteins with PDZ domains interact with 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     283
many other cellular proteins, including proteins that 
bind to the actin cytoskeleton, providing a scaffold 
around which a complex of postsynaptic proteins is 
constructed. Indeed, a biochemical analysis of the PSD 
has identified dozens of proteins that participate in 
NMDA or AMPA receptor complexes.
NMDA Receptors Have Unique Biophysical and 
Pharmacological Properties
The NMDA receptor has several interesting properties 
that distinguish it from AMPA receptors. As mentioned 
earlier, NMDA receptors have a distinctively high per-
meability to Ca2+. In addition, the NMDA receptor is 
unique among ligand-gated channels thus far char-
acterized because its opening depends on membrane 
voltage as well as transmitter binding.
The voltage dependence is caused by a mecha-
nism that is quite different from that employed by 
the voltage-gated channels that generate the action 
potential. In the latter, changes in membrane poten-
tial are translated into conformational changes in the 
channel by an intrinsic voltage sensor. In the NMDA 
receptors, however, depolarization removes an extrin-
sic plug from the channel. At the resting membrane 
potential (−65 mV), extracellular Mg2+ binds tightly to 
a site in the pore of the channel, blocking ionic current. 
But when the membrane is depolarized (for example, 
by the opening of AMPA receptor-channels), Mg2+ is 
expelled from the channel by electrostatic repulsion, 
allowing Na+, K+, and Ca2+ to flow (Figure 13–8). The 
NMDA receptor has the further interesting property of 
being inhibited by the hallucinogenic drug phencycli-
dine (PCP, also known as angel dust) and the experi-
mental compound MK801. Both drugs bind to a site in 
the pore of the channel that is distinct from the Mg2+ 
binding site (Figure 13–3A).
At most glutamatergic central synapses, the post-
synaptic membrane contains both NMDA and AMPA 
receptors. The relative contributions of current through 
Open
Closed
Closed
Open
+60
+30
0
–30
–60
Membrane
potential
(mV)
A  Normal extracellular Mg2+
B  No extracellular Mg2+
25 ms
2 pA
NMDA
receptor-
channel
Mg2+
Figure 13–8  Opening of individual NMDA receptor-channels 
depends on membrane potential in addition to glutamate.  
These patch-clamp recordings are from individual NMDA recep-
tor-channels (from rat hippocampal cells in culture). Downward 
deflections indicate pulses of inward (negative) current; upward 
deflections indicate outward (positive) current. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from J. Jen and C.F. Stevens.)
A. When Mg2+ is present in normal concentration in the extra-
cellular solution (1.2 mM), the channel is largely blocked at the 
resting potential (−60 mV). At negative membrane potentials, 
only brief, flickering, inward currents are seen upon channel 
opening because of the Mg2+ block. Substantial depolarization 
to voltages positive to the reversal potential of 0 mV (to  
+30 mV or +60 mV) relieves the Mg2+ block, permitting longer-
lasting pulses of outward current through the channel.
B. When Mg2+ is removed from the extracellular solution, the 
opening and closing of the channel do not depend on voltage. 
The channel is open at the resting potential of –60 mV, and the 
synaptic current reverses near 0 mV, like the total synaptic  
current (see Figure 13–9B).


===== Page 9 =====
284    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
NMDA and AMPA receptors to the total excitatory 
postsynaptic current (EPSC) can be quantified using 
pharmacological antagonists in a voltage-clamp exper-
iment (Figure 13–9). Since NMDA receptors are largely 
inhibited by Mg2+ at the normal resting potential of 
most neurons, the EPSC is predominantly determined 
by charge flow through the AMPA receptors. This cur-
rent has very rapid rising and decay phases. However, 
as a neuron becomes depolarized and Mg2+ is driven 
out of the mouth of the NMDA receptors, more charge 
flows through them. Thus, the NMDA receptor-channel 
conducts current maximally when two conditions 
are met: Glutamate is present, and the cell is depolar-
ized. That is, the NMDA receptor acts as a molecular 
“coincidence detector,” opening during the concurrent 
activation of the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. In 
addition, because of its intrinsic kinetics of ligand gat-
ing, the current through the NMDA receptor-channel 
rises and decays with a much slower time course than 
the current through AMPA receptor-channels. As a 
result, the NMDA receptors contribute to a late, slow 
phase of the EPSC and EPSP.
As most glutamatergic synapses contain AMPA 
receptors that are capable of triggering an action poten-
tial by themselves, what is the function of the NMDA 
receptor? At first glance, the function of these receptors 
is even more puzzling because their intrinsic channel 
is normally blocked by Mg2+ at the resting potential. 
However, the high permeability of the NMDA receptor-
channels to Ca2+ endows them with the special ability 
to produce a marked rise in intracellular [Ca2+] that 
can activate various calcium-dependent signaling 
cascades, including several different protein kinases 
(Chapters 15 and 53). Thus, NMDA receptor activation 
can translate electrical signals into biochemical ones. 
Some of these biochemical reactions lead to long-lasting 
changes in synaptic strength through a set of processes 
called long-term synaptic plasticity, which are important 
for refining synaptic connections during early develop-
ment and regulating neural circuits in the adult brain, 
including circuits critical for long-term memory.
The Properties of the NMDA Receptor Underlie 
Long-Term Synaptic Plasticity
In 1973, Tim Bliss and Terje Lomo found that a brief 
period of high-intensity and high-frequency synaptic 
stimulation (known as a tetanus) leads to long-term 
potentiation (LTP) of excitatory synaptic transmission 
in the hippocampus, a region of the mammalian brain 
required for many forms of long-term memory (Figure 
13–10; see Chapters 53 and 54). Subsequent studies 
demonstrated that LTP requires Ca2+ influx through 
the NMDA receptor-channels, which open in response 
to the combined effect of glutamate release and strong 
postsynaptic depolarization during the tetanic stimu-
lation. LTP is blocked if the tetanus is delivered in the 
presence of APV, which blocks the NMDA receptors, 
or if the postsynaptic neuron is injected with a com-
pound that chelates intracellular Ca2+.
The rise of Ca2+ in the postsynaptic cell is thought 
to potentiate synaptic transmission by activating post-
synaptic biochemical cascades that trigger the insertion 
of additional AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic 
membrane. Under some circumstances, postsynaptic 
Ca2+ can trigger production of a retrograde messenger, 
a chemical signal that enhances transmitter release from 
the presynaptic terminal (Chapter 14). As we will dis-
cuss later, the Ca2+ accumulation and biochemical acti-
vation are largely restricted to the individual spines that 
are activated by the tetanic stimulation. As a result, LTP 
is input-specific; only those synapses that are activated 
during the tetanic stimulation are potentiated.
The prolonged high-frequency presynaptic fir-
ing required to induce LTP is unlikely to be achieved 
under physiological conditions. However, a more 
physiologically relevant form of plasticity, termed spike-
timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), can be induced if a 
single presynaptic stimulus is paired at low frequency 
with the triggered firing of one or more postsynaptic 
action potentials, providing sufficient depolarization 
to relieve Mg2+ block of the NMDA receptor pore. The 
presynaptic activity must precede postsynaptic firing, 
following a rule proposed in 1949 by the psycholo-
gist Donald Hebb for how individual neurons could 
become grouped together into functional assemblies 
during associative memory storage. A number of lines 
of evidence now suggest that LTP, STDP, or related pro-
cesses provide an important cellular mechanism for 
memory storage (Chapters 53 and 54) and fine-tuning 
synaptic connections during development (Chapter 49).
NMDA Receptors Contribute to  
Neuropsychiatric Disease
Unfortunately, there is also a downside to recruiting 
Ca2+ through the NMDA receptors. Excessively high 
concentrations of glutamate are thought to result in an 
overload of Ca2+ in the postsynaptic neurons, a condi-
tion that can be toxic to neurons. In tissue culture, even 
a brief exposure to high concentrations of glutamate 
can kill many neurons, an action called glutamate exci-
totoxicity. High concentrations of intracellular Ca2+ are 
thought to activate calcium-dependent proteases and 
phospholipases and lead to the production of free radi-
cals that are toxic to the cell.


