===== Page 1 =====
572    Part IV / Perception
Light
Dark
Frequency
50 deg2
28 deg2
13 deg2
1
1
1
3
2
5
1
4
2
3
4
5
5
5
2, 3, 4
Light
Dark
A  Size constancy
B  Position constancy
C  Form-cue invariance
Neural response (spikes/s)
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
 400
 300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Frequency
300
200
100
0
2
4
8
16
32
64
Figure 24–7  Perceptual constancy is reflected in the 
behavior of neurons in the inferior temporal cortex.  The 
responses of many inferior temporal neurons are selective for 
stimuli with a particular frequency (number) of lobes but invari-
ant to object size, position, and reflectance. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Schwartz et al. 1983.)
A. Size constancy. An object is perceived to be the same even 
when the retinal image size decreases with the distance of the 
object in the visual field. The response of the vast majority of infe-
rior temporal neurons to substantial changes in retinal image size 
is invariant, as illustrated here by the record of a single cell.
B. Position constancy. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in position in the retinal image. Almost all infe-
rior temporal neurons respond similarly to the same stimulus in 
different positions in the visual field, as illustrated here by the 
record of a single neuron.
C. Form-cue invariance. An object is perceived to be the same 
despite changes in reflectance. Most inferior temporal neurons 
respond similarly to the two images illustrated, as shown in the 
record of an individual neuron.
Categorical Perception of Objects  
Simplifies Behavior
All forms of perceptual constancy are the product of 
the visual system’s attempts to generalize across dif-
ferent retinal images generated by a single object. A 
still more general type of constancy is the perception 
of individual objects as belonging to the same semantic 
category. The apples in a basket or the many appear-
ances of the letter A in different fonts, for example, are 
physically distinct but are effortlessly perceived as 
categorically identical.
Categorical perception is classically defined as the 
ability to distinguish objects of different categories better 
than objects of the same category. For example, it is more 
difficult to discriminate between two red lights that differ 
in wavelength by 10 nm than to discriminate between red 
and orange lights with the same wavelength difference.
Categorical perception simplifies behavior. For 
example, it usually does not matter whether an apple 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     573
is completely spherical or slightly mottled on the left 
side or whether the seat we are offered is a Windsor 
or a Chippendale side chair. Similarly, reading ability 
requires that one be able to recognize the alphabet in 
a broad variety of type styles. Like the simpler forms 
of perceptual constancy, categorical perception relies 
on the brain’s ability to extract invariant features of 
objects seen.
Is there a population of neurons that respond uni-
formly to objects within a category and differentially 
to objects of different categories? To test this, David 
Freedman and Earl Miller and colleagues created a 
set of images in which features of dogs and cats were 
merged; the proportions of dog and cat in the compos-
ite images varied continuously from one extreme to the 
other. Monkeys were trained to identify these stimuli 
reliably as either dog or cat. Miller and colleagues then 
recorded from visually responsive neurons in the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex, a region that receives direct 
input from the inferior temporal cortex. Not only did 
these neurons exhibit the predicted category-selective 
responses—responding well to cat but not dog, or vice 
versa—but the neuronal category boundary also corre-
sponded to the behaviorally learned boundary (Figure 
24–8). By contrast, neurons in inferior temporal cortex 
represented similarity of features, not categories.
The fact that category-specific agnosias some-
times follow damage to the temporal lobe suggests 
there are neurons in the inferior temporal cortex that 
are category-selective similar to those of neurons in 
the prefrontal cortex. Face-selective cells in the tempo-
ral cortex appear to meet this criterion, because their 
responses to a range of faces are often similar. Yet, 
these may constitute a special case, whereas for most 
stimulus conditions, category-selective responses may 
be characteristic of neurons in the prefrontal cortex, 
where visual responses are more commonly linked to 
the behavioral significance of the stimuli.
Visual Memory Is a Component of High-Level 
Visual Processing
Visual experience can be stored as memory, and visual 
memory influences the processing of incoming visual 
information. Object recognition in particular relies on 
the observer’s previous experiences with objects. Thus, 
the contributions of the inferior temporal cortex to 
object recognition must be modifiable by experience.
Studies of the role of experience in visual percep-
tion have focused on two distinct types of experience-
dependent plasticity. One stems from repeated 
exposure or practice, which leads to improvements 
in visual discrimination and object recognition abil-
ity. These experience-dependent changes constitute a 
form of implicit learning known as perceptual learn-
ing (Chapter 23). The other occurs in connection with 
the storage of explicit learning, the learning of facts or 
events that can be recalled consciously (Chapter 54).
Implicit Visual Learning Leads to Changes in the 
Selectivity of Neuronal Responses
The ability to discriminate complex visual stimuli is 
highly modifiable by experience. For example, indi-
viduals who attend to fine differences between auto-
mobile models improve their ability to recognize such 
differences.
In the inferior temporal cortex, neuronal selectivity 
for complex objects can undergo change that parallels 
change in the ability to distinguish objects. For exam-
ple, in a study by Logothetis and colleagues, monkeys 
were trained to identify novel three-dimensional 
objects, such as randomly bent wire forms, from two-
dimensional views of the objects. Extensive training 
led to pronounced improvements in the ability to 
recognize the objects from two-dimensional views. 
After training, a population of neurons was found that 
exhibited marked selectivity for the views seen earlier 
but not for other two-dimensional views of the same 
objects (Figure 24–9).
Other studies with monkeys have shown that 
familiarization with novel faces alters the tuning of 
face-selective neurons in the inferior temporal cortex. 
Similarly, when an animal has experience with novel 
objects formed from simple features, inferior temporal 
neurons become selective for those objects. Such neu-
ronal changes have been found as a consequence of 
the animal engaging in active discrimination or simply 
passive viewing of visual stimuli, and they are often 
manifested as a sharpening of neural selectivity rather 
than changes in absolute firing rate. Sharpening is pre-
cisely the sort of neuronal change that could underlie 
improvements in perceptual discrimination of visual 
stimuli.
The Visual System Interacts With Working Memory 
and Long-Term Memory Systems
Object recognition and learning are intricately linked. 
In fact, learning can generate entire areas of functional 
specialization within inferior temporal cortex. For exam-
ple, monkeys who learn at a young age to associate 
specific shapes (eg, a number symbol) with particular 
reward magnitudes develop specialized brain areas 
that process these specific shapes. These brain regions 


===== Page 3 =====
574    Part IV / Perception
13
10
7
4
–500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1
100% Cat
80% Cat
60% Cat
60% Dog
80% Dog
100% Dog
A
B
Time from sample stimulus onset (ms)
Interclass correlations
Choice
Sample
Fixation
Delay
Lateral
prefrontal
cortex
Figure 24–8  Neural coding for categorical perception.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Freedman et al. 2002.)
A. The images combine cat and dog features in varying propor-
tions. Monkeys were trained to categorize an image as cat or 
dog if it had 50% or more features of that animal.
B. Peristimulus time histograms illustrate the responses of 
a prefrontal cortex neuron to the images shown in part A. 
The neuron responded much more weakly to images of cats 
(100%, 80%, and 60%) than to images of dogs (60%, 80%, 
and 100%). Responses to images from the same category 
were very similar despite variations in retinal images that were 
as large as or even larger than the differences in retinal images 
between categories. Thus, the cell was category-specific. Such 
category-specific responses were common among visual neu-
rons of the lateral prefrontal cortex.
develop close to the temporal lobe face patches dis-
cussed earlier.
Two issues concerning interaction between vision 
and memory have been investigated. First, how is 
visual information maintained in short-term working 
memory? Working memory has a limited capacity, act-
ing like a buffer in a computer operating system, and 
consolidation into long-term memory is susceptible to 
interference (Chapter 54). Second, how are long-term 
visual memories and the associations between them 
stored and recalled?
In a visual delayed-response task requiring access 
to stimulus information beyond the duration of the 
stimulus (Box 24–1), many vision-related neurons in 
both the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices con-
tinue firing during the delay. This delay-period activ-
ity is thought to maintain information in short-term 
working memory (Figure 24–11). Delay-period activity 
in the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices differs 
in a number of ways. For one, activity in the inferior 
temporal cortex is associated with the short-term stor-
age of visual patterns and color information, whereas 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     575
Figure 24–9  Familiarity with particular complex objects 
leads inferior temporal neurons to respond selectively for 
those objects. (Reproduced, with permission, from Logothetis 
and Pauls 1995. Copyright © 1995 Oxford University Press.)
A. Monkeys were trained to recognize a randomly bent wire 
from a set of two-dimensional views of the wire. The wire form 
was rotated 12° in successive views. Once recognition perfor-
mance was stable at a high level, recordings were made from 
neurons in the inferior temporal cortex while each view was 
presented. Peristimulus time histograms show the responses 
of a typical neuron to each view. This neuron responded selec-
tively to views that represented a small range of rotation of the 
object.
B. When the same neuron was tested with two sets of stimuli 
that were unfamiliar to the monkey, it failed to respond to any 
of these stimuli.
A  Familiar object
B  Unfamiliar object
–168°
–120°
–108°
–96°
–84°
–72°
–60°
–48°
–36°
–24°
–12°
0°
800 ms
60 spikes/s
Inferior
temporal cortex
activity in the prefrontal cortex encodes visuospatial 
information as well as information received from other 
sensory modalities. Delay-period activity in the infe-
rior temporal cortex also appears to be closely attuned 
to visual perception, for it encodes the sample image, 
but can be eliminated by the appearance of another 
image.
In the prefrontal cortex, by contrast, delay-period 
activity depends more on task requirements and is not 
terminated by intermittent sensory inputs, suggest-
ing that it may play a role in the recall of long-term 
memories. Experiments by Earl Miller and colleagues 
support this view. In these experiments, monkeys were 
trained to associate multiple pairs of objects. They 
were then tested on whether they had learned these 
pairwise associations, using the following procedure. 
First, a single (sample) object was presented; then, 
after a brief delay, a second (test) object appeared. The 
monkey was instructed to indicate whether the test 
object was the object paired with the sample during 
previous training.
There are two possible ways to solve this task. Dur-
ing the delay, the animal could use a sensory code and 
keep a representation of the sample object online until 
the appearance of the test object, or it could remem-
ber the sample object’s associate and keep information 
about the associate object online in a “prospective 
code” of what might appear as the test object. Remark-
ably, neuronal activity appears to transition from one 
to the other during the delay. Neurons in the prefron-
tal cortex initially encode the sensory properties of the 
sample object—the one just seen—but later begin to 
encode the expected (associated) object. As we shall 
see, such prospective coding in the prefrontal cortex 
may be the source of top-down signals to the inferior 
temporal cortex, activating neurons that represent the 
expected object and thus giving rise to conscious recall 
of that object.
The relation between long-term declarative mem-
ory storage and visual processing has been explored 
extensively in the context of remembered associations 
between visual stimuli. Over a century ago, William 
James, a founder of the American school of experimen-
tal psychology, suggested that learning visual asso-
ciations might be mediated by enhanced connectivity 
between the neurons encoding individual stimuli. To 
test this hypothesis, Thomas Albright and colleagues 
trained monkeys to associate pairs of objects that had 
no prior physical or semantic relatedness. The monkeys 
were later tested while extracellular recordings of neu-
rons in the inferior temporal cortex were made. Objects 
that had been paired often elicited similar neuronal 


===== Page 5 =====
576    Part IV / Perception
The relationship between vision and memory can be 
studied by combining a neuropsychological approach 
with single-cell electrophysiological methods.
One behavioral paradigm used to study memory is 
the delayed-response task. A subject is required to make a 
specific response based on information remembered dur-
ing a brief delay. In one form of this task, known as delayed 
match-to-sample, the subject must indicate whether a visual 
stimulus is the same or different from a previously viewed 
cue stimulus (sample) (Figure 24–10A).
When used in conjunction with single-cell record-
ing, this task allows the experimenter to isolate three 
key components of a neuronal response: (1) the sensory 
component, the response elicited by the cue stimulus; 
(2) the short-term or working-memory component, the 
response that occurs during the delay between the cue 
and the match; and (3) the recognition-memory or famil-
iarity component, the difference between the response 
elicited by the match stimulus and the earlier response 
to the cue stimulus.
A second behavioral paradigm, the visual paired-
association task, has been used in conjunction with 
electrophysiology to explore the cellular mechanisms 
underlying the long-term storage and recall of asso-
ciations. This task differs from the delayed match-to-
sample task in that the match and cue are two different 
stimuli (Figure 24–10B).
The sample stimulus might consist of the letter A 
and the match stimulus the letter B. Through repeated 
temporal pairing and conditional reinforcement, sub-
jects learn that A and B are predictive of one another: 
They are associated.
Box 24–1  Investigating Interactions Between Vision and Working Memory
Figure 24–10A  Delayed match-to-sample task. In this 
paradigm, a trial begins with the appearance of a  
fixation spot that directs the subject’s attention and  
gaze to the center of the computer screen. A cue stimu-
lus (the “sample”) then appears briefly, typically for  
500 ms, followed by a delay in which the display is 
blank. The delay can be varied to fit the experimental 
goals. Following the delay, the choice display appears, 
which contains several images, one of which is the cue 
(the “match”). The subject must respond by choosing 
the cue stimulus, typically either by pressing a but-
ton or by a saccade to the stimulus. In the task illus-
trated here, all of the test images appear at once (a 
simultaneous match-to-sample task). They can also be 
presented sequentially (a sequential match-to-sample 
task). Although the trial’s duration may be longer for the 
sequential task, this paradigm can be advantageous for 
electrophysiological studies by limiting the visual stimuli 
present at any time.
Figure 24–10B  The paired-association task.  This para-
digm resembles the match-to-sample paradigm except 
that the cue and match are different stimuli. In the illus-
trated example, the basketball is the cue stimulus and the 
airplane is the experimenter-designated match stimulus. 
Because these stimuli have no inherent association, the 
subject must discover the designated association through 
trial-and-error learning. The task is thus to establish an 
association between nonidentical stimuli. The paired- 
association task can also incorporate a delay between 
presentation of the sample and test stimuli, and it can be 
used in both simultaneous (shown) and sequential forms.
Time
Fixation
A
Cue
Choice
Reinforcement
Delay
Response
+
+
+
+
Time
Fixation
Cue
Choice
Reinforcement
Response
+
+
B


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     577
Figure 24–11  Neural activity representing an object is  
sustained while the object is held in working memory.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster and Jervey 1982. 
Copyright © 1982 Society for Neuroscience.)
A. Monkeys were trained to perform a color match-to-sample 
task. For example, a red stimulus was first presented and the 
animal later had to choose a red stimulus from among many 
colored stimuli. The task incorporated a brief delay (1–2 seconds) 
between display of the sample and the match, during which 
information about the correct target color had to be maintained 
in working memory. The purple area in the monkey’s brain indi-
cates the inferior temporal cortex.
B. Peristimulus time histograms and raster plots of action  
potentials illustrate responses of a single neuron in the inferior 
temporal cortex during the delayed match-to-sample task. The 
upper record is from trials in which the sample was red, and the 
lower record is from trials in which it was green (shown here as 
blue). The recordings show that the cell responds preferentially 
to red stimuli. In trials with a green sample, the activity of the 
neuron does not change, whereas in trials with a red sample, 
the cell exhibited a brief burst of activity following presentation 
of the sample and continued firing throughout the delay. Many 
visual neurons in the inferior temporal and prefrontal cortices 
exhibit this kind of behavior.
 
Number of spikes
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–15
–10
–5
0
5
10
Time (s)
15
20
25
30
Cell is selective for red
Delay
Sample
Match
A
B
responses, as one would expect if functional connec-
tions had been enhanced, whereas responses elicited 
by unpaired objects were unrelated. Recordings from 
individual inferior temporal neurons while monkeys 
were learning new visual associations showed that a 
cell’s responses to paired objects became more simi-
lar over the course of training (Figure 24–12). Most 
importantly, the changes in neuronal activity occurred 
on the same timescale as the changes in behavior, and 
the changes in neural activity depended on successful 
learning.
These learning-dependent changes in the stimu-
lus selectivity of inferior temporal cortex neurons 
are long-lasting, suggesting that this cortical region 
is part of the neural circuitry for associative visual 
memories. The experimental results also support the 
view that learned associations are implemented rap-
idly by changes in the strength of synaptic connections 
between neurons representing the associated stimuli.
We know that the hippocampus and neocorti-
cal areas of the medial temporal lobe—the perirhi-
nal, entorhinal, and parahippocampal cortices—are 


===== Page 7 =====
578    Part IV / Perception
Figure 24–12  Object recognition is linked to associative 
memory. Monkeys learned associations between pairs of 
visual stimuli while activity was recorded from a neuron in the 
inferior temporal cortex. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Messinger et al. 2001. © 2001 National Academy of Sciences.)
A. Behavioral performance on a paired-association task is plot-
ted for each quartile of a single training session (572 trials). 
The animal was presented with four novel stimuli (A, B, C, D) 
and was required to learn two paired associations (A–B, C–D). 
As expected, performance began at chance (50% correct) and 
gradually climbed as the animal learned the associations.
B. Mean firing rates of an inferior temporal neuron recorded 
during the behavioral task described in part A. Each trace  
represents the firing rate during presentation of one of the four 
stimuli (A, B, C, or D). The responses to all stimuli were of  
similar magnitude at the outset. As the paired associations 
were learned, the neuronal responses to the paired stimuli  
A and B began to cluster at a different level from responses 
to the paired stimuli C and D. The neuron’s activity thus corre-
sponded to the learned associations between the two pairs.
20
15
10
5
0
Neuronal activity (spikes/s)
0
572
D
C
A
B
Trial number
Percent correct
60
50
Chance
40
30
1st
2nd
3rd
Quartile
4th
A  Animals learn to associate pairs of stimuli
B  After training neurons respond similarly to paired stimuli
essential both for the acquisition of associative visual 
memories and for the functional plasticity of the infe-
rior temporal cortex. In fact, work by Yasushi Miyashita 
and colleagues showed that the aforementioned pair-
association neurons are much more prevalent in per-
irhinal cortex than in anterior inferior temporal cortex. 
Thus, although learning changes the stimulus selectiv-
ity of neurons in both areas, the association between 
visually associated pairs grows stronger from inferior 
temporal to perirhinal cortex (Figure 24–2C). The hip-
pocampus and medial temporal lobe may facilitate the 
reorganization of local neuronal circuitry in the inferior 
temporal cortex necessary to store associative visual 
memories. The reorganization itself may be a form of 
Hebbian plasticity (Chapter 49) initiated by the tempo-
ral coincidence of the associated visual stimuli.
Associative Recall of Visual Memories 
Depends on Top-Down Activation of the 
Cortical Neurons That Process Visual Stimuli
One of the most intriguing features of high-level visual 
processing is the fact that the detection of an image in 
one’s visual field and the recall of the same image are 
subjectively similar. The former depends on the bottom-
up flow of visual information and is what we tradi-
tionally regard as vision. The latter, by contrast, is a 
product of top-down information flow. This distinc-
tion is anatomically accurate but obscures the fact that 
under normal conditions afferent and descending sig-
nals collaborate to yield visual experience.
The study of associative visual memory has pro-
vided valuable insights into the cellular mechanisms 
underlying visual recall. As we have seen, visual asso-
ciative memories are stored in the visual cortex through 
changes in the functional connectivity between neu-
rons that independently represent the associated 
stimuli. The practical consequence of this change is 
that a neuron that responded only to stimulus A prior 
to learning will respond to both A and B after these 
stimuli have been associated (Figure 24–13). Activa-
tion of an A-responsive neuron by stimulus B can be 
viewed as the neuronal correlate of top-down recall of 
stimulus A.
Neurons in the inferior temporal cortex exhibit pre-
cisely this behavior. The activity correlated with cued 
recall is nearly identical to the bottom-up activation by 
the stimulus. These neurophysiological findings are 
supported by a number of brain imaging studies that 
have identified selective activity in the visual cortex 
during cued and spontaneous recall of objects.
Although learned associations between images 
are likely to be stored through circuit changes in the 
inferior temporal cortex, activation of these circuits for 
conscious recall depends on input from the prefrontal 
cortex. The afferent signal for one of a pair of images 
might be received by the inferior temporal cortex and 
relayed to prefrontal cortex, where the information 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 24 / High-Level Visual Processing: From Vision to Cognition     579
Figure 24–13  Circuits for visual association and recall.   
Bottom-up signals—afferent signals conveying information 
about objects in the observer’s visual field—are combined 
into object representations in the inferior temporal cortex. 
Before associative learning, a neuron (blue) responds well 
to the circus tent but not to the horse. Learned associations 
between objects are mediated in the inferior temporal cortex 
by strengthening connections between neurons representing  
each of the paired objects (the indirect pathway in the figure). 
Thus, recall of the circus tent following presentation of the 
horse is achieved by activating the indirect pathway. Indirect 
activation can also be triggered by the contents of working 
memory (feedback from the prefrontal cortex). Under  
normal conditions, visual perception is the product of a  
combination of direct and indirect inputs to inferior  
temporal neurons.
Prefrontal 
cortex
(working 
memory)
Inferior 
temporal cortex
(memory store)
Medial 
temporal lobe
(consolidation)
Low- and 
intermediate-level 
visual processing
Indirect 
pathway 
Before associative learning
After associative learning
would be maintained in working memory. As we have 
seen, the continued firing of many prefrontal neurons 
during the delay period of a delayed match-to-sample 
task initially represents information about the sam-
ple image but changes to the associated image that is 
expected to follow. Signals from prefrontal cortex to the 
inferior temporal cortex would selectively activate neu-
rons representing the associated image, and that activa-
tion would constitute the neural correlate of visual recall.
Highlights
  1.  A key function of high-level vision is object 
recognition. Object recognition imbues visual 
perception with meaning. As the eminent neu-
ropsychologist Hans-Lukas Teuber once wrote, 
failure of object recognition “would appear in its 
purest form as a normal percept that has some-
how been stripped of its meaning.”
  2.  Object recognition is difficult, primarily because 
of changes in appearance with changes in 
position, distance, orientation, or lighting condi-
tions, possibly rendering different objects similar 
in appearance. Building computer models mim-
icking primate object recognition capabilities is a 
major challenge for current and future research.
  3.  Object recognition relies on a region of the tem-
poral lobe called inferior temporal cortex. Visual 
information reaching inferior temporal cortex 
has already been processed through mechanisms 
of low- and mid-level vision.
  4.  Lesions to inferior temporal cortex cause visual 
agnosia, a loss in the ability to recognize objects. 
Apperceptive agnosia, the inability to match 
or copy complex objects, is distinguished from 
associative agnosia, the impairment of the abil-
ity to recognize an object’s meaning or function. 
Predicting the exact nature of an agnosia from 
the pattern of lesioned or inactivated areas, and 
thus to go from understanding the correlates to 
the causes of neural object representations, is a 
major goal for the field of object recognition and 
neurology.


===== Page 9 =====
580    Part IV / Perception
  5.  Individual cells in inferior temporal cortex 
can be highly shape-selective and respond 
selectively, eg, to a hand or a face. They can 
maintain selectivity across position, size, and 
even rotation—properties that might explain 
perceptual constancy.
  6.  Inferotemporal cortex comprises a yet-unknown 
number of areas with very different functional 
specializations. While the functional logic of the 
overall organization remains unknown, we do 
know that cells with similar selectivity group into 
cortical columns and that face cells are organized 
into larger units called face areas.
  7.  Face recognition is supported by multiple face 
areas, each with a unique functional specializa-
tion. Face areas are selectively coupled to form a 
face-processing network, which has emerged as a 
model system for high-level vision.
  8.  Inferotemporal cortex is interconnected with 
perirhinal and parahippocampal cortices for 
memory formation, with the amygdala for the 
assignment of emotional valence to objects, and 
with prefrontal cortex for object categorization 
and visual working memory. If associative memo-
ries are stored as patterns of connections between 
neurons, what then are the specific contributions 
of hippocampus and neocortical structures of 
the medial temporal lobe, and by what cellular 
mechanisms do they exert their influences? The 
confluence of molecular-genetic, cellular, neuro-
physiological, and behavioral approaches prom-
ises to solve these and other problems.
  9.  Objects are perceived as members of a category. 
This simplifies the selection of appropriate 
behaviors, which often do not depend on stim-
ulus details. Neurons with categorical selectiv-
ity are found in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, a 
main projection site of inferior temporal cortex.
10.  Object recognition relies on past experience. Per-
ceptual learning can improve the ability to dis-
criminate between complex objects and refine 
neural selectivity in inferior temporal cortex.
11.  Visual information can be held in short-term 
working memory to be available beyond the dura-
tion of a sensory stimulus. Neurons in temporal 
and prefrontal cortex can exhibit delay-period 
activity after the disappearance of a stimulus. 
How these networks establish the ability to keep 
information online is an open question.
12.  High-level 
visual 
information 
processing 
changes with top-down modulation. The sensory 
experience of an image in view and the recall of 
the same stimulus from memory are subjectively 
similar. Neurons in inferior temporal cortex 
exhibit similar activity during bottom-up activa-
tion and cued recall.
 Thomas D. Albright  
 Winrich A. Freiwald 
Selected Reading
Freedman DJ, Miller EK. 2008. Neural mechanisms of visual 
categorization: insights from neurophysiology. Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 32:311–329.
Gross CG. 1999. Brain, Vision, Memory: Tales in the History of 
Neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. 1997. The fusiform 
face area: a module in human extrastriate cortex special-
ized for face perception. J Neurosci 17:4302–4311.
Logothetis NK, Sheinberg DL. 1996. Visual object recogni-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 19:577–621.
McCarthy G, Puce A, Gore J, Allison T. 1997. Face-specific 
processing in the human fusiform gyrus. J Cog Neurosci 
9:605–610.
Messinger A, Squire LR, Zola SM, Albright TD. 2005. Neural 
correlates of knowledge: stable representation of stimulus 
associations across variations in behavioral performance. 
Neuron 48:359–371.
Miller EK, Li L, Desimone R. 1991. A neural mechanism for 
working and recognition memory in inferior temporal 
cortex. Science 254:1377–1379.
Miyashita Y. 1993. Inferior temporal cortex: where visual per-
ception meets memory. Annu Rev Neurosci 16:245–263.
Schlack A, Albright TD. 2007. Remembering visual motion: 
neural correlates of associative plasticity and motion 
recall in cortical area MT. Neuron 53:881–890.
Squire LR, Zola-Morgan S. 1991. The medial temporal lobe 
memory system. Science 253:1380–1386.
Ungerleider LG, Courtney SM, Haxby JV. 1998. A neural sys-
tem for human visual working memory. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 95:883–890.
References
Baker CI, Behrmann M, Olson CR. 2002. Impact of learn-
ing on representation of parts and wholes in monkey 
inferotemporal cortex. Nat Neurosci 5:1210–1216.
Brown S, Schafer ES. 1888. An investigation into the func-
tions of the occipital and temporal lobes of the monkey’s 
brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 179:303–327.
Damasio AR, Damasio H, Van Hoesen GW. 1982. Prosop-
agnosia: anatomic basis and behavioral mechanisms. 
Neurology 32:331–341.


