===== Page 1 =====
988    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
r2
r1
N. III
N. IV
N. V
N. VII
N. IX
N. X
N. XII
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Somatic
motor nuclei
Visceral
motor nuclei
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
Floor
plate
A
B
2nd arch
3rd arch
1st arch
N. VI
Figure 40–5  Embryonic cranial nerve nuclei are organized 
segmentally.
A. In the developing hindbrain (seen here from the ventral side), 
special and general visceral motor neurons (represented on the 
right side of the brain stem) form in each hindbrain segment 
(rhombomere) except rhombomere 1 (r1). Each special visceral 
motor nucleus comprises neurons in two rhombomeres: the 
trigeminal motor nucleus is formed by neurons in r2 and r3, the 
facial nucleus by neurons in r4 and r5, the glossopharyngeal 
nucleus by neurons in r6 and r7, and the motor nuclei of the 
vagus by neurons in r7 and r8. Axons of neurons in each of these 
nuclei course laterally within the brain, leaving the brain through 
exit points in the lateral neuroepithelium (of r2, r4, r6, and r7) and 
running together outside the brain to form the respective cranial 
motor nerves (V, VII, IX, X). The trigeminal (V) nerve innervates 
muscles in the 1st branchial arch, the facial (VII) nerve innervates 
muscles in the 2nd branchial arch, and the glossopharyngeal (IX) 
nerve innervates muscles in the 3rd branchial arch.
    All of the visceral motor neurons (various shades of green, 
represented on the right side of the brain stem) develop initially 
next to the floor plate at the ventral midline; after extending 
their axons toward their respective exit points, the cell bodies 
then migrate laterally (arrows). Exceptions are the facial motor 
neurons formed in r4 (red); the cell bodies, after extending their 
axons toward the exit point, migrate caudally to the axial level 
of r6 before migrating laterally. General visceral (parasympa-
thetic) motor neurons associated with nerve VII (light green) 
take a more conventional course (see panel B).
    General somatic motor nuclei (various shades of blue, 
represented on the left side of the brain stem) are formed in 
r1 (trochlear nucleus), r5 and r6 (abducens nucleus), and r8 
(hypoglossal nucleus). The cell bodies of these neurons remain 
close to their place of birth, next to the floor plate. The axons of 
abducens and hypoglossal neurons exit the brain directly ven-
trally, without coursing laterally. The axons of trochlear neurons 
(light blue) extend laterally and dorsally within the brain until, 
caudal to the inferior colliculus, they turn medially, decussate 
just behind the inferior colliculus, and exit near the midline of 
the opposite side.
B. The brain stem of a mouse embryo in which fluorescent dyes 
label different populations of cranial nerve VII motor neurons. A 
red-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of facial motor neurons 
via retrograde transport from the motor root of the facial nerve. 
These neurons develop initially in r4 and then migrate posteri-
orly, alongside the floor plate, to r6 (see red neurons in part A). 
A green-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of general visceral 
motor neurons in r5 (see light green neurons in part A) via retro-
grade transport from the root of the intermediate nerve (sensory 
and preganglionic general visceral motor axons). (Micrograph 
reproduced, with permission, from Dr. Ian McKay.)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    989
Figure 40–6  Adult cranial nerve nuclei are organized in six 
functional columns on the rostrocaudal axis of the brain 
stem.
A. This dorsal view of the human brain stem shows the loca-
tion of the cranial nerve sensory nuclei (right) and motor nuclei 
(left).
B. A schematic view of the functional organization of the cranial 
nerve nuclei makes it clearer that they form motor and sensory 
columns.
C. The medial-lateral arrangement of the cranial nerve nuclei is 
shown in a cross section at the level of the medulla (compare 
with Figure 40–4D).
Special visceral
General
somatic
General and special visceral
General somatic
Special somatic
Midbrain
Sensory
Motor
Pons
Medulla
Spinal cord
Special somatic
sensory (N. VIII)
Sensory:
Somatic
Sulcus
limitans
Visceral
General somatic
sensory (N. V, VII, IX, X)
General and special
visceral sensory
(N. VII, IX, X)
General visceral
motor (N. III, VII, IX, X)
General somatic
motor (N. III, IV, VI, XII)
Special visceral motor
(N. V, VII, IX, X, XI)
General
visceral
A
B
C
Hypoglossal nucleus (N. XII)
Dorsal motor nucleus
of vagus (N. X)
Accessory nucleus (N. XI)
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus (N. V, VII, IX, X)
Solitary nucleus
(N. VII, IX, X)
Principal sensory
trigeminal nucleus (N. V)
III
VII
IX
X
XII
IX
VI
VIII
VIII
IV
III
V
IX, X
VII
V
V
V, VII,
IX, X
XI
Vestibular nuclei
(N. VIII)
Cochlear nucleus
(N. VIII)
Motor:
Visceral
Somatic
Edinger-Westphal
nucleus (N. III)
Oculomotor
nucleus (N. III)
Trochlear
nucleus (N. IV)
Trigeminal motor
nucleus (N. V)
Abducens nucleus (N. VI)
Facial motor
nucleus (N. VII)
Salivatory
nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus (N. IX, X)
Superior (N. VII)
Inferior (N. IX)
Mesencephalic
trigeminal
nucleus (N. V)
Sensory
Motor


===== Page 3 =====
990    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
is represented ventrally and the oral region dorsally, 
with the tongue extending medially toward the taste 
region of the nucleus of the solitary tract, with which it 
shares some afferent information concerning food tex-
ture and temperature. Axons from the spinal trigemi-
nal nucleus descend on the same side of the brain 
stem into the cervical spinal cord, where they cross 
the midline in the anterior commissure with spinotha-
lamic axons and join the opposite spinothalamic tract. 
(For this reason, upper cervical spinal cord injury may 
cause facial numbness.) The trigeminothalamic axons 
then ascend back through the brain stem in close asso-
ciation with the spinothalamic tract, providing inputs 
to brain stem nuclei for reflex motor and autonomic 
responses in addition to carrying pain and tempera-
ture information to the thalamus.
The principal sensory trigeminal nucleus lies in the 
mid-pons just lateral to the trigeminal motor nucleus. 
It receives the axons of neurons in the trigeminal gan-
glion concerned with position sense and fine touch 
discrimination, the same types of sensory information 
carried from the rest of the body by the dorsal col-
umns. The axons from this nucleus are bundled just 
medial to those from the dorsal column nuclei in the 
medial lemniscus, through which they ascend to the 
ventroposterior medial thalamus.
The mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, located at the 
midbrain level in the lateral surface of the periaque-
ductal gray matter, relays mechanosensory information 
from the muscles of mastication and the periodontal 
ligaments. The large cells of this nucleus are not cen-
tral neurons but primary sensory ganglion cells that 
derive from the neural crest and, unlike their relatives 
in the trigeminal ganglion, migrate into the brain dur-
ing development. The central branches of the axons of 
these pseudo-unipolar cells contact motor neurons in 
the trigeminal motor nucleus, providing monosynap-
tic feedback to the jaw musculature, critical for rapid 
and precise control of chewing movements.
Special Somatic Sensory Column
The special somatic sensory column has inputs from the 
acoustic and vestibular nerves and develops from the 
intermediate region of the alar plate. The cochlear nuclei 
(N. VIII), which lie at the lateral margin of the brain 
stem at the pontomedullary junction, receive affer-
ent fibers from the spiral ganglion of the cochlea. The 
output of the cochlear nuclei is relayed through the 
pons to the superior olivary and trapezoid nuclei and 
bilaterally on to the inferior colliculus (Chapter 28). 
The vestibular nuclei (N. VIII) are more complex. They 
include four distinct cell groups that relay information 
from the vestibular ganglion to various motor sites in 
the brain stem, cerebellum, and spinal cord concerned 
with maintaining balance and coordination of eye and 
head movements (Chapter 27).
Visceral Sensory Column
The visceral sensory column is concerned with spe-
cial visceral information (taste) and general visceral 
information from the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal 
(IX), and vagus nerves (X). It is derived from the most 
medial tier of neurons in the alar plate. All of the affer-
ent axons from these sources terminate in the nucleus 
of the solitary tract. The solitary tract is analogous to 
the spinal trigeminal tract or Lissauer’s tract, bun-
dling afferents from different cranial nerves as they 
course rostrocaudally along the length of the nucleus. 
As a result, sensory information from different regions 
of the viscera produces a unified map of the internal 
body in the nucleus.
Special visceral afferents from the anterior two-
thirds of the tongue travel to the nucleus of the soli-
tary tract through the chorda tympani branch of the 
facial nerve, whereas those from the posterior parts 
of the tongue and oral cavity arrive through the glos-
sopharyngeal and vagus nerves. These afferents ter-
minate in roughly somatotopic fashion in the anterior 
third of the nucleus of the solitary tract (or solitary 
nucleus). General visceral afferents are relayed through 
the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. Those from 
the rest of the gastrointestinal tract (down to the trans-
verse colon) terminate in the middle portion of the sol-
itary nucleus in topographic order, whereas those from 
the cardiovascular and respiratory systems terminate 
in the caudal and lateral portions.
The solitary nucleus projects directly to parasym-
pathetic and sympathetic preganglionic motor neurons 
in the medulla and spinal cord that mediate various 
autonomic reflexes, as well as to parts of the reticular 
formation that coordinate autonomic and respiratory 
responses. Most ascending projections from the soli-
tary nucleus that carry information from the viscera 
to the forebrain are relayed through the parabrachial 
nucleus in the pons, although some reach the forebrain 
directly. Together, the solitary and parabrachial nuclei 
supply visceral sensory information to the hypothala-
mus, basal forebrain, amygdala, thalamus, and cer-
ebral cortex.
General Visceral Motor Column
All motor neurons initially develop adjacent to the 
floor plate, a longitudinal strip of non-neuronal cells 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    991
at the ventral midline of the neural tube (Chapter 45). 
Neurons fated to become the three types of brain stem 
motor neurons migrate dorsolaterally, settling in three 
distinct rostrocaudal columns. The neurons that form 
the general visceral motor column take up a position 
along the most lateral region of the basal plate, just 
medial to the sulcus limitans. During development, the 
parasympathetic motor neurons destined to join the 
superior salivatory nucleus (part of the facial nerve) 
and nucleus ambiguus (part of the vagus nerve) migrate 
ventrolaterally, leaving behind axons that ascend medi-
ally before turning laterally to exit the brain stem, in a 
course similar to the facial motor neurons.
The Edinger-Westphal nucleus (N. III) lies in the mid-
line separating the somatic oculomotor neurons just 
below the floor of the cerebral aqueduct. It contains 
preganglionic neurons that control pupillary constriction 
and lens accommodation through the ciliary ganglion.
The superior salivatory nucleus (N. VII) lies just dor-
sal to the facial motor nucleus and comprises para-
sympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate the 
sublingual and submandibular salivary glands and the 
lacrimal glands and intracranial circulation through 
the sphenopalatine and submandibular parasympa-
thetic ganglia.
Parasympathetic preganglionic neurons associ-
ated with the gastrointestinal tract form a column at 
the level of the medulla just dorsal to the hypoglossal 
nucleus and ventral to the nucleus of the solitary tract. 
At the most rostral end of this column is the inferior 
salivatory nucleus (N. IX) comprising the preganglionic 
neurons that innervate the parotid gland through the 
otic ganglion. The rest of this column constitutes the 
dorsal motor vagal nucleus (N. X). Most of the pregangli-
onic neurons in this nucleus innervate the gastrointes-
tinal tract below the diaphragm; a few are cardiomotor 
neurons.
The nucleus ambiguus (N. X) runs the rostrocau-
dal length of the ventrolateral medulla and contains 
parasympathetic preganglionic neurons that innervate 
thoracic organs, including the esophagus, heart, and 
respiratory system, as well as special visceral motor 
neurons that innervate the striated muscle of the 
larynx and pharynx, and neurons that generate res-
piratory motor patterns (see later in chapter). The par-
asympathetic preganglionic neurons are organized in 
topographic fashion, with the esophagus represented 
most rostrally and dorsally.
Special Visceral Motor Column
The special visceral motor column includes motor 
nuclei that innervate muscles derived from the 
branchial (pharyngeal) arches. Because these arches 
are homologous to the gills in fish, the muscles are 
considered special visceral muscles, even though they 
are striated. During development, these cell groups 
migrate to an intermediate position in the basal plate 
and are eventually located ventrolaterally in the 
tegmentum.
The trigeminal motor nucleus (N. V) lies at midpon-
tine levels and innervates the muscles of mastication. 
Nearby in separate clusters are located the accessory 
trigeminal nuclei that innervate the tensor tympani, ten-
sor veli palatini, and mylohyoid muscles, and the ante-
rior belly of the digastric muscle.
The facial motor nucleus (N. VII) lies caudal to the 
trigeminal motor nucleus at the level of the caudal 
pons and innervates the muscles of facial expression. 
During development, facial motor neurons migrate 
medially and rostrally around the medial margin of 
the abducens nucleus before turning laterally, ven-
trally, and caudally toward their definitive position 
at the pontomedullary junction (Figure 40–5A). This 
sinuous course that the axons leave behind forms the 
internal genu of the facial nerve. The adjacent accessory 
facial motor nuclei innervate the stylohyoid and stape-
dius muscles and the posterior belly of the digastric 
muscle.
The nucleus ambiguus contains branchial motor 
neurons with axons that run in the glossopharyngeal 
and vagus nerves. These neurons innervate the striated 
muscles of the larynx and pharynx. During develop-
ment, these motor neurons migrate into the ventrolat-
eral medulla, and as a consequence, their axons run 
dorsomedially toward the dorsal motor vagal nucleus, 
then turn sharply within the medulla to exit laterally, 
similar to the course of the facial motor axons.
General Somatic Motor Column
The neurons of the somatic motor column migrate the 
least during development, remaining close to the ven-
tral midline. The oculomotor nucleus (N. III) lies at the 
midbrain level; it consists of five rostrocaudal columns 
of motor neurons innervating the medial, superior, 
and inferior rectus muscles, the inferior oblique mus-
cle, and the levator of the eyelids. The motor neurons 
for the medial and inferior rectus and inferior oblique 
muscles are on the side of the brain stem from which 
the nerve exits, whereas those for the superior rectus 
are on the opposite side. The levator motor neurons 
are bilateral.
The trochlear nucleus (N. IV), which innervates the 
trochlear muscle, lies at the midbrain/rostral pon-
tine level on the side of the brain stem opposite from 


===== Page 5 =====
992    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
which the nerve exits. The abducens nucleus (N. VI), 
which innervates the lateral rectus muscle, is located 
at the midpontine level. The hypoglossal nucleus  
(N. XII) in the medulla consists of several columns of 
neurons, each of which innervates a single muscle of 
the tongue.
The Organization of the Brain Stem Differs From 
the Spinal Cord in Three Important Ways
One major difference between the organization of the 
brain stem and that of the spinal cord is that many 
long ascending and descending sensory tracts that run 
along the outside of the spinal cord are incorporated 
within the interior of the brain stem. Thus, the ascend-
ing sensory tracts (the medial lemniscus and spinotha-
lamic tract) run through the reticular formation of the 
brain stem, as do the auditory, vestibular, and visceral 
sensory pathways.
A second major difference is that in the brain stem, 
the cerebellum and its associated pathways form addi-
tional structures that are superimposed on the basic 
plan of the spinal cord. Fibers of the cerebellar tracts 
and nuclei are bundled with those of the pyramidal 
and extrapyramidal motor systems to form a large 
ventral portion of the brain stem. Thus, from the mid-
brain to the medulla, the brain stem is divided into 
a dorsal portion, the tegmentum, which follows the 
basic segmental plan of the spinal cord, and a ventral 
portion, which contains the structures associated with 
the cerebellum and the descending motor pathways. 
At the level of the midbrain, the ventral (motor) por-
tion includes the cerebral peduncles, substantia nigra, 
and red nuclei. The base of the pons includes the 
pontine nuclei, corticospinal tract, and middle cer-
ebellar peduncle. In the medulla, the ventral motor 
structures include the pyramidal tracts and inferior 
olivary nuclei.
A third major difference is that, although the hind-
brain is segmented into rhombomeres during develop-
ment, there is no clear repeating pattern in the adult 
brain. In contrast, the spinal cord is not segmented 
during development, but the final pattern consists of 
repeating segments. The prominent ladder-like arrays 
of ventral root axons and dorsal root ganglia suggest 
that segmentation is imposed by a polarizing effect 
of the adjacent body segments, or somites into which 
they migrate—in each somite, the rostral part attracts 
axonal growth cones and neural crest cells, whereas the 
caudal part is repulsive. In the head, such patterning is 
lacking as the cranial mesoderm is not segmented into 
somites but rather develops under the influence of the 
rhombomeres.
Neuronal Ensembles in the Brain Stem 
Reticular Formation Coordinate Reflexes and 
Simple Behaviors Necessary for Homeostasis 
and Survival
In the 19th century, Charles Darwin pointed out in his 
book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals 
that the muscles of facial expression are activated in 
similar patterns in all mammals during similar emo-
tional situations (fear, anger, disgust, happiness). He 
hypothesized that the patterns of facial expression 
must be deeply embedded in the organization of the 
brain stem. We now recognize that a wide range of 
reflexes and simple, repetitive, coordinated behaviors, 
such as facial emotional expression, breathing, and eat-
ing, are controlled by neurons in the brain stem reticu-
lar formation called pattern generators, which produce 
stereotyped innate responses. Impairment of cranial 
nerve reflexes and motor patterns in patients with neu-
rological disease can indicate the precise site of brain 
stem damage.
Cranial Nerve Reflexes Involve Mono- and 
Polysynaptic Brain Stem Relays
The responses of the pupils to light (pupillary light 
reflexes) are determined by the balance between sym-
pathetic tone in the pupillodilator muscles and para-
sympathetic tone in the pupilloconstrictor muscles of 
the iris. Sympathetic tone is maintained by postgangli-
onic neurons in the superior cervical ganglion, which 
in turn are innervated by preganglionic neurons in the 
first and second thoracic spinal segments. Parasympa-
thetic tone is supplied by postganglionic ciliary gan-
glion cells under the control of preganglionic neurons 
in the Edinger-Westphal nucleus and adjacent areas of 
the midbrain.
Light impinging on the retina activates a special 
class of retinal ganglion cells that act as brightness 
detectors. These cells receive inputs from photopig-
ment-containing rod and cone cells, but they also have 
their own photopigment, melanopsin, which allows 
them to respond to light even when the rods and cones 
have degenerated. These cells send their axons through 
the optic nerve, chiasm, and tract to the olivary pretec-
tal nucleus, where they terminate on neurons whose 
axons project to preganglionic neurons in the Edinger-
Westphal nucleus (Figure 40–7). Thus, injury to the 
dorsal midbrain in the region of the posterior commis-
sure can prevent pupillary light responses (midposi-
tion, fixed pupils), whereas injury to the oculomotor 
nerve eliminates parasympathetic tone to that pupil 
(fixed and dilated pupil). The melanopsin-containing 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    993
Figure 40–7  The pupillary response to light is mediated by 
parasympathetic innervation of the iris. Retinal ganglion cells 
that contain the photopigment melanopsin act as luminance 
detectors, sending their axons through the optic tract to the oli-
vary pretectal nucleus, at the junction of the midbrain and the 
thalamus. Neurons in this nucleus project through the posterior 
commissure to parasympathetic preganglionic neurons in and 
around the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. The axons of the pregan-
glionic cells exit with the oculomotor (III) nerve and contact cili-
ary ganglion cells, which control the pupilloconstrictor muscle 
in the iris. (Abbreviations: LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus;  
MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus.)
LGN
MLF
Olivary pretectal 
nucleus
Ciliary
ganglia
Pupilloconstrictor
muscle in the iris
Retinal
ganglion cell
N. III
Edinger-Westphal
nucleus
retinal ganglion cells also project to the suprachias-
matic nucleus of the hypothalamus, where they entrain 
circadian rhythms to the day–night cycle (Chapter 44).
Vestibulo-ocular reflexes stabilize the image on the 
retina during head movement by rotating the eyeballs 
counter to the rotation of the head. These reflexes are 
activated by pathways from the vestibular ganglion 
and nerve to the medial, superior, and lateral vestibu-
lar nuclei, and from there to neurons in the reticular 
formation and ocular motor nuclei that coordinate 
eye movements. The reflex movements are seen most 
clearly in comatose patients, in whom turning the head 
will elicit counter-rotational movements of the eyes 
(so-called doll’s eye movements). Damage to these 
pathways in the pons impairs these movements.
The corneal reflex involves closure of both eyelids as 
well as upward turning of the eyes (Bell phenomenon) 
when the cornea is gently stimulated (eg, with a wisp 
of cotton). The sensory axons from the first division of 
the trigeminal nerve terminate in the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus, which relays the sensory signals to pattern 
generator neurons in the reticular formation adjacent 
to the facial motor nucleus. The pattern generator neu-
rons provide bilateral inputs to the motor neurons that 
protect the cornea from damage by causing the orbicu-
laris oculi muscle to close the eyelid and the oculomo-
tor nuclei to roll the eyes upward and back in the orbit. 
Because the output of the pattern generator is bilateral, 
damage along the sensory pathway prevents the reflex 
in both eyes, whereas damage to the facial nerve pre-
vents closure on the same side only.
The stapedial reflex contracts the stapedius muscle 
in response to a loud sound, thus damping movement 
of the ossicles. The sensory pathway is through the 
cochlear nerve and nucleus to the reticular formation 
adjacent to the facial motor nucleus and from there to 
the stapedial motor neurons, which run in the facial 
nerve. As described earlier, in patients with injury to 
the facial nerve (eg, Bell palsy), the stapedial reflex is 
impaired, and the patient complains that sounds in 
that ear have a “booming” quality (hyperacusis).
A variety of gastrointestinal reflexes are con-
trolled by multisynaptic brain stem relays. For exam-
ple, the tasting of food causes neurons in the solitary 
nucleus that project to the reticular formation adja-
cent to the motor facial and dorsal motor vagal nuclei 
to stimulate the preganglionic salivary neurons. The 
contact of food in the mouth can also elicit gastric 
contractions and acid secretion, presumably through 
inputs from the solitary nucleus directly to parasym-
pathetic preganglionic gastric neurons in the dorsal 
motor vagal nucleus. In patients who have had Bell 
palsy, the damaged VII nerve parasympathetic axons 
may regrow aberrantly so that salivary axons reach 
the lacrimal gland in error, causing tasty food to initi-
ate reflex tearing (crocodile tears).
The gag reflex protects the airway in response to 
stimulation of the posterior oropharynx. The affer-
ent sensory fibers in the glossopharyngeal and vagus 
nerves terminate in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, 
whose axons project to the reticular formation adja-
cent to the nucleus ambiguus. Branchial motor neu-
rons in the nucleus ambiguus innervate the posterior 
pharyngeal muscles, resulting in elevation of the 


===== Page 7 =====
994    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
palate, constriction of pharyngeal muscles (to expel the 
offending stimulus), and closure of the airway. Loss of 
the gag reflex on one side of the throat indicates injury 
to the medulla or to cranial nerve X on that side (cra-
nial nerve IX has such a small territory of sensory and 
motor innervations in the pharynx that transection of 
this nerve does not cause a noticeable deficit).
Pattern Generators Coordinate More Complex 
Stereotypic Behaviors
As Darwin proposed, pools of pattern generator neu-
rons in the reticular formation adjacent to the facial 
nucleus control facial emotional expression through 
stereotypic patterns of contraction of facial muscles 
simultaneously on the two sides of the face. Pattern 
generator neurons on each side of the brain stem pro-
ject to the facial motor neurons on both sides of the 
brain, so that spontaneous facial expressions are virtu-
ally always symmetric. Even patients who have had 
major strokes in the cerebral hemispheres and cannot 
voluntarily move the contralateral orofacial muscles 
still tend to smile symmetrically when they hear a joke 
and can raise their eyebrows symmetrically, both of 
which are initiated by facial pattern generators.
Similarly, orofacial movements involved in eat-
ing are produced by pattern generator neurons in the 
reticular formation near the cranial motor nuclei that 
mediate the behaviors. Licking movements are organ-
ized in the reticular formation near the hypoglos-
sal nucleus, chewing movements near the trigeminal 
motor nucleus, sucking movements near the facial and 
ambiguus nuclei, and swallowing near the nucleus 
ambiguus. Not surprisingly, neurons in these reticu-
lar areas are closely interconnected with each other 
and receive inputs from the part of the nucleus of 
the solitary tract concerned with taste and from the 
part of the spinal trigeminal nucleus concerned with 
tongue and oral sensation, as well as from neurons in 
the adjacent reticular formation that respond to more 
complex combinations of taste, texture, and tempera-
ture of food. As a result, even a decerebrate rat is able 
to make appropriate choices of which foods to swal-
low and which to reject.
Vomiting is another example of a coordinated 
response mediated by pattern generator neurons. 
Toxic substances in the blood stream can be detected 
by nerve cells in the area postrema, a small region 
adjacent to the nucleus of the solitary tract along the 
floor of the fourth ventricle. Unlike most of the brain, 
which is protected by a blood–brain barrier, the area 
postrema contains fenestrated capillaries that allow its 
neurons to sample the contents of the blood stream. 
These neurons, when they detect a toxin, activate a 
pool of neurons in the ventrolateral medulla that con-
trol a pattern of responses that clears the digestive tract 
of any poisonous substances. These responses include 
reversal of peristalsis in the stomach and esophagus, 
increased abdominal muscle contraction, and activa-
tion of the same motor patterns used in the gag reflex 
to clear the oropharynx of unwanted material.
A variety of responses organized by the brain stem 
require coordination of cranial motor patterns with 
autonomic and sometimes endocrine responses. A 
good example is the baroreceptor reflex, which ensures 
an adequate blood flow to the brain (Chapter 41). 
The nucleus of the solitary tract receives information 
about stretch of the aortic arch through the vagus (X) 
nerve and stretch of the carotid sinus through the glos-
sopharyngeal (IX) nerve. This information is relayed 
to neurons in the ventrolateral medulla that produce a 
coordinated response that protects the brain against a 
fall in blood pressure.
Reduced stretch of the aortic arch and carotid 
sinus reduces drive to the parasympathetic pregangli-
onic cardiac-vagal neurons in the nucleus ambiguus, 
resulting in reduced vagal tone and increased heart 
rate. Simultaneously, increased firing of neurons in 
the rostral ventrolateral medulla drives sympathetic 
preganglionic vasoconstrictor and cardioaccelerator 
neurons. This combination of increased cardiac output 
and increased vascular resistance elevates blood pres-
sure. Meanwhile, other neurons in the ventrolateral 
medulla increase the firing of hypothalamic neurons 
that secrete vasopressin from their terminals in the 
posterior pituitary gland. Vasopressin also has a direct 
vasoconstrictor effect, and it maintains blood volume 
by reducing water excretion through the kidney.
Control of Breathing Provides an Example of 
How Pattern Generators Are Integrated Into More 
Complex Behaviors
One of the most important functions of the brain stem 
is control of breathing. The brain stem automatically 
generates breathing movements beginning in utero at 
11 to 13 weeks of gestation in humans, and continues 
nonstop from birth until death. This behavior does not 
require any conscious effort, and in fact, it is rare for us 
to even think about the need to breathe. The primary 
purpose of breathing is to ventilate the lungs to con-
trol blood levels of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and hydro-
gen ions (pH). (These are often measured together 
clinically and referred to as “blood gases.”) Breathing 
movements involve contraction of the diaphragm, acti-
vated by the phrenic nerve. The diaphragm is assisted 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    995
Figure 40–8  Rhythmic breathing is generated within the 
medulla.
A. Rhythmic activity in the phrenic motor nerve of a guinea pig 
causes contraction of the diaphragm. The firing of the phrenic 
nerve is phase-locked to bursts of firing by neurons in the medulla. 
The activity in a single medullary neuron, recorded intracellularly, is 
shown. (Reproduced, with permission, from Richerson and  
Getting 1987. Copyright © 1987. Published by Elsevier B.V.)
B. Similar rhythmic firing can be recorded in vitro from 
accessory respiratory nerves, such as the hypoglossal (XII) 
nerve. The minimal tissue necessary to support this rhythm 
is a slice about 0.5 mm thick at the level of the rostral 
medulla. Neurons in the pre-Bötzinger complex (Pre-BötC) 
near the nucleus ambiguus fire bursts that are phase-locked 
to the motor rhythm. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Smith et al. 1991. Copyright © 1991 AAAS.)
when necessary by accessory muscles of respiration, 
including the intercostal muscles, pharyngeal mus-
cles (to change airway diameter), some neck muscles 
(which help expand the chest), the tongue protruder 
muscles (to open the airway), and even some facial 
muscles (which flare the nares).
Respiratory activity can be generated by the medulla 
even when it is isolated from the rest of the nervous 
system. Many medullary neurons have patterns of fir-
ing that correlate with inspiration or expiration (Figure 
40–8A). Some have more refined patterns, such as firing 
only during early inspiration or late inspiration. These 
respiratory neurons are concentrated in two regions, the 
dorsal and ventral respiratory groups.
The dorsal respiratory group is located bilaterally in 
and around the ventrolateral part of the nucleus of the 
solitary tract. Neurons in this group receive respiratory 
sensory input, including afferents from stretch recep-
tors in the lungs and peripheral chemoreceptors, and 
participate in such reflex actions as limitation of lung 
inflation at high volume (the Hering-Breuer reflex) and 
the ventilatory response to low oxygen (hypoxia). The 
ventral respiratory group, a column of neurons in and 
around the nucleus ambiguus, coordinates respira-
tory motor output. Some of these neurons are motor 
neurons with axons that leave the brain through the 
vagus nerve and innervate accessory muscles of respi-
ration or premotor neurons that innervate the phrenic 
Medulla
Phrenic 
nerve
C3-C5
A  In vivo recording
B  In vitro recording
Hypoglossal
nucleus (N. XII)
Nucleus
ambiguus
N. XII
N. XII
Phrenic nerve
Medullary neuron
Pre-BötC
0.4 s
20 mV
–60 mV
5 s
20 mV
motor nucleus, whereas others form a pattern genera-
tor, the pre-Bötzinger complex, that generates respiratory 
rhythm.
The intrinsic rhythmicity of the pre-Bötzinger com-
plex is so resilient that, even in a transverse brain slice 
from the rostral medulla, neurons in the pre-Bötzinger 
complex are able independently to generate a respira-
tory rhythm that can be recorded in the rootlets of the 
hypoglossal (XII) nerve that emerge from the ventral 
surface of the slices (Figure 40–8B). Acute destruction 
of this cell group in an intact animal results in inability 
to maintain a normal respiratory rhythm.
The most important inputs to the respiratory pat-
tern generator come from chemoreceptors that sense 
oxygen and carbon dioxide. Under normal conditions, 
ventilation is primarily regulated by the levels of CO2 
rather than O2 (Figure 40–9A). However, breathing is 
also strongly stimulated if O2 becomes sufficiently low, 
such as at high altitude or in people with lung disease. 
The peripheral chemoreceptors in the carotid and aor-
tic bodies normally respond primarily to a decrease in 
blood oxygen, but during hypoxia, they also become 
more sensitive to elevated levels of CO2 (hypercapnia). 
Afferent fibers from the carotid sinus nerve travel in 
the glossopharyngeal nerve and activate neurons in 
the dorsal respiratory group.
The response to hypercapnia is largely driven by 
central chemoreceptors in the brain stem that sense the 


===== Page 9 =====
996    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 40–9  Respiratory motor output is regu-
lated by carbon dioxide in the blood.
A. Lung ventilation (determined by the rate and 
depth of breathing) in humans is steeply depend-
ent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide 
(PCO2) at normal levels of the partial pressure of 
oxygen (PO2) (>100 mm Hg). When PO2 drops to 
very low values (<50 mm Hg), breathing is stimu-
lated directly and also becomes more sensitive 
to an increase in PCO2 (seen here as an increase 
in the slope of the curves for alveolar PO2 of 37 
and 47 mm Hg). (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Nielsen and Smith 1952.)
B. Central chemoreceptors in the medulla control 
ventilatory motor output to maintain normal blood 
CO2. The firing rate of serotonergic neurons within 
the raphe nuclei of the medulla increases when 
elevated PCO2 causes a pH decrease. The records 
shown here are from in vitro recordings of a neu-
ron in the raphe nuclei of a rat at two different 
levels of pH (7.4, control, and 7.2, acidosis). (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Wang et al. 2002.)
C. Serotonergic neurons are closely associated 
with large arteries in the ventral medulla where 
they can monitor local changes in PCO2. Two 
images of the same transverse section of the rat 
medulla show blood vessels after injection of a 
red fluorescent dye into the arterial system (left) 
and green antibody staining for tryptophan hydrox-
ylase, the enzyme that synthesizes serotonin 
(right). The basilar artery (B) is on the ventral sur-
face of the medulla between the pyramidal tracts 
(P). (Reproduced, with permission, from Bradley 
et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
B
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
50
0
–50
50
0
–50
Lung ventilation (liters/min)
Alveolar PCO2 (mm Hg)
Alveolar PO2
(mm Hg)
37
47
110
or 169
A
C
Control
Acidosis
Vm (mV)
Vm (mV)
Blood vessels
Serotonin neurons
Dorsal
B
P
P
5 s
accompanying decrease in pH. The most sensitive area 
for this is along the ventral surface of the medulla lat-
eral to the pyramidal tract. This region contains at least 
two sets of neurons that respond to elevated CO2. Glu-
tamatergic neurons in the retrotrapezoid nucleus in 
the rostral ventrolateral medulla, near the facial motor 
nucleus, are highly sensitive to CO2 levels. Absence of 
these neurons, due to a mutation in the phox2b tran-
scription factor required for their development, causes 
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, in which 
there is failure to breathe adequately, particularly dur-
ing sleep. In addition, serotonergic neurons in the ros-
tral ventrolateral medulla, like retrotrapezoid neurons, 
lie along penetrating arteries and are sensitive to acido-
sis (Figure 40–9B,C). Genetic deletion of these neurons 
reduces the ventilatory response to hypercapnia, espe-
cially during sleep. Recent studies demonstrate that a 
serotonin 5-HT2A agonist can restore arousal responses 
to CO2, suggesting that the serotonergic neurons play 
a modulatory role, increasing the sensitivity of the 
CO2 reflexes during hypercapnia, and that this may be 
especially important during sleep.
The motor pattern generated by the respiratory 
system is remarkably stable in healthy people, but 
a variety of diseases can alter these patterns. One of 
the most common and easily recognized patterns is 
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, which is characterized by 
repeated cycles of gradually increasing then decreas-
ing ventilation, alternating with cessation of breathing 
(apnea). This periodic breathing is seen, for exam-
ple, in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome, 
where the central neurons are not sufficiently sensi-
tive to rising CO2, particularly during sleep. By the time 
they begin to respond, CO2 levels may already be quite 
high. This causes hyperventilation, which reduces CO2 
levels below the threshold where breathing is required. 
The result is a period of apnea, until the CO2 levels 
again become quite high (Figure 40–10).
A similar pattern is seen in people who have car-
diac or pulmonary disease that increases the time it 
takes for the change in alveolar CO2 to register with 
the medulla. Cheyne-Stokes respiration often occurs 
in hospitalized patients with marginal cardiac or res-
piratory reserve when they fall asleep, thus reducing 


