===== Page 1 =====
1004    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
a predator). The monoaminergic systems include impor-
tant descending projections to the dorsal horn of the spi-
nal cord that modulate pain perception (Chapter 20).
The noradrenergic inputs to the spinal cord origi-
nate from the pontine cell groups A5–A7, with the 
locus ceruleus (A6) providing most of the input to the 
dorsal horn. Similarly, the serotonergic raphe nuclei 
in the medulla, particularly the nucleus raphe mag-
nus, project to the dorsal horn where they modulate 
the processing of information about noxious stimuli. 
Direct application of serotonin to dorsal horn neurons 
inhibits their response to noxious stimuli, and intrathe-
cal administration of serotonin attenuates the defensive 
withdrawal of the paw evoked by noxious stimuli. In 
addition, intrathecal administration of antagonists of 
serotonin receptors blocks the pain inhibition evoked 
by stimulation of the raphe nuclei.
Insight into the role of serotonin in pain process-
ing has been used in treating migraine headaches. In 
particular, the triptan agonists of 5-HT1D receptors 
have been found to be therapeutically effective. One 
of the possible mechanisms of action of this family of 
tryptamine-based drugs includes presynaptic inhibi-
tion of pain afferents from the meninges, preventing 
sensitization of central neurons. Drugs that block 
monoamine reuptake, including both traditional anti-
depressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
are effective in limiting pain in patients with chronic 
pain and migraine headaches.
Motor Activity Is Facilitated by  
Monoaminergic Pathways
The dopaminergic system is critical for normal motor 
performance. A massive projection ascends from the 
substantia nigra pars compacta to the striatum, where 
dopaminergic fibers act on striatal neuron receptors to 
release inhibition of motor responses (Chapter 38).
Patients with Parkinson disease in whom midbrain 
dopaminergic neurons have degenerated have trouble 
initiating movement and difficulty sustaining move-
ments. Such patients speak softly, write with small 
letters, and take small steps. Conversely, drugs that 
facilitate dopaminergic transmission in the striatum 
can result in unintended behaviors, ranging from motor 
tics (small muscle twitches), to chorea (large-scale, jerky 
limb movements), to complex cognitive behaviors (such 
as compulsive gambling or sexual activity).
As first shown by Sten Grillner, serotonergic neu-
rons play an important role in modulating motor pro-
grams. Drugs that activate serotonin receptors can 
induce hyperactivity, myoclonus, tremor, and rigid-
ity, all of which are part of the “serotonin syndrome.” 
Increases in the firing of raphe neurons have been 
observed in animals during repetitive motor activi-
ties such as feeding, grooming, locomotion, and deep 
breathing. Conversely, the firing of both serotonergic 
raphe and noradrenergic locus ceruleus neurons prac-
tically ceases during the atonia and lack of movement 
that occur during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep.
Noradrenergic cell groups in the pons also send 
extensive projections to motor cell groups. This modu-
latory input acts on presynaptic β- and α1-adrenergic 
receptors to facilitate excitatory inputs to motor neurons 
(Chapter 31). The sum of these effects is to facilitate 
motor neuron responses in stereotypic and repetitive 
behaviors such as rhythmic chewing, swimming, or 
locomotion. Conversely, increased β-adrenergic acti-
vation during stress can exaggerate motor responses 
and produce tremor. Drugs that block β-adrenergic 
receptors are used clinically to reduce certain types of 
tremor and are often taken by musicians prior to per-
formances to minimize tremulousness.
Ascending Monoaminergic Projections Modulate 
Forebrain Systems for Motivation and Reward
The forebrain is continuously bombarded with sen-
sory information and must determine which stimuli 
deserve attention. It must also decide which of many 
available behaviors should receive priority, based in 
part on experience—which behaviors have achieved 
rewarding outcomes in the past. The ascending mono-
aminergic systems play key roles in modulating all of 
these choices.
As noted earlier, dopaminergic inputs to the stria-
tum adjust the likelihood that a specific motor pattern 
or even a cognitive pattern will be expressed. Low 
dopamine levels reduce output from the direct path-
way striatal neurons (which release behaviors) and 
increase activity of indirect pathway striatal neurons 
(which inhibit behavior). Dopamine also has been 
linked to reward-based learning. Rewards are objects 
or events for which an animal will work (Chapter 42) 
and are useful in positively reinforcing behavior. Activ-
ity of dopaminergic neurons increases when a reward 
(such as food or juice) is unexpectedly given. But after 
animals are trained to expect a reward following a con-
ditioned stimulus, the activity of the neurons increases 
immediately after the conditioned stimulus rather than 
after the reward. This pattern of activity indicates that 
dopaminergic neurons provide a reward-prediction 
error signal, an important element in reinforcement 
learning. The importance of dopamine in learning is 
also supported by observations that lesions of dopa-
minergic systems prevent reward-based learning. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    1005
The same dopaminergic pathways that are important 
for reward and learning are involved in addiction to 
many drugs of abuse (Chapter 43)
Noradrenergic neurons of the locus ceruleus play 
an important role in attention. These neurons have a 
low baseline level of activity in drowsy monkeys. In 
alert, attentive monkeys the cells have two firing pat-
terns. In the phasic mode, the baseline activity of the 
neurons is low to moderate, but there are bursts of 
firing just before the monkey responds to stimuli to 
which it has been attentive. This pattern of activity 
is thought to facilitate selective attention to a stimu-
lus that is about to initiate a behavior. In contrast, in 
the tonic mode, the baseline level of activity is elevated 
and does not change in response to external stimuli. 
This mode of firing may promote the search for a new 
behavioral and attentional goal when the current task 
is no longer rewarding (Figure 40–14).
Performance
Focused attention
Inattentive
nonalert
Firing rate of LC neurons
Scanning 
labile attention
Locus ceruleus
Figure 40–14  Locus ceruleus (LC) neurons exhibit different 
patterns of activity with different levels of attentiveness and 
task performance.  The inverted U curve shows the relationship 
between a monkey’s performance on a target detection task 
and the level of locus ceruleus activity. Histograms show the 
responses of LC neurons to presentation of the target during 
different levels of task performance. Performance is poor at low 
levels of LC activity because the animals are not alert. Perfor-
mance is optimal when baseline activity is moderate and phasic 
activation follows presentation of the target. Performance is also 
poor when baseline activity is high because the higher baseline 
is incompatible with focusing on the assigned task. The tonic 
mode (with high baseline activity) might be optimal for tasks (or 
contexts) that require behavioral flexibility instead of focused 
attention. If so, the LC could regulate the balance between 
focused and flexible behavior. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Aston-Jones, Rajkowski, and Cohen 1999. Copyright © 1999 
Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc.)
Many monoaminergic neurons also participate in 
regulating overall arousal (Figure 40–15). The noradr-
energic locus ceruleus, serotonergic dorsal and median 
raphe nuclei, dopaminergic A10 neurons, and hista-
minergic tuberomammillary neurons innervate the 
thalamus, hypothalamus, basal forebrain, and cerebral 
cortex. All of these systems have the property of fir-
ing fastest during wakefulness, slowing down during 
slow wave (or non-REM) sleep, and grinding to a halt 
during REM sleep.
Stimulation of noradrenergic neurons in the locus 
ceruleus or histaminergic cells in the tuberomammil-
lary nucleus increases electroencephalogram (EEG) 
arousal, indicating that these systems play an impor-
tant role in cortical and behavioral arousal. However, 
lesions restricted to one or even a combination of mon-
oaminergic cell groups do not cause profound loss of 
wakefulness, suggesting that the various cell groups 


===== Page 3 =====
1006    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Hippocampus
Thalamus
Cerebral
cortex
Lateral dorsal
tegmental nucleus
(acetylcholine)
RT
ILT
Locus ceruleus
(norepinephrine)
Dorsal and median
raphe nuclei
(serotonin)
Tuberomammillary
nucleus
(histamine)
Lateral 
hypothalamus
(supramammillary
glutamate,
orexin,
GABA)
 
Parabrachial
nucleus
(glutamate)
Pedunculopontine
nucleus
(glutamate,
acetylcholine)
Basal 
forebrain
(glutamate, 
acetylcholine,
GABA)
Norepinephrine
Glutamate
Acetylcholine
Serotonin
Orexin
 GABA
 
Histamine
 
Figure 40–15  Major cell groups in the ascending arousal 
system. Neurons using the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, 
serotonin, dopamine, histamine, and acetylcholine have wide-
spread forebrain projections. Although they all contribute to 
arousal by modulating various brain functions, ablation of any one 
of these cell groups has little effect on the waking state, sug-
gesting that none of them are essential for maintaining a waking 
state. On the other hand, extensive damage to glutamatergic 
neurons in the parabrachial and pedunculopontine nuclei or to 
the GABAergic, glutamatergic, and cholinergic neurons in the 
basal forebrain (orange boxes) can cause a profound and pro-
longed coma. Thus, the parabrachial–pedunculopontine–basal 
forebrain–cortical pathway appears to be the only one that is 
essential to maintaining a waking state. (Abbreviations: GABA, 
γ-aminobutyric acid; ILT, intralaminar thalamic nuclei; LC, locus 
ceruleus; RT, reticular nucleus of the thalamus.)
probably have overlapping and at least partly redun-
dant roles in sleep/wake regulation. The monoamin-
ergic pathways modulate specific cellular properties 
of postsynaptic neurons in the thalamus and cerebral 
cortex, enhancing alertness and interaction with envi-
ronmental stimuli.
Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Neurons Maintain 
Arousal by Modulating Forebrain Neurons
The monoaminergic and cholinergic neurons induce 
arousal by activating cortical neurons both directly and 
indirectly. They do this in part by modulating the activ-
ity of neurons in the brain stem, hypothalamus, basal 
forebrain, and thalamus that activate the cerebral cortex.
Both noradrenergic and serotonergic neurons 
innervate the parabrachial complex, a glutamatergic 
cell group that is critical for maintaining a waking fore-
brain. Noradrenergic inputs also activate histaminer-
gic and orexin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus 
as well as cholinergic and GABAergic neurons in the 
basal forebrain, all of which project directly to the cer-
ebral cortex. The parabrachial, histaminergic, orexin, 
and cholinergic basal forebrain neurons all excite corti-
cal pyramidal cells, whereas the GABAergic basal fore-
brain neurons inhibit cortical inhibitory interneurons, 
thus disinhibiting the cortical pyramidal cells. The net 
effect of these inputs is to make the cortical pyrami-
dal neurons more responsive to incoming sensory and 
cognitive inputs.
Parabrachial, noradrenergic, serotonergic, hista-
minergic, and cholinergic inputs also innervate the 
thalamus and modulate its ability to transmit sensory 
information to the cerebral cortex. Thalamic relay neu-
rons fire in rhythmic bursts during sleep (Chapter 44) but 
fire single spikes related to incoming sensory stimuli 
during wakefulness. The firing pattern of thalamic 
and cortical neurons changes from burst mode to 
single-spike mode when the cells are depolarized fol-
lowing application of acetylcholine, norepinephrine, 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    1007
Thalamic
relay
neuron
Thalamic
reticular
neuron
Cortical
neuron
Bursting
Single spikes
1 s
0.5 s
ACh,  NE or Glu
5-HT, NE, HA or Glu
ACh, NE, HA or Glu
Figure 40–16  Monoaminergic and cholinergic systems 
modulate the activity of thalamic and cortical neurons to 
maintain arousal. The firing patterns of cortical and thalamic 
neurons are converted from burst mode to single-spike mode 
by the action of acetylcholine or monoamines. Recordings are 
from neurons in brain slices. Thalamic and cortical neurons have 
limited ability to convey information when firing in rhythmic 
bursts. However, when in single-spike mode, their firing activ-
ity reflects the inputs they receive. Therefore, the monoamin-
ergic and cholinergic arousal systems keep open the lines of 
communication necessary for cortical information processing. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Steriade, McCormick, and 
Sejnowski 1993. Copyright © 1993 AAAS.)
serotonin, or histamine (Figure 40–16). Thus, the mon-
oaminergic neurons that participate in the ascending 
arousal system regulate cortical activity in part by 
altering the firing of thalamic neurons.
Many pharmacological agents that target mono-
aminergic and cholinergic systems influence arousal. 
For example, antihistamines cause drowsiness, sero-
tonin reuptake blockers decrease the amount of REM 
sleep, and nicotine is a powerful stimulant. In addi-
tion, arousal is induced by amphetamines, cocaine, 
and other drugs that block dopamine reuptake; mice 
lacking the dopamine transporter are insensitive to 
such drugs.
Patients with Parkinson disease, who lose dopa-
minergic neurons in the substantia nigra, also lose 
noradrenergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and tend 
to be abnormally sleepy during the day. Some drugs 
used to treat Parkinson disease activate the D2 dopa-
mine receptor on presynaptic terminals of the remain-
ing dopaminergic arousal neurons, which results 
in presynaptic inhibition, thus reducing dopamine 
release. As a result, although these drugs may make 
the movement disorder better (through their effects 
on postsynaptic D2 receptors on neurons in the stria-
tum), the inhibitory effect on remaining dopaminergic 
cells in the arousal system may exacerbate daytime 
sleepiness.
Highlights
1.	 The plan for the brain stem and the cranial nerves 
unfolds early in development, as neurons assem-
ble into clusters that come, in time, to assume 
their functional organization. Building on the 
basic plan of the spinal cord, motor and sensory 
neurons concerned with the face, head, neck, and 
internal viscera form into discrete nuclei with spe-
cific functions and territories of innervation.
2.	 Neurons in the reticular formation surrounding 
these cranial nerve nuclei develop into ensembles 
of neurons that can generate patterns of auto-
nomic and motor responses that subserve simple, 
stereotyped, coordinated functions, ranging from 
facial expression to feeding and breathing. These 
behavior patterns are sufficiently complex and 
flexible to represent the entire behavioral reper-
tory of a newborn baby.
3.	 As the forebrain develops and exerts its control 
over these brain stem pattern generators, a variety 
of more complex responses and ultimately voli-
tional control of behavior evolve.
4.	 Even a skilled actor, however, finds it difficult to 
produce the facial expressions associated with 
specific emotions unless he recreates the emo-
tional states internally, thereby triggering the pre-
patterned facial expressions associated with those 
feeling states. Thus, some of the most complex 
human emotions and behaviors are played out 
unconsciously by means of stereotypic patterns of 
motor and autonomic responses in the brain stem.


===== Page 5 =====
1008    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
5.	 The brain stem also contains a series of cell groups 
that have long-ranging and diffuse projections. 
Their targets range from the cognitive and behav-
ioral systems in the cerebral cortex, to hypotha-
lamic and brain stem autonomic control areas, to 
sensory and motor control systems in the spinal 
cord. Many of the neurons that participate in these 
modulatory systems, which set the tone for more 
specific sensory, motor, behavioral, and autonomic 
outputs, use monoamines as neuromodulators.
6.	 As a result of the diffuseness of these modulatory 
pathways and the multiplicity of receptors that 
they employ, a large portion of all central nervous 
system–active drugs act on these pathways. Unfor-
tunately, many of the off-target effects of these 
drugs are due to the diffuseness of these pathways 
and their use of the same neurotransmitters and 
receptors at multiple locations. A challenge for the 
future of central nervous system pharmacology 
will be to develop drugs more highly selective for 
the targeted functions that require modulation.
 Clifford B. Saper  
 Joel K. Elmquist 
Selected Reading
Feldman JL, Del Negro CA, Gray PA. 2013. Understanding 
the rhythm of breathing: so near and yet so far. Ann Rev 
Physiol 75:423–452.
Gautron L, Elmquist JK, Williams KW. 2015. Neural control 
of energy balance: translating circuits to therapies. Cell 
161:133–145.
Guyenet PG, Bayliss DA. 2015. Control of breathing and CO2 
homeostasis. Neuron 87:94–961.
Hodges MR, Richerson GB. 2010. Medullary serotonin neu-
rons and their roles in central respiratory chemoreception. 
Respir Physiol Neurobiol 173:256–263.
Llorca-Torralba M, Borges G, Neto F, Mico JA, Berrocoso E. 
2016. Noradrenergic locus coeruleus pathways in pain 
modulation. Neuroscience 338:93–113.
Plum F, Posner JB, Saper CB, Schiff ND. 2007. Plum and Pos-
ner’s Diagnosis of Stupor and Coma, 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Davis.
Saper CB. 2002. The central autonomic nervous system: con-
scious visceral perception and autonomic pattern genera-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:433–469.
Saper CB, Stornetta RL. 2014. Central autonomic system. In: 
G Paxinos (ed). The Rat Nervous System, 4th ed., pp. 627–671. 
San Diego: Elsevier.
Schultz W. 2016. Dopamine reward prediction-error signalling: 
a two-component response. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:183–195.
Sohn JW, Elmquist JK, Williams KW. 2013. Neuronal circuits 
that regulate feeding behaviour and metabolism. Trends 
Neurosci 36:504–512.
References
Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD. 2005. An integrative theory of 
locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive gain 
and optimal performance. Annu Rev Neurosci 28:403–450.
Aston-Jones G, Rajkowski J, Cohen J. 1999. Role of locus coer-
uleus in attention and behavioral flexibility. Biol Psychiatry 
46:1309–1320.
Aston-Jones G, Bloom FE. 1981. Activity of norepinephrine-
containing locus ceruleus neurons in behaving rats antici-
pates fluctuations in the sleep-wake cycle. J Neurosci 
1:876–886.
Bieger D, Hopkins DA. 1987. Viscerotropic representation of 
the upper alimentary tract in the medulla oblongata in the 
rat: the nucleus ambiguus. J Comp Neurol 262:546–562.
Blessing WW, Li Y-W. 1989. Inhibitory vasomotor neurons in 
the caudal ventrolateral region of the medulla oblongata. 
Prog Brain Res 81:83–97.
Bouret S, Richmond BJ. 2015. Sensitivity of locus coeruleus 
neurons to reward value for goal-directed attention.  
J Neurosci 35:4005–4014.
Bradley SR, Pieribone VA, Wang W, Severson CA, Jacobs RA, 
Richerson GB. 2002. Chemosensitive serotonergic neu-
rons are closely associated with large medullary arteries. 
Nat Neurosci 5:401–402.
Bruinstroop E, Cano G, Vanderhorst VG, et al. 2012. Spinal 
projections of the A5, A6 (locus coeruleus), and A7 noradr-
energic cell groups in rats. J Comp Neurol 520:1985–2001.
Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Williams EK, Umans BD, Liberles 
SD. 2015. Vagal sensory neuron subtypes that differen-
tially control breathing. Cell 161:622–633.
Filiano JJ, Kinney HC. 1994. A perspective on neuropatho-
logic findings in victims of the sudden infant death syn-
drome: the triple-risk model. Biol Neonate 65:194–197.
Gray PA, Janczewski WA, Mellen N, McCrimmon DR,  
Feldman JL. 2001. Normal breathing requires pre-Bötzinger 
complex neurokinin-1 receptor-expressing neurons. Nat 
Neurosci 4:927–930.
Grunstein RR, Sullivan CE. 1990. Neural control of respira-
tion during sleep. In: MJ Thorpy (ed). Handbook of Sleep 
Disorders. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Jenny AB, Saper CB. 1987. Organization of the facial nucleus 
and cortico-facial projection in the monkey: a reconsid-
eration of the upper motor neuron facial palsy. Neurol 
37:930–939.
Lahiri S, Maret K, Sherpa M, Peters R Jr. 1984. Sleep and 
periodic breathing at high altitude: Sherpa natives vs. 
sojourners.  In: J West, S lahiri (eds).  High Altitude and 
Man, pp. 73–90. Bethesda: American Physiological Society.
Morecraft RJ, Louie JL, Herrick JL, Stilwell-Morecraft KS. 
2001. Cortical innervation of the facial nucleus in the 
non-human primate: a new interpretation of the effects of 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    1009
stroke and related subtotal brain trauma on the muscles of 
facial expression. Brain 124(Pt 1):176–208.
Mulkey DK, Stornetta RL, Weston MC, et al. 2004. Respira-
tory control by ventral surface chemoreceptor neurons in 
rats. Nat Neurosci 7:1360–1369.
Nielson M, Smith H. 1952. Studies on the regulation of res-
piration in acute hypoxia; with an appendix on respira-
tory control during prolonged hypoxia. Acta Physiol Scan 
24:293–313.
Richerson GB. 2004. Serotonergic neurons as carbon dioxide 
sensors that maintain pH homeostasis. Nat Rev Neurosci 
5:449–461.
Richerson GB, Getting PA. 1987. Maintenance of complex 
neural function during perfusion of the mammalian 
brain. Brain Res 409:128–132.
Rinaman L, Card JP, Schwaber JS, Miselis RR. 1989. Ultra-
structural demonstration of a gastric monosynaptic vagal 
circuit in the nucleus of the solitary tract in rat. J Neurosci 
9:1985–1996.
Smith JC, Ellenberger HH, Ballanyi K, Richter DW, Feldman 
JL. 1991. Pre-Bötzinger complex: a brain stem region that 
may generate respiratory rhythm in mammals. Science 
254:726–729.
Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. 1993. Thalamo-
cortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused brain. 
Science 262:679–685.
Wang W, Bradley SR, Richerson GB. 2002.  Quantification of 
the response of rat medullary raphe neurons to independ-
ent change in pH and PCO2. J Physiol 540:951–970.
Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BE, Lowell BB, 
Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and 
nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.


===== Page 7 =====
41
The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal,  
and Behavioral Control of Survival
The Neuroendocrine System Links the Brain to Physiological 
Responses Through Hormones
Hypothalamic Axon Terminals in the Posterior Pituitary 
Release Oxytocin and Vasopressin Directly Into the Blood
Endocrine Cells in the Anterior Pituitary Secrete 
Hormones in Response to Specific Factors Released by 
Hypothalamic Neurons
Dedicated Hypothalamic Systems Control Specific 
Homeostatic Parameters
Body Temperature Is Controlled by Neurons in the 
Median Preoptic Nucleus
Water Balance and the Related Thirst Drive Are 
Controlled by Neurons in the Vascular Organ of the 
Lamina Terminalis, Median Preoptic Nucleus, and 
Subfornical Organ
Energy Balance and the Related Hunger Drive Are 
Controlled by Neurons in the Arcuate Nucleus
Sexually Dimorphic Regions in the Hypothalamus Control 
Sex, Aggression, and Parenting
Sexual Behavior and Aggression Are Controlled by 
the Preoptic Hypothalamic Area and a Subarea of the 
Ventromedial Hypothalamic Nucleus
Parental Behavior Is Controlled by the Preoptic 
Hypothalamic Area
Highlights
T
he survival of an individual requires tight con-
trol of body temperature, water balance, and blood 
pressure, together with sufficient food intake 
and appropriate regulation of sleep/wakefulness 
Homeostasis Keeps Physiological Parameters Within a 
Narrow Range and Is Essential for Survival
The Hypothalamus Coordinates Homeostatic Regulation
The Hypothalamus Is Commonly Divided Into Three 
Rostrocaudal Regions
Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Link 
Interoceptive Sensory Feedback With Outputs That 
Control Adaptive Behaviors and Physiological  
Responses
Modality-Specific Hypothalamic Neurons Also Receive 
Descending Feedforward Input Regarding Anticipated 
Homeostatic Challenges
The Autonomic System Links the Brain to Physiological 
Responses
Visceral Motor Neurons in the Autonomic System Are 
Organized Into Ganglia
Preganglionic Neurons Are Localized in Three Regions 
Along the Brain Stem and Spinal Cord
Sympathetic Ganglia Project to Many Targets 
Throughout the Body
Parasympathetic Ganglia Innervate Single Organs
The Enteric Ganglia Regulate the Gastrointestinal Tract
Acetylcholine and Norepinephrine Are the Principal 
Transmitters of Autonomic Motor Neurons
Autonomic Responses Involve Cooperation Between the 
Autonomic Divisions
Visceral Sensory Information Is Relayed to the Brain Stem 
and Higher Brain Structures
Central Control of Autonomic Function Can Involve 
the Periaqueductal Gray, Medial Prefrontal Cortex, and 
Amygdala


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1011
cycles. Survival of a species requires that individuals 
be fertile, mate, and nurture their offspring, and that 
aggression toward others be appropriate and adaptive. 
Neurons in the hypothalamus control all of these key 
survival activities.
As we shall learn in this chapter, the hypothala-
mus together with interconnected areas of the brain 
responds to bodily and emotional challenges by recruit-
ing appropriate behavioral and physiological responses. 
Coordination of these activities ensures constancy of the 
internal environment, a process known as homeosta-
sis. The hypothalamus acts on three major systems: the 
autonomic motor system, the neuroendocrine system, 
and neural pathways that mediate motivated behavior.
The autonomic motor system is distinct from the 
somatic motor system, which controls skeletal muscle. 
Whereas somatic motor neurons regulate contractions 
of striated muscles (Chapter 31), autonomic motor 
neurons regulate blood vessels, the heart, the skin, 
and visceral organs through synapses upon smooth 
and cardiac muscle cells, upon glands cells that serve 
endocrine and exocrine functions, and upon metabolic 
targets such as adipocytes. The neuroendocrine system 
works differently, by secreting several peptide hor-
mones from the pituitary, the “master gland,” located 
just beneath the hypothalamus. These pituitary hor-
mones control water retention by the kidney, parturi-
tion, lactation, somatic growth, gamete development, 
and also the release of nonpeptide hormones from 
three downstream glands—the gonads, adrenal cortex, 
and thyroid.
Although largely involuntary, autonomic and 
neuroendocrine responses are tightly integrated with 
voluntary behavior executed by the somatic motor sys-
tem. Running, climbing, and lifting exemplify volun-
tary actions that have metabolic, cardiovascular, and 
thermoregulatory consequences. These needs are auto-
matically met by the autonomic and neuroendocrine 
systems through changes in cardiorespiratory drive, 
cardiac output, regional blood flow, heat dissipation, 
and fuel mobilization. Such compensatory changes are 
implemented primarily by feedforward central com-
mands, supplemented by reflexes activated by sensory 
feedback. Similarly, emotional states evoke autonomic 
and neuroendocrine responses. Feelings of fear, anger, 
happiness, and sadness have characteristic autonomic 
and hormonal manifestations.
In this chapter, we first explore the concept of 
homeostasis and the general means by which it is 
achieved. We then discuss the anatomical and func-
tional organization of the hypothalamus and its two 
“involuntary” motor arms—the autonomic and neu-
roendocrine systems. After that, we focus in depth on 
three classic examples of hypothalamic homeostatic 
control—regulation of body temperature, of water 
balance and its related deficiency drive, thirst, and of 
energy balance and its drive, hunger. We conclude by 
examining sexually dimorphic regions of the hypo-
thalamus and their role in regulating sexual behavior, 
aggression, and parenting. Additional discussion of 
sleep cycles and regulation of circadian rhythms can 
be found in Chapter 44.
Homeostasis Keeps Physiological Parameters 
Within a Narrow Range and Is Essential  
for Survival
In the mid-19th century, the French physiologist and 
founder of experimental medicine Claude Bernard 
drew attention to the stability of the body’s internal 
environment over a broad range of behavioral states 
and external conditions. “The internal environment 
(le milieu interior),” he wrote, “is a necessary condition 
for a free life.” Building on this idea, in the 1930s, the 
American physiologist Walter B. Cannon introduced 
the concept of homeostasis to describe the mechanisms 
that maintain the constancy of composition of the bod-
ily fluids, body temperature, blood pressure, and other 
physiological variables—all of which are necessary for 
survival.
Homeostatic mechanisms are highly adaptive 
because they greatly extend the range of conditions 
that can be tolerated. For example, during exercise, 
many parameters can increase dramatically—cardiac 
output by 4- to 5-fold, oxygen and fuel consumption by 
5- to 10-fold, and heat production to a similar degree. 
In the absence of compensatory responses, blood pres-
sure would increase in proportion to cardiac output, 
rupturing blood vessels; circulating fuels would fall 
to critically low levels, starving cells of energy; and 
hyperthermia would denature cell proteins. Indeed, 
the capacity of homeostasis is remarkable, making it 
possible for animals to survive at high latitudes where 
seasonal temperatures can fluctuate by 70°C and for 
humans to run 251 km in the sands of the extremely 
hot Sahara Desert (Marathon des Sables). Homeostatic 
mechanisms greatly extend the range of habitats, activ-
ities, and traumas that can be survived.
Homeostasis requires negative sensory feed-
back from the body. The concept of feedback loops 
evolved from the discovery of sensors that detect criti-
cal physiological variables and then couple them with 
behavioral, autonomic, and neuroendocrine motor 
outputs. Drawing upon the engineering principle of 
negative feedback control, this led to the concept that 


===== Page 9 =====
1012    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–1  (Left) Set points, settling points, and 
homeostasis.
A. The set point view was inspired by engineering principles. 
As with a thermostat, constancy is achieved by providing feed-
back on the existing level of a parameter, determining how it 
compares to an idealized set point, and then instituting correc-
tive measures to return the parameter to the set point. While 
popular for many years, it has fallen out of favor as years of 
research have failed to uncover molecular and neural bases for 
encoding set points and performing error detection.
B. The settling point model was inspired by observations that 
many systems achieve constancy in the absence of any feed-
back or error detection. In this example, the level of outflow 
of water from a lake is proportional to the depth of the lake. 
When it rains, the increase or decrease in the level of the lake 
causes more or less water to flow out of the lake. The level 
of the lake remains fairly constant without a set point or error 
detection. A related example is regulation of body weight. 
Increased food intake leads to increased body weight. As 
body weight increases, the energy cost of carrying and sus-
taining that increased weight goes up. Because of this, body 
weight too should have its settling point. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Speakman et al. 2011.)
C. In this model the concepts of feedback in part A and set-
tling point in part B are combined. The apparent set point is 
in fact the settling point, an emergent property of multiple 
feedback-informed afferent/efferent loops.
physiological “set points” help control key parameters 
like body temperature, blood osmolarity, blood pres-
sure, and body fat content.
Set point models are appealing because thermo-
stats are so effective in maintaining room temperature 
at a targeted set point and, by analogy, physiological 
variables like body temperature are likewise tightly 
controlled. In such models, a “set point” exists for a 
A  Set point model
B  Settling point model
C  Combined model: settling point of multiple afferent/efferent loops
X
Y
Set point
Error
detector
Sensor
Effectors
Too high
Too low
+
–
Detectors
1
2
3
4
Neurons
Parameters
Behavioral
Physiologic 1
Physiologic 2
Effectors
Hypothalamus
Depth at outﬂow
Rain
Parameter
parameter, 37°C in the case of body temperature, and 
at any given moment, the real level of the parameter 
is assessed and compared with the targeted set point 
through feedback and error detection (Figure 41–1A). 
Any deviation above or below triggers counteracting 
corrective responses—if too hot, cutaneous vasodila-
tation, sweating, and a dip in the pool; if too cold, 
vasoconstriction, thermogenesis, shivering, and the 
donning of a sweater. For regulation of body tempera-
ture, the set point and detection of error were histori-
cally seen as emergent properties of neurons in the 
preoptic area of the hypothalamus (POA).
Over time, the set point model required revision 
because intensive investigation failed to uncover any 
molecular or neuronal bases for encoding set points 
and performing error detection. In addition, “set 
point–like” regulation can, in principle, be achieved 
without a set point, feedback, or error detection—the 
so-called “settling point” model (Figure 41–1B). Con-
sider the changing level of a lake. When rainfall is 
excessive, its level rises; the rivers draining the lake 
rise and their flow increases. The converse is true when 
rainfall is low. The changing flow of the rivers draining 
the lake thus maintains its level near a settling point 
without requiring an idealized set point, feedback, 
or error detection. While aspects of the settling point 
model have appeal, it too is incomplete because home-
ostatic processes clearly receive important feedback 


