===== Page 1 =====
68    Part I / Overall Perspective
the intensity of sensation or speed of movement is the 
frequency of the action potentials. Likewise, the dura-
tion of a sensation or movement is determined by the 
period over which action potentials are generated.
In addition to the frequency of the action potentials, 
the pattern of action potentials also conveys important 
information. For example, some neurons are spon-
taneously active in the absence of stimulation. Some 
spontaneously active nerve cells (beating neurons) fire 
action potentials regularly; others (bursting neurons) 
fire in brief bursts of action potentials. These diverse 
cells respond differently to the same excitatory synaptic 
input. An excitatory synaptic potential may initiate one 
or more action potentials in a cell that is not spontane-
ously active, whereas that same input to spontaneously 
active cells will simply increase the existing rate of firing.
An even more dramatic difference is seen when 
the input signal is inhibitory. Inhibitory inputs have 
little information value in a silent cell. By contrast, in 
spontaneously active cells, inhibition can have a pow-
erful sculpting role. By establishing periods of silence 
in otherwise ongoing activity, inhibition can produce a 
complex pattern of alternating firing and silence where 
none existed. Such subtle differences in firing patterns 
may have important functional consequences for the 
information transfer between neurons. Mathemati-
cal modelers of neuronal networks have attempted 
to delineate neural codes in which information is also 
carried by the fine-grained pattern of firing—the exact 
timing of each action potential.
If signals are stereotyped and reflect only the most 
elementary properties of the stimulus, how can they 
carry the rich variety of information needed for complex 
behavior? How is a message that carries visual informa-
tion about a bee distinguished from one that carries pain 
information about the bee’s sting, and how are these 
sensory signals distinguished from motor signals for 
voluntary movement? The answer is simple and yet is 
one of the most important organizational principles of 
the nervous system: Interconnected neurons form ana-
tomically and functionally distinct pathways—labeled 
lines—and it is these pathways of connected neurons, 
these labeled lines, not individual neurons, that convey 
information. The neural pathways activated by receptor 
cells in the retina that respond to light are completely 
distinct from the pathways activated by sensory cells in 
the skin that respond to touch.
The Output Component Releases Neurotransmitter
When an action potential reaches a neuron’s terminal, 
it stimulates the release of chemical substances from 
the cell. These substances, called neurotransmitters, can be 
small organic molecules, such as l-glutamate and ace-
tylcholine, or peptides like substance P or LHRH (lute-
inizing hormone–releasing hormone).
Neurotransmitter molecules are held in subcellu-
lar organelles called synaptic vesicles, which accumulate 
in the terminals of the axon at specialized release sites 
called active zones. To eject their transmitter substance 
into the synaptic cleft, the vesicles move up to and fuse 
with the neuron’s plasma membrane, then burst open 
to release the transmitter into the synaptic cleft (the 
extracellular space between the pre- and postsynaptic 
cell) by a process known as exocytosis. The molecular 
machinery of neurotransmitter release is described in 
Chapters 14 and 15.
The released neurotransmitter molecules are 
the neuron’s output signal. The output signal is 
thus graded according to the amount of transmit-
ter released, which is determined by the number and 
frequency of the action potentials that reach the pre-
synaptic terminals (Figure 3–9C,D). After release, the 
transmitter molecules diffuse across the synaptic cleft 
and bind to receptors on the postsynaptic neuron. This 
binding causes the postsynaptic cell to generate a syn-
aptic potential. Whether the synaptic potential has an 
excitatory or inhibitory effect depends on the type of 
receptor in the postsynaptic cell, not on the particular 
chemical neurotransmitter. The same transmitter sub-
stance can have different effects at different receptors.
The Transformation of the Neural Signal From 
Sensory to Motor Is Illustrated by the  
Stretch-Reflex Pathway
As we have seen, the properties of a signal are trans-
formed as the signal moves from one component of a 
neuron to another or between neurons. In the stretch 
reflex, when a muscle is stretched, the amplitude and 
duration of the stimulus are reflected in the amplitude 
and duration of the receptor potential generated in the 
sensory neuron (Figure 3–10A). If the receptor poten-
tial exceeds the threshold for an action potential in 
that cell, the graded signal is transformed at the trig-
ger zone into an action potential. Although individual 
action potentials are all-or-none signals, the more the 
receptor potential exceeds threshold, the greater the 
depolarization and consequently the greater the fre-
quency of action potentials in the axon. The duration 
of the input signal also determines the duration of the 
train of action potentials.
The information encoded by the frequency and 
duration of firing is faithfully conveyed along the 
axon to its terminals, where the firing of action poten-
tials determines the amount of transmitter released. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    69
Figure 3–10  The sequence of signals that produces a reflex 
action.
A.  The stretching of a muscle produces a receptor potential in 
the specialized receptor (the muscle spindle). The amplitude 
of the receptor potential is proportional to the intensity of the 
stretch. This potential spreads passively to the integrative or 
trigger zone at the first node of Ranvier. If the receptor poten-
tial is sufficiently large, it triggers an action potential that then 
propagates actively and without change along the axon to the 
axon terminal. At specialized sites in the terminal, the action 
potential leads to the release of a chemical neurotransmitter, 
the output signal. The transmitter diffuses across the synaptic 
cleft between the axon terminal and a target motor neuron that 
innervates the stretched muscle; it then binds to receptor mol-
ecules on the external membrane of the motor neuron.
B.  This interaction initiates a synaptic potential that spreads 
passively to the trigger zone of the motor neuron’s axon, where 
it initiates an action potential that propagates actively to the  
terminal of the motor neuron’s axon. At the axon terminal,  
the action potential leads to release of a neurotransmitter near 
the muscle fiber.
C.  The neurotransmitter binds receptors on the muscle fiber, 
generating a synaptic potential. The synaptic potential triggers 
an action potential in the muscle, which causes a contraction.
Muscle spindle
Stretch
Sensory neuron
Motor neuron
Graded
receptor
potential
Action
potential
Receptor
potential
Graded
synaptic
potential
Graded
synaptic
potential
Synaptic
potential
Synaptic
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Action
potential
Input
Stimulus
Integration
Conduction Output
(transmitter
release)
Input
Integration
Conduction
Output
(transmitter
release)
Input
Integration
Conduction Output
(behavior)
Muscle
A  Sensory signals
C  Muscle signals
B  Motor signals
Contraction
C
A
B
These stages of signaling have their counterparts in 
the motor neuron (Figure 3–10B) and in the muscle  
(Figure 3–10C).
Nerve Cells Differ Most at the Molecular Level
The model of neuronal signaling we have outlined is a 
simplification that applies to most neurons, but there 
are some important variations. For example, some 
neurons do not generate action potentials. These are 
typically local interneurons without a conductive com-
ponent; they have no axon or such a short one that 
regeneration of the signal is not required. In these neu-
rons, the input signals are summed and spread pas-
sively to the presynaptic terminal region near where 
transmitter is released. Neurons that are spontane-
ously active do not require sensory or synaptic inputs 
to fire action potentials because they have a special 
class of ion channels that permit Na+ current flow even 
in the absence of excitatory synaptic input.
Even cells that are similar morphologically can 
differ importantly in molecular details. For example, 
they can have different combinations of ion channels. 
As we shall learn in Chapter 10, different ion channels 
provide neurons with various thresholds, excitabil-
ity properties, and firing patterns. Such neurons can 
encode synaptic potentials into different firing pat-
terns and thereby convey different information.
Neurons also differ in the chemical substances they 
use as transmitters and in the receptors that receive 
transmitter substances from other neurons. Indeed, 
many drugs that act on the brain do so by modifying 
the actions of specific chemical transmitters or recep-
tors. Because of physiological differences among neu-
rons, a disease may affect one class of neurons but 


===== Page 3 =====
70    Part I / Overall Perspective
not others. Certain diseases strike only motor neu-
rons (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and poliomyeli-
tis), whereas others affect primarily sensory neurons 
(leprosy and tabes dorsalis, a late stage of syphilis). 
Parkinson disease, a disorder of voluntary movement, 
damages a small population of neurons that use dopa-
mine as a neurotransmitter. Some diseases are selective 
even within the neuron, affecting only the receptive 
elements, the cell body, or the axon. In Chapter 57, 
we describe how research into myasthenia gravis, a 
disease caused by a faulty transmitter receptor in the 
muscle membrane, has provided important insights 
into synaptic transmission. Indeed, because the nerv-
ous system has so many cell types and variations at the 
molecular level, it is susceptible to more diseases (psy-
chiatric as well as neurological) than any other organ 
system of the body.
Despite the morphological differences among nerve 
cells, the molecular mechanisms of electrical signaling 
are surprisingly similar. This simplicity is fortunate, for 
understanding the molecular mechanisms of signaling 
in one kind of nerve cell aids the understanding of these 
mechanisms in many other nerve cells.
The Reflex Circuit Is a Starting Point for 
Understanding the Neural Architecture of 
Behavior
The stretch reflex illustrates how interactions between 
just a few types of nerve cells can constitute a func-
tional circuit that produces a simple behavior, even 
though the number of neurons involved is large (the 
stretch reflex circuit has perhaps a few hundred sen-
sory neurons and a hundred motor neurons). Some 
invertebrate animals are capable of behavior as sophis-
ticated as reflexes using far fewer neurons. Moreover, 
in some instances, just one critical command neuron 
can trigger a complex behavior such as the withdrawal 
of a body part from a noxious stimulus.
For more complex behaviors, especially in higher 
vertebrates, many neurons are required, but the basic 
neural structure of the simple reflex is often preserved. 
First, there is often an identifiable group of neurons 
whose firing rate changes in response to a particu-
lar type of environmental stimulus, such as a tone of 
a certain frequency, or the juxtaposition of light and 
dark at a particular angle. Just as the firing rate of the 
stretch receptor neurons encodes the degree of muscle 
tension, the firing rates of cortical neurons in sensory 
areas of the cortex encode the intensity of a sensory 
feature (eg, the degree of contrast of the contour). As 
we shall see in later chapters, it is possible to change 
the features of a percept just by changing the firing rate 
of small groups of neurons.
Second, there is often an identifiable group of 
neurons whose firing rate changes before an animal 
performs a motor act. Just as the spike rate of motor 
neurons controls the magnitude of the contraction of 
the quadriceps muscle—hence the knee jerk—so does 
the firing rate of neurons in the motor cortex affect the 
latency and type of movement that will be performed. 
Exactly what aspect of the movement is encoded by 
such neurons remains an area of active inquiry, but it is 
well established that groups of neurons affect the ensu-
ing action in a graded fashion by adjusting their firing 
rate. In other association areas of the cerebral cortex, 
the graded firing rates of neurons encode quantities 
that are essential for thought processes, such as the 
amount of evidence bearing on a choice (Chapter 56).
Although sophisticated mental operations are 
far more complicated than a simple stretch reflex, it 
may nevertheless prove useful to consider the extent 
to which cognitive functions are supported by neural 
mechanisms that are organized in any way that resem-
bles a simple reflex. What types of elaborations might 
be required to mediate a sophisticated behavior and 
thought? Unlike a simple reflex, with a sophisticated 
behavior, activation of sensory neurons would not give 
rise to an immediate reflexive action. There is more 
contingency to the process. Although simple reflexes 
are modulated by context, mental functions are more 
deeply shaped by a complex repertoire of contingen-
cies, allowing for many possible effects of any one 
stimulus and many possible precipitants of any one 
action. In light of these contingencies, we are forced 
to conceive of a flexible routing between the brain’s 
data acquisition systems—not just the sensory systems 
but also the memory systems—and effector systems. 
As we shall see in later chapters, this is the role of the 
higher association areas of the cerebral cortex, acting in 
concert with several subcortical brain structures.
Perhaps a more salient difference between a com-
plex mental function and a reflex is the timing of 
action. Once activated, a reflex circuit leads to action 
almost immediately after the sensory stimulus. Any 
delay depends mainly on the conduction velocity of 
the action potentials in the afferent and efferent limbs 
of the reflex (eg, the ankle jerk is slower than the knee 
jerk because the spinal cord is further from the stretch 
receptors of the calf muscles than it is from the thigh 
extensors). For more complex behaviors, action need 
not occur more or less instantaneously with the arrival 
of sensory information. It might be delayed to await 
additional information or be expressed only when spe-
cific circumstances occur.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    71
Interestingly, the neurons in the association areas 
of the cortex of primates have the capacity to sustain 
graded firing rates for durations of many seconds. 
These neurons are abundant in the parts of the brain 
that mediate the flexible linkage between sensory and 
motor areas. They afford a freedom from the instanta-
neous nature of reflexive behavior and therefore may 
furnish the essential circuit properties that distinguish 
cognitive functions from more straightforward senso-
rimotor transformations like a reflex.
Neural Circuits Can Be Modified by Experience
Learning can result in behavioral changes that endure 
for years, even a lifetime. But even simple reflexes can 
be modified, albeit for a much briefer period of time. 
The fact that much behavior can be modified by learn-
ing raises an interesting question: How is it that behav-
ior can be modified if the nervous system is wired so 
precisely? How can changes in the neural control of 
behavior occur when connections between the signaling 
units, the neurons, are set during early development?
Several solutions for this dilemma have been pro-
posed. The proposal that has proven most farsighted is 
the plasticity hypothesis, first put forward at the turn of 
the 20th century by Ramón y Cajal. A modern form of 
this hypothesis was advanced by the Polish psycholo-
gist Jerzy Konorski in 1948.
The application of a stimulus leads to changes of a twofold 
kind in the nervous system … [T]he first property, by vir-
tue of which the nerve cells react to the incoming impulse … 
we call excitability, and … changes arising … because of this 
property we shall call changes due to excitability. The second 
property, by virtue of which certain permanent functional 
transformations arise in particular systems of neurons as a 
result of appropriate stimuli or their combination, we shall 
call plasticity and the corresponding changes plastic changes.
There is now considerable evidence for functional 
plasticity at chemical synapses. These synapses often 
have a remarkable capacity for short-term physiologi-
cal changes (lasting seconds to hours) that increase 
or decrease synaptic effectiveness. Long-term physi-
ological changes (lasting days or longer) can give rise 
to anatomical alterations, including pruning of syn-
apses and even growth of new ones. As we shall see in 
later chapters, chemical synapses are functionally and 
anatomically modified during critical periods of early 
development but also throughout life. This functional 
plasticity of neurons endows each of us with a char-
acteristic manner of interacting with the surrounding 
world, both natural and social.
Highlights
1.	 Nerve cells are the signaling units of the nervous 
system. The signals are mainly electrical within 
the cell and chemical between cells. Despite vari-
ations in size and shape, nerve cells share certain 
common features. Each has specialized receptors 
or transducers that receive input from other nerve 
cells or from the senses respectively; a mechanism 
to convert input to electrical signals; a threshold 
mechanism to generate an all-or-none electrical 
impulse, the action potential, which can be regen-
erated along the axon that connects the nerve cell 
to its synaptic target (another nerve cell, a muscle, 
or gland); and the ability to produce the release 
of a chemical (neurotransmitter) that affects the 
target.
2.	 Glial cells support nerve cells. One type provides 
the insulation that speeds propagation of the 
action potential along the axon. Others help estab-
lish the chemical milieu for the nerve cells to oper-
ate, and still others couple nerve activity to the 
vascular supply of the nervous system.
3.	 Nerve cells differ in their morphology, the connec-
tions they make, and where they make them. This 
is clearest in specialized structures like the retina. 
Perhaps the largest difference between neurons 
is at the molecular level. Examples of molecular 
diversity include expression of different receptors, 
enzymes for synthesis of different neurotransmit-
ters, and different expressions of ion channels. 
Differences in gene expression furnish the start-
ing point for understanding why certain diseases 
affect some neurons and not others.
4.	 Each nerve cell is part of a circuit that has one or 
more behavioral functions. The stretch reflex cir-
cuit is an example of a simple circuit that produces 
a behavior in response to a stimulus. Its simplicity 
belies integrative functions, such as relaxation of 
muscles that oppose the stretched muscle.
5.	 Modern neural science aspires to explain mental 
processes far more complex than reflexes. A natu-
ral starting point is to understand the ways that 
circuits must be elaborated to support sensory-
motor transformations, which unlike a reflex, 
are contingent, flexible and not beholden to the 
immediacy of sensory processing and movement 
control.
6.	 Neural connections can be modified by experi-
ence. In simple circuits, this process is a simple 
change in the strength of connections between 
neurons. A working hypothesis in modern neu-
roscience is that the “plastic” mechanisms at play 


===== Page 5 =====
72    Part I / Overall Perspective
in simple circuits also play a critical role in the 
learning of more complex behavior and cognitive 
function.
Michael N. Shadlen 
Eric R. Kandel
Selected Reading
Adrian ED. 1928. The Basis of Sensation: The Action of the Sense 
Organs. London: Christophers.
Jack JJB, Noble D, Tsien RW. 1983. Electric Current Flow in 
Excitable Cells. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Jones EG. 1988. The nervous tissue. In: L Weiss (ed). Cell and 
Tissue Biology: A Textbook of Histology, 6th ed., pp. 277–351. 
Baltimore: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Poeppel D, Mangun GR, Gazzaniga MS. 2020. The Cogni-
tive Neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1937] 1989. Recollections of My Life. EH 
Craigie (transl). Philadelphia: American Philosophical 
Society; 1989. Reprint. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
References
Adrian ED. 1932. The Mechanism of Nervous Action: Electrical 
Studies of the Neurone. Philadelphia: Univ. Pennsylvania 
Press.
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter 
JD. 2002. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th ed. New York: 
Garland.
Dacey DM, Peterson BB, Robinson FR, Gamlin PD. 2003. 
Fireworks in the primate retina: in vitro photodynamics 
reveals diverse LGN-projecting ganglion cell types. 
Neuron 37:15–27.
Erlanger J, Gasser HS. 1937. Electrical Signs of Nervous Activ-
ity. Philadelphia: Univ. Pennsylvania Press.
Hodgkin AL, Huxley AF. 1939. Action potentials recorded 
from inside a nerve fiber. Nature 144:710–711.
Kandel ER. 1976. The study of behavior: the interface 
between psychology and biology. In: Cellular Basis of 
Behavior: An Introduction to Behavioral Neurobiology, pp. 3–27. 
San Francisco: WH Freeman.
Konorski J. 1948. Conditioned Reflexes and Neuron Organiza-
tion. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Martinez PFA. 1982. Neuroanatomy: Development and Structure 
of the Central Nervous System. Philadelphia: Saunders.
McCormick DA. 2004. Membrane potential and action 
potential. In: JH Byrne, JL Roberts (eds). From Molecules to 
Networks: An Introduction to Cellular Neuroscience, 2nd ed., 
p. 130. San Diego: Elsevier.
Newman EA. 1986. High potassium conductance in astro-
cyte endfeet. Science 233:453–454.
Nicholls JG, Wallace BG, Fuchs PA, Martin AR. 2001. From 
Neuron to Brain, 4th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Penfield W (ed). 1932. Cytology & Cellular Pathology of the 
Nervous System, Vol. 2. New York: Hoeber.
Ramón y Cajal S. 1933. Histology, 10th ed. Baltimore: Wood.
Sears ES, Franklin GM. 1980. Diseases of the cranial nerves. 
In: RN Rosenberg (ed). The Science and Practice of Clinical 
Medicine. Vol. 5, Neurology, pp. 471–494. New York: Grune 
& Stratton.
Sherrington C. 1947. The Integrative Action of the Nervous System, 
2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.


===== Page 6 =====
4
The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural 
Circuits Mediate Behavior
T
he human brain  carries out actions in ways 
no current computer can begin to approach. 
Merely to see—to look onto the world and rec-
ognize a face or facial expression—entails amazing 
computational achievements. Indeed, all our percep-
tual abilities—seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and 
touching—are analytical triumphs. Similarly, all of our 
voluntary actions are triumphs of engineering. Sen-
sation and movement, while wondrous in their own 
right, pale in comparison to complex cognitive behav-
iors such as forming memories or understanding social 
conventions.
The brain accomplishes these computational feats 
because its nerve cells are wired together in very pre-
cise functional circuits. The brain is hierarchically 
organized such that information processed at one level 
is passed to higher-level circuits for more complex and 
refined processing. In essence, the brain is a network of 
networks. Different brain areas work in an integrated 
fashion to accomplish purposeful behavior.
In this chapter, we outline the neuroanatomical 
organization of some of the circuits that enable the 
brain to process sensory input and produce motor out-
put. We focus on touch as a sensory modality because 
the somatosensory system is particularly well under-
stood and because touch clearly illustrates the inter-
action of sensory processing circuits at several levels, 
from the spinal cord to the cerebral cortex. Our pur-
pose here is to illustrate the basic principles of how cir-
cuits control behavior. In the next chapter, we consider 
the functional properties of these circuits, including 
the computations by which they process information. 
In subsequent chapters, we consider in more detail the 
Local Circuits Carry Out Specific Neural Computations That 
Are Coordinated to Mediate Complex Behaviors
Sensory Information Circuits Are Illustrated in the 
Somatosensory System
Somatosensory Information From the Trunk and Limbs Is 
Conveyed to the Spinal Cord
The Primary Sensory Neurons of the Trunk and Limbs 
Are Clustered in the Dorsal Root Ganglia
The Terminals of Central Axons of Dorsal Root Ganglion 
Neurons in the Spinal Cord Produce a Map of the Body 
Surface
Each Somatic Submodality Is Processed in a Distinct 
Subsystem From the Periphery to the Brain
The Thalamus Is an Essential Link Between Sensory 
Receptors and the Cerebral Cortex
Sensory Information Processing Culminates in the Cerebral 
Cortex
Voluntary Movement Is Mediated by Direct Connections 
Between the Cortex and Spinal Cord
Modulatory Systems in the Brain Influence Motivation, 
Emotion, and Memory
The Peripheral Nervous System Is Anatomically Distinct 
From the Central Nervous System
Memory is a Complex Behavior Mediated by Structures 
Distinct From Those That Carry Out Sensation or Movement
The Hippocampal System Is Interconnected With the 
Highest-Level Polysensory Cortical Regions
The Hippocampal Formation Comprises Several 
Different but Highly Integrated Circuits
The Hippocampal Formation Is Made Up Mainly of 
Unilateral Connections
Highlights


===== Page 7 =====
74    Part I / Overall Perspective
anatomy and function of the various sensory modali-
ties and how sensory input regulates movement.
Finally, we provide a preview of the brain circuits 
that are instrumental in producing the memories of 
our daily lives, called explicit memory (see Chapters 
52 and 54). We do this to make the point that while 
many of the neurons in the memory circuits are similar 
to those in the sensory and motor circuits, not all are. 
Moreover, the organization of the pathways between 
circuits is different in the memory system than it is in 
the motor and sensory systems. This highlights a basic 
neurobiological tenet that different circuits of the brain 
have evolved an organization to most efficiently carry 
out specific functions.
Comprehending the functional organization of the 
brain might at first seem daunting. But as we saw in 
the previous chapter, the organization of the brain is 
simplified by three anatomical considerations. First, 
there are relatively few types of neurons. Each of the 
many thousands of spinal motor neurons or millions 
of neocortical pyramidal cells has a similar anatomi-
cal structure and serves a similar function. Second, 
neurons in the brain and spinal cord are clustered in 
functional groups called nuclei or discrete areas of the 
cerebral cortex, which form networks or functional 
systems. Third, the discrete areas of the cerebral cortex 
are specialized for sensory, motor, or associative func-
tions such as memory.
Local Circuits Carry Out Specific Neural 
Computations That Are Coordinated to 
Mediate Complex Behaviors
Neurons are interconnected to form functional circuits. 
Within the spinal cord, for example, simple reflex circuits 
receive sensory information from stretch receptors and 
send output to various muscle groups. For more complex 
behavioral functions, different stages of information pro-
cessing are carried out in networks in different regions 
of the nervous system. Connections between neurons 
within the nervous system can be of different lengths.
Within a brain region, local connections, which 
may be excitatory or inhibitory, integrate many of the 
neurons into functional networks. Such local networks 
may then provide outputs to one or more other brain 
regions through longer projections. Many of these 
longer pathways have names. For example, projections 
from the lateral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus to 
the visual cortex are called the optic radiations. Con-
nections from the neocortex—the region of the cerebral 
cortex nearest the surface of the brain—of one side of 
the brain to the other side of the brain form the corpus 
callosum. Information carried by these long pathways 
integrates the output of many local circuits (Figure 4–1).
Consider the simple act of hitting a tennis ball 
(Figure 4–2). Visual information about the motion of 
the approaching ball is analyzed in the visual sys-
tem, which is itself a hierarchically organized system 
extending from the retina to the lateral geniculate 
nucleus of the thalamus to dozens of cortical areas 
in the occipital and temporal lobes (Chapter 21). This 
information is combined in the motor cortex with pro-
prioceptive information about the position of the arms, 
legs, and trunk to calculate the movement necessary 
to intercept the ball. Once the swing is initiated, many 
minor adjustments of the motor program are made by 
other brain regions dedicated to movement, such as 
the cerebellum, based on a steady stream of sensory 
information about the trajectory of the approaching 
ball and the position of the arm.
Like most motor behaviors, hitting a tennis ball is 
not hardwired into brain circuits but requires learn-
ing and memory. The memory for motor tasks, termed 
procedural or implicit memory, requires modifica-
tions to circuits in motor cortex, the basal ganglia, and 
the cerebellum. Finally, this entire act is accessible to 
consciousness and may elicit conscious recall of past 
similar experiences, termed explicit memory, and emo-
tions. Explicit memory depends on circuits in the hip-
pocampus (Chapters 52 and 54), whereas emotions 
are regulated by the amygdala (Chapters 42 and 53) 
and portions of the orbitofrontal, cingulate, and insu-
lar cortices. Of course, as the swing is being executed, 
the brain is also engaged in coordinating the player’s 
heart rate, respiration, and other homeostatic functions 
through equally complex networks.
Sensory Information Circuits Are Illustrated in 
the Somatosensory System
Complex behaviors, such as differentiating the motor 
acts required to grasp a ball versus a book, require the 
integrated action of several nuclei and cortical regions. 
Information is processed in the brain in a hierarchical 
fashion. Thus, information about a stimulus is con-
veyed through a succession of subcortical and then 
cortical regions; at each level of processing, the infor-
mation becomes increasingly more complex.
In addition, different types of information, even 
within a single sensory modality, are processed in sev-
eral anatomically discrete pathways. In the somatosen-
sory system, a light touch and a painful pin prick to 
the same area of skin are mediated by different sensory 
receptors in the skin that connect to distinct pathways 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 4 / The Neuroanatomical Bases by Which Neural Circuits Mediate Behavior    75
Figure 4–1  The dorsal column–medial lemniscal pathway is 
the major afferent pathway for somatosensory information. 
Somatosensory information enters the central nervous system 
through the dorsal root ganglion cells. The flow of information 
ultimately leads to the somatosensory cortex. Fibers that relay 
information from different parts of the body maintain an orderly 
relationship to each other and form a neural map of the body 
surface in their pattern of termination at each synaptic relay.
Cerebral cortex
Ascending dorsal column–medial lemniscal pathway to primary sensory cortex
Somatic sensory cortex
(postcentral gyrus)
Toe
Lateral
sulcus
Internal
capsule
Thalamus
Ventral posterior
lateral nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Gracile nucleus
Gracile fascicle
Cuneate fascicle
Dorsal root
ganglion
Medulla
Spinal cord
Cuneate nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus
Sensory decussation
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Third ventricle
Leg
Trunk
Forearm and
hand area
Face


===== Page 9 =====
76    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 4–2  A simple behavior is mediated by many parts of 
the brain.
A.  A tennis player watching an approaching ball uses the visual 
cortex to judge the size, direction, and velocity of the ball. The 
premotor cortex develops a motor program to return the ball. 
The amygdala acts in conjunction with other brain regions 
to adjust the heart rate, respiration, and other homeostatic 
mechanisms and also activates the hypothalamus to motivate 
the player to hit well.
B.  To execute the shot, the player must use all of the struc-
tures illustrated in part A as well as others. The motor cortex 
sends signals to the spinal cord that activate and inhibit many 
muscles in the arms and legs. The basal ganglia become 
involved in initiating motor patterns and perhaps recalling 
learned movements to hit the ball properly. The cerebellum 
adjusts movements based on proprioceptive information  
from peripheral sensory receptors. The posterior parietal 
cortex provides the player with a sense of where his body 
is located in space and where his racket arm is located with 
respect to his body. Brain stem neurons regulate heart rate, 
respiration, and arousal throughout the movement. The  
hippocampus is not involved in hitting the ball but is involved 
in storing the memory of the return so that the player can 
brag about it later.
Premotor
cortex
A
B
Motor cortex
Posterior
parietal
cortex
Cerebellum
Brain stem
nuclei
Spinal cord
Hippocampus
Basal
ganglia
Amygdala
Visual
cortices
Hypothalamus
in the brain. The system for fine touch, pressure, and 
proprioception is called the epicritic system, whereas 
the system for pain and temperature is called the pro-
topathic system.
Somatosensory Information From the Trunk and 
Limbs Is Conveyed to the Spinal Cord
All forms of somatosensory information from the 
trunk and limbs enter the spinal cord, which has a core 
H-shaped region of gray matter where neuronal cell 
bodies are located. The gray matter is surrounded by 
white matter formed by myelinated axons that make 
up both short and long connections. The gray matter 
on each side of the cord is divided into dorsal (or pos-
terior) and ventral (or anterior) horns (Figure 4–3).
The dorsal horn contains groups of secondary 
sensory neurons (sensory nuclei) whose dendrites 
receive stimulus information from primary sensory 
neurons that innervate the body’s skin, muscles, 
and joints. The ventral horn contains groups of 
motor neurons (motor nuclei) whose axons exit the 
spinal cord and innervate skeletal muscles. The spi-
nal cord has circuits that mediate behaviors rang-
ing from the stretch reflex to coordination of limb 
movements.
As we discussed in Chapter 3, when consider-
ing the knee-jerk reflex, interneurons of various 
types in the gray matter regulate the output of the 
spinal cord motor neurons (see Figure 3–5). Some of 
these interneurons are excitatory, whereas others are 
inhibitory. These interneurons modulate both sensory 
information flowing toward the brain and motor com-
mands descending from the brain to the spinal motor 
neurons. Motor neurons can also adjust the output 
of other motor neurons via the interneurons. These 


