===== Page 1 =====
164    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Hama K, Arii T, Kosaka T. 1994. Three-dimensional organiza-
tion of neuronal and glial processes: high voltage electron 
microscopy. Microsc Res Tech 29:357–367.
Harris KM, Jensen FE, Tsao B. 1992. Three-dimensional struc-
ture of dendritic spines and synapses in rat hippocampus 
(CA1) at postnatal day 15 and adult ages: implications 
for the maturation of synaptic physiology and long-term 
potentiation. J Neurosci 12:2685–2705.
Harris KM, Stevens JK. 1989. Dendritic spines of CA1 pyram-
idal cells in the rat hippocampus: serial electron micros-
copy with reference to their biophysical characteristics.  
J Neurosci 9:2982–2997.
Hirokawa N. 1997. The mechanisms of fast and slow trans-
port in neurons: identification and characterization of the 
new Kinesin superfamily motors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
7:605–614.
Hirokawa N, Pfister KK, Yorifuji H, Wagner MC, Brady ST, 
Bloom GS. 1989. Submolecular domains of bovine brain 
kinesin identified by electron microscopy and monoclo-
nal antibody decoration. Cell 56:867–878.
Hoffman PN, Lasek RJ. 1975. The slow component of axonal 
transport: identification of major structural polypeptides 
of the axon and their generality among mammalian neu-
rons. J Cell Biol 66:351–366.
Hong S, Stevens B. 2016. Microglia: phagocytosing to clear, 
sculpt and eliminate. Dev Cell 38:126–128.
Ko CO, Robitaille R. 2015. Perisynaptic Schwann cells at the 
neuromuscular synapse: adaptable, multitasking glial 
cells. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7:a020503.
Lemke G. 2001. Glial control of neuronal development. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 24:87–105.
Liddelow SA,Guttenplan KA, Clarke LE, et al. 2016 Neuro-
toxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated micro-
glia. Nature 541:481–487.
Lupski JR, de Oca-Luna RM, Slaugenhaupt S, et al. 1991. 
DNA duplication associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease type 1A. Cell 66:219–232.
Lupski JR, Garcia CA. 1992. Molecular genetics and neuro-
pathology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A. Brain 
Pathol 2:337–349.
Ma Z, Stork T, Bergles DE, Freeman MR. 2016. Neuromod-
ulators signal through astrocytes to alter neural circuit 
activity and behaviour. Nature 539:428–432.
Maday S, Twelvetrees AE, Moughamian AJ, Holzbaur EL. 
2014. Axonal transport: cargo-specific mechanisms of 
motility and regulation. Neuron 84:292–309.
McNew JA, Goodman JM. 1996. The targeting and assem-
bly of peroxisomal proteins: some old rules do not apply. 
Trends Biochem Sci 21:54–58.
Mirra SS, Hyman BT. 2002. Aging and dementia. In: DI Graham, 
PL Lantos (eds). Greenfield’s Neuropathology, 7th ed., Vol. 2, 
p. 212. London: Arnold.
Ochs S. 1972. Fast transport of materials in mammalian nerve 
fibers. Science 176:252–260.
Peles E, Salzer JL. 2000. Molecular domains of myelinated 
axons. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:558–565.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H de F. 1991. The Fine Structure of 
the Nervous System, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Raine CS. 1984. Morphology of myelin and myelination. In: P 
Morell (ed). Myelin. New York: Plenum Press.
Ransohoff RM, Cardona AE. 2010. The myeloid cells of the 
central nervous system parenchyma. Nature 468:253–262.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1901] 1988. Studies on the human cerebral 
cortex. IV. Structure of the olfactory cerebral cortex of 
man and mammals. In: J DeFelipe, EG Jones (eds, transl). 
Cajál on the Cerebral Cortex, pp. 289–362. New York: Oxford 
Univ. Press.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1909] 1995. Histology of the Nervous System 
of Man and Vertebrates. N Swanson, LW Swanson (transl). 
Vols. 1, 2. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Readhead C, Popko B, Takahashi N, et al. 1987. Expression of a 
myelin basic protein gene in transgenic Shiverer mice: cor-
rection of the dysmyelinating phenotype. Cell 48:703–712.
Roa BB, Lupski JR. 1994. Molecular genetics of Charcot-
Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Adv Human Genet 22:117–152.
Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Kautzman AG, et al. 2012. Micro-
glia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74:691–705.
Schnapp BJ, Reese TS. 1982. Cytoplasmic structure in rapid-
frozen axons. J Cell Biol 94:667–679.
Silva-Vargas V, Maldonado-Soto AR, Mizrak D, Codega P, 
Doetsch F. 2016. Age-dependent niche signals from the 
choroid plexus regulate adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem 
Cell 19:643–652.
Sorra KE, Harris KM. 1993. Occurrence and three-dimensional 
structure of multiple synapses between individual radia-
tum axons and their target pyramidal cells in hippocam-
pal area CA1. J Neurosci 13:3736–3748.
Sossin W. 1996. Mechanisms for the generation of synapse 
specificity in long-term memory: the implications of a 
requirement for transcription. Trends Neurosci 19:215–218.
Takei K, Mundigl O, Daniell L, De Camilli P. 1996. The syn-
aptic vesicle cycle: a single vesicle budding step involving 
clathrin and dynamin. J Cell Biol 1335:1237–1250.
Ventura R, Harris KM. 1999. Three-dimensional relation-
ships between hippocampal synapses and astrocytes.  
J Neurosci 19:6897–6906.
Weiss P, Hiscoe HB. 1948. Experiments on the mechanism of 
nerve growth. J Exp Zool 107:315–395.
Wells DG, Richter JD, Fallon JR. 2000. Molecular mechanisms 
for activity-regulated protein synthesis in the synapto-
dendritic compartment. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:132–137.
Williams PL, Warwick R, Dyson M, Bannister LH (eds). 1989. 
Gray’s Anatomy, 37th ed., pp 859–919. Edinburgh: Church-
ill Livingstone.
Zemanick MC, Strick PL, Dix RD. 1991. Direction of transneu-
ronal transport of herpes simplex virus 1 in the primate 
motor system is strain-dependent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
88:8048–8051.


===== Page 2 =====
8
Ion Channels
ear respond to tiny movements of atomic dimensions. 
These sensory responses ultimately lead to the firing of 
an action potential during which the membrane poten-
tial changes at up to 500 volts per second.
The rapid changes in membrane potential that 
underlie signaling throughout the nervous system 
are mediated by specialized pores or openings in the 
membrane called ion channels, a class of integral mem-
brane proteins found in all cells of the body. The ion 
channels of nerve cells are optimally tuned to respond 
to specific physical and chemical signals. They are also 
heterogeneous—in different parts of the nervous sys-
tem different types of channels carry out specific sign-
aling tasks.
Because of their key roles in electrical signaling, 
malfunctioning of ion channels can cause a wide vari-
ety of neurological diseases (Chapters 57 and 58). Dis-
eases caused by ion channel malfunction are not limited 
to the brain; for example, cystic fibrosis, skeletal mus-
cle disease, and certain types of cardiac arrhythmia are 
also caused by ion channel malfunction. Moreover, ion 
channels are often the site of action of drugs, poisons, 
or toxins. Thus, ion channels have crucial roles in both 
the normal physiology and pathophysiology of the 
nervous system.
In addition to ion channels, nerve cells contain 
a second important class of proteins specialized for 
moving ions across cell membranes, the ion transport-
ers and pumps. These proteins do not participate in 
rapid neuronal signaling but rather are important for 
establishing and maintaining the concentration gra-
dients of physiologically important ions between the 
inside and outside of the cell. As we will see in this and 
Ion Channels Are Proteins That Span the Cell Membrane
Ion Channels in All Cells Share Several Functional 
Characteristics
Currents Through Single Ion Channels Can Be Recorded
The Flux of Ions Through a Channel Differs From 
Diffusion in Free Solution
The Opening and Closing of a Channel Involve 
Conformational Changes
The Structure of Ion Channels Is Inferred From Biophysical, 
Biochemical, and Molecular Biological Studies
Ion Channels Can Be Grouped Into Gene Families
X-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Potassium Channel 
Structure Provides Insight Into Mechanisms of Channel 
Permeability and Selectivity
X-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Voltage-Gated 
Potassium Channel Structures Provides Insight Into 
Mechanisms of Channel Gating
The Structural Basis of the Selective Permeability of 
Chloride Channels Reveals a Close Relation Between 
Channels and Transporters
Highlights
S
ignaling in the brain depends on the ability of 
nerve cells to respond to very small stimuli with 
rapid and large changes in the electrical poten-
tial difference across the cell membrane. In sensory 
cells, the membrane potential changes in response to 
minute physical stimuli: Receptors in the eye respond 
to a single photon of light; olfactory neurons detect a 
single molecule of odorant; and hair cells in the inner 


===== Page 3 =====
166    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
the next chapters, ion transporters and pumps differ 
in important aspects from ion channels, but also share 
certain common features.
Ion channels have three important properties: (1) 
They recognize and select specific ions; (2) they open 
and close in response to specific electrical, chemical, or 
mechanical, signals; and (3) they conduct ions across 
the membrane. The channels in nerve and muscle con-
duct ions across the cell membrane at extremely rapid 
rates, thereby providing a large flow of electric charge. 
Up to 100 million ions can pass through a single 
channel each second. This current causes the rapid 
changes in membrane potential required for signaling 
(Chapter 10). The fast flow of ions through channels is 
comparable to the turnover rate of the fastest enzymes, 
catalase and carbonic anhydrase, which are limited 
by diffusion of substrate. (The turnover rates of most 
other enzymes are considerably slower, ranging from 
10 to 1,000 per second.)
Despite such an extraordinary rate of ion flow, 
channels are surprisingly selective for the ions they 
allow to permeate. Each type of channel allows only 
one or a few types of ions to pass. For example, the 
negative resting potential of nerve cells is largely 
determined by a class of K+ channels that are 100-fold 
more permeable to K+ than to Na+. In contrast, genera-
tion of the action potential involves a class of Na+ chan-
nels that are 10- to 20-fold more permeable to Na+ than 
to K+. Thus, a key to the great versatility of neuronal 
signaling is the regulated activation of different classes 
of ion channels, each of which is selective for specific 
ions.
Many channels open and close in response to a 
specific event: Voltage-gated channels are regulated by 
changes in membrane potential, ligand-gated channels 
by binding of chemical transmitters, and mechanically 
gated channels by membrane stretch. Other channels 
are normally open when the cell is at rest. The ion flux 
through these “resting” channels largely determines 
the resting potential.
The flux of ions through ion channels is passive, 
requiring no expenditure of metabolic energy by 
the channels. Ion channels are limited to catalyzing 
the passive movement of ions down their thermo-
dynamic concentration and electrical gradients. The 
direction of this flux is determined not by the channel 
itself, but rather by the electrostatic and diffusional 
driving forces across the membrane. For example, 
Na+ ions flow into a cell through voltage-gated Na+ 
channels during an action potential because the exter-
nal Na+ concentration is much greater than the inter-
nal concentration; the open channels allow Na+ to 
diffuse into the cell down its concentration gradient. 
With such passive ion movement, the Na+ concentra-
tion gradient would eventually dissipate were it not 
for ion pumps. Different types of ion pumps main-
tain the concentration gradients for Na+, K+, Ca2+and 
other ions.
These pumps differ from ion channels in two 
important details. First, whereas open ion channels 
have a continuous water-filled pathway through which 
ions flow unimpeded from one side of the membrane 
to the other, each time a pump moves an ion or group 
of ions across the membrane, it must undergo a series 
of conformational changes. As a result, the rate of ion 
flow through pumps is 100 to 100,000 times slower 
than through channels. Second, pumps that maintain 
ion gradients use chemical energy, often in the form 
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to transport ions 
against their electrical and chemical gradients. Such 
ion movements are termed active transport. The func-
tion and structure of ion pumps and transporters are 
considered in detail at the end of this chapter and in 
Chapter 9.
In this chapter, we examine six questions: Why 
do nerve cells have channels? How can channels 
conduct ions at such high rates and still be selec-
tive? How are channels gated? How are the proper-
ties of these channels modified by various intrinsic 
and extrinsic conditions? How does channel struc-
ture explain function? Finally, how do ion move-
ments through channels differ from ion movements 
through transporters? In succeeding chapters, we 
consider how resting channels and pumps generate 
the resting potential (Chapter 9), how voltage-gated 
channels generate the action potential (Chapter 10), 
and how ligand-gated channels produce synaptic 
potentials (Chapters 11, 12, and 13).
Ion Channels Are Proteins That Span  
the Cell Membrane
To appreciate why nerve cells use channels, we need 
to understand the nature of the plasma membrane 
and the physical chemistry of ions in solution. The 
plasma membrane of all cells, including nerve cells, 
is approximately 6 to 8 nm thick and consists of a 
mosaic of lipids and proteins. The core of the mem-
brane is formed by a double layer of phospholipids 
approximately 3 to 4 nm thick. Embedded within this 
continuous lipid sheet are integral membrane pro-
teins, including ion channels.
The lipids of the membrane do not mix with 
water—they are hydrophobic. In contrast, the ions 
within the cell and those outside strongly attract water 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    167
molecules—they are hydrophilic (Figure 8–1). Ions 
attract water because water molecules are dipolar: 
Although the net charge on a water molecule is zero, 
charge is separated within the molecule. The oxygen 
atom in a water molecule tends to attract electrons 
and so bears a small net negative charge, whereas the 
hydrogen atoms tend to lose electrons and therefore 
carry a small net positive charge. As a result of this 
unequal distribution of charge, positively charged ions 
(cations) are strongly attracted electrostatically to the 
oxygen atoms of water, and negatively charged ions 
(anions) are attracted to the hydrogen atoms. Similarly, 
ions attract water; they become surrounded by electro-
statically bound waters of hydration (Figure 8–1).
An ion cannot move from water into the uncharged 
hydrocarbon tails of the lipid bilayer in the membrane 
unless a large amount of energy is expended to over-
come the attraction between the ion and the surround-
ing water molecules. For this reason, it is extremely 
unlikely that an ion will move from solution into the 
lipid bilayer, and therefore, the bilayer itself is almost 
completely impermeable to ions. Rather, ions cross the 
membrane through ion channels, where the energetics 
favor ion movement.
Although their molecular nature has been known 
with certainty for only approximately 35 years, the idea 
of ion channels dates to the work of Ernst Brücke at the 
end of the 19th century. Physiologists had long known 
that, despite the fact that the cell membrane acts as a 
barrier, cell membranes are nevertheless permeable to 
water and many small solutes, including some ions. 
To explain osmosis, the flow of water across biologi-
cal membranes, Brücke proposed that membranes con-
tain channels or pores that allow water but not larger 
solutes to flow. Over 100 years later, Peter Agre found 
that a family of proteins termed aquaporins form chan-
nels with a highly selective permeability to water. At 
the beginning of the 20th century, William Bayliss sug-
gested that water-filled channels would permit ions to 
cross the cell membrane easily, as the ions would not 
need to be stripped of their waters of hydration.
The idea that ions move through channels leads 
to a question: How can a water-filled channel con-
duct ions at high rates and yet be selective? How, for 
instance, does a channel allow K+ ions to pass while 
excluding Na+ ions? Selectivity cannot be based solely 
on the diameter of the ion because K+, with a crystal 
radius of 0.133 nm, is larger than Na+ (crystal radius 
of 0.095 nm). One important factor that determines 
ion selectivity is the size of an ion’s shell of waters of 
hydration, because the ease with which an ion moves 
in solution (its mobility) depends on the size of the ion 
together with the shell of water surrounding it. The 
smaller an ion, the more highly localized is its charge 
and the stronger its electric field. As a result, smaller 
ions attract water more strongly. Thus, as Na+ moves 
through solution, its stronger electrostatic attraction 
for water causes it to have a larger water shell, which 
tends to slow it down relative to K+. Because of its 
larger water shell, Na+ behaves as if it is larger than K+. 
The smaller an ion, the lower its mobility in solution. 
Therefore, we can construct a model of a channel that 
selects K+ rather than Na+ simply on the basis of the 
interaction of the two ions with water in a water-filled 
channel (Figure 8–1).
Although this model explains how a channel can 
select K+ and exclude Na+, it does not explain how a 
channel could select Na+ and exclude K+. This prob-
lem led many physiologists in the 1930s and 1940s to 
abandon the channel theory in favor of the idea that 
ions cross cell membranes by first binding to a specific 
carrier protein, which then shuttles the ion through the 
membrane. In this carrier model, selectivity is based on 
the chemical binding between the ion and the carrier 
protein, not on the mobility of the ion in solution.
Even though we now know that ions can cross 
membranes by means of a variety of transport macro-
molecules, the Na+-K+ pump being a well-characterized 
example (Chapter 9), many properties of membrane 
ion permeability do not fit the carrier model. Most 
important is the rapid rate of ion transfer across mem-
branes. An example is provided by the transmembrane 
current that is initiated when the neurotransmitter ace-
tylcholine (ACh) binds its receptor in the postsynaptic 
membrane of the nerve–muscle synapse. As described 
later, the current conducted by a single ACh receptor 
is 12.5 million ions per second. In contrast, the Na+-K+ 
pump transports at most 100 ions per second.
If the ACh receptor acted as a carrier, it would 
have to shuttle an ion across the membrane in 0.1 μs 
(one ten-millionth of a second), an implausibly fast 
rate. The 100,000-fold difference in rates between the 
Na+-K+ pump and ACh receptor strongly suggests that 
the ACh receptor (and other ligand-gated receptors) 
must conduct ions through a channel. Later measure-
ments in many voltage-gated pathways selective for 
K+, Na+, and Ca2+ also demonstrated large currents car-
ried by single macromolecules, indicating that they too 
are channels.
But we are still left with the problem of what makes 
a channel selective. To explain selectivity, Bertil Hille 
extended the pore theory by proposing that channels 
have narrow regions that act as molecular sieves. At 
this selectivity filter, an ion must shed most of its waters 
of hydration to traverse the channel; in their place, 
weak chemical bonds (electrostatic interactions) form 


===== Page 5 =====
168    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Na+
Na+
binding
site
Na+
Na+
+
Hydrophilic 
polar head 
group
Glycerol
backbone
Hydrophobic
fatty acid 
“tails” 
Phospholipid
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
C
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
O–
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
H
H
O
O
O
R
O
C
O
O
CH2
CH2
CH
P
O–
O
C
O
K+
K+
Na+
K+ channel
Na+ channel
Membrane
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
Na+


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    169
with polar (charged) amino acid residues that line the 
walls of the channel (Figure 8–1). Because shedding its 
waters of hydration is energetically unfavorable, the 
ion will traverse a channel only if its energy of interac-
tion with the selectivity filter compensates for the loss 
of the energy of interaction with its waters of hydra-
tion. Ions traversing the channel are normally bound 
to the selectivity filter for only a short time (less than 
1 μs), after which electrostatic and diffusional forces 
propel the ion through the channel. In channels where 
the pore diameter is large enough to accommodate 
several water molecules, an ion need not be stripped 
completely of its water shell.
How is this chemical recognition and specificity 
established? One theory was developed in the early 
1960s by George Eisenman to explain the properties of 
ion-selective glass electrodes. According to this theory, 
a binding site with high negative field strength—for 
example, one formed by negatively charged carboxylic 
acid groups of glutamate or aspartate—will bind Na+ 
more tightly than K+. This selectivity results because the 
electrostatic interaction between two charged groups, 
as governed by Coulomb’s law, depends inversely on 
the distance between the two groups.
Because it has a smaller crystal radius than K+, Na+ 
can approach a binding site with a high negative field 
strength more closely than K+ can and thus will derive 
a more favorable free-energy change on binding. This 
compensates for the requirement that Na+ lose some 
of its waters of hydration in order to traverse the nar-
row selectivity filter. In contrast, a binding site with 
a low negative field strength—one that is composed, 
for example, of polar carbonyl or hydroxyl oxygen 
atoms—would select K+ over Na+. At such a site, the 
binding of Na+ would not provide a sufficient free-
energy change to compensate for the loss of the ion’s 
waters of hydration, which Na+ holds strongly. How-
ever, such a site would be able to compensate for the 
loss of a K+ ion’s waters of hydration since the larger 
K+ ions interact more weakly with water. It is currently 
thought that ion channels are selective both because 
of such specific chemical interactions and because of 
molecular sieving based on pore diameter.
Ion Channels in All Cells Share Several 
Functional Characteristics
Most cells are capable of local signaling, but only nerve 
and muscle cells are specialized for rapid signaling 
over long distances. Although nerve and muscle cells 
have a particularly rich variety and high density of 
membrane ion channels, their channels do not differ 
fundamentally from those of other cells in the body. 
Here we describe the general properties of ion chan-
nels in a wide variety of cells determined by recording 
current flow through channels under various experi-
mental conditions.
Currents Through Single Ion Channels  
Can Be Recorded
Studies of ion channels were originally limited to 
recording the total current through the entire popula-
tion of a class of ion channels, an approach that obscures 
some details of channel function. Later developments 
Figure 8–1  (Opposite) The permeability of the cell mem-
brane to ions is determined by the interaction of ions with 
water, the membrane lipid bilayer, and ion channels. Ions in 
solution are surrounded by a cloud of water molecules (waters 
of hydration) that are attracted by the net charge of the ion. This 
cloud is carried along by the ion as it diffuses through solution, 
increasing the effective size of the ion. It is energetically unfa-
vorable, and therefore improbable, for the ion to leave this polar 
environment to enter the nonpolar environment of the lipid 
bilayer formed from phospholipids.
    Phospholipids have a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail. 
The hydrophobic tails join to exclude water and ions, whereas 
the polar hydrophilic heads face the aqueous environments  
of the extracellular fluid and cytoplasm. The phospholipid is 
composed of a backbone of glycerol in which two −OH groups 
are linked by ester bonds to fatty acid molecules. The third −OH 
group of glycerol is linked to phosphoric acid. The phosphate 
group is further linked to one of a variety of small, polar alcohol 
head groups (R).
    Ion channels are integral membrane proteins that span the 
lipid bilayer, providing a pathway for ions to cross the mem-
brane. The channels are selective for specific ions.
    Potassium channels have a narrow pore that excludes Na+. 
Although a Na+ ion is smaller than a K+ ion, in solution, the effective 
diameter of Na+ is larger because its local field strength is more 
intense, causing it to attract a larger cloud of water molecules. The 
K+ channel pore is too narrow for the hydrated Na+ ion to permeate.
   Sodium channels have a selectivity filter that weakly binds 
Na+ ions. According to the hypothesis developed by Bertil Hille 
and colleagues, a Na+ ion binds transiently at an active site as it 
moves through the filter. At the binding site, the positive charge 
of the ion is stabilized by a negatively charged amino acid resi-
due on the channel wall and also by a water molecule that is 
attracted to a second polar amino acid residue on the other side 
of the channel wall. It is thought that a K+ ion, because of its 
larger diameter, cannot be stabilized as effectively by the  
negative charge and therefore will be excluded from the  
filter. (Adapted from Hille 1984.)


===== Page 7 =====
170    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 8–2  Patch-clamp setup and recording.
A. A pipette containing a low concentration of acetylcholine 
(ACh) in saline solution is used to record current through 
ACh receptor channels in skeletal muscle. (Adapted from 
Alberts et al. 1994.)
B. Patch-clamp recording of the current through a single 
ACh receptor channel as the channel switches between 
closed and open states. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from B. Sakmann.)
The patch-clamp technique was developed in 1976 by 
Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann to record current from 
single ion channels. It is a refinement of the original volt-
age clamp technique (see Box 10–1).
A small fire-polished glass micropipette with a tip 
diameter of approximately 1 μm is pressed against the 
membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber. A metal electrode 
in contact with the electrolyte in the micropipette con-
nects the pipette to a special electrical circuit that meas-
ures the current through channels in the membrane 
under the pipette tip (Figure 8–2A).
In 1980, Neher discovered that applying a small 
amount of suction to the patch pipette greatly increased 
the tightness of the seal between the pipette and the 
membrane. The result was a seal with extremely high 
resistance between the inside and the outside of the 
pipette. The seal lowered the electronic noise and 
extended the usefulness of the patch-clamp technique 
to the whole range of ion channels. Since this discovery, 
the patch-clamp technique has been used to study all the 
major classes of ion channels in a variety of neurons and 
other cells (Figure 8–2B).
Christopher Miller independently developed 
a method for incorporating ion channels from 
biological membranes into artificial lipid bilayers. He 
first homogenized the membranes in a blender; using 
centrifugation of the homogenate, he then separated 
out a fraction composed only of membrane vesicles. 
He studied the functional components of these vesi-
cles using a technique developed by Paul Mueller and 
Donald Rudin in the 1960s. They discovered how to 
create an artificial lipid bilayer by painting a thin drop 
of phospholipid over a hole in a nonconducting bar-
rier separating two salt solutions. Miller found that 
under appropriate ionic conditions his membrane 
vesicles fused with the planar phospholipid mem-
brane, incorporating any ion channel in the vesicle 
into the planar membrane.
This technique has two experimental advantages. 
First, it allows recording from ion channels in regions 
of cells that are inaccessible to patch clamp; for exam-
ple, Miller has successfully studied a K+ channel isolated 
from the internal membrane of skeletal muscle (the sar-
coplasmic reticulum). Second, it allows researchers to 
study how the composition of the membrane lipids 
influences channel function.
Box 8–1  Recording Current in Single Ion Channels: The Patch Clamp
Muscle cell
Acetylcholine
Cell membrane
Tight
seal
Acetylcholine
receptor
channels
Glass
micropipette
20 ms
2 pA
Closed
Open
A
B


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    171
have made it possible to obtain much higher resolution 
by recording the current through single ion channels. 
The first direct recordings of individual ion channels in 
biological membranes were obtained by Erwin Neher 
and Bert Sakmann in 1976. A glass micropipette con-
taining ACh—the neurotransmitter that activates the 
ACh receptors in the membrane of skeletal muscle—
was pressed tightly against a muscle membrane. Small 
unitary current pulses representing the opening and 
closing of a single ACh receptor channel were recorded 
from the membrane under the pipette tip. The current 
pulses all had the same amplitude, indicating that the 
channels open in an all-or-none fashion (Box 8–1).
The pulses measured 2 pA (2 × 10–12 A) at a mem-
brane potential of –80 mV, which according to Ohm’s 
law (I = V/R) indicates that the channels had a resist-
ance of 5 × 1011 ohms. In dealing with ion channels, it is 
more useful to speak of conductance, the reciprocal of 
resistance (γ = 1/R), as this provides an electrical meas-
ure related to ion permeability. Thus, Ohm’s law for a 
single ion channel can be expressed as i = γ × V. The 
conductance of the ACh receptor channel is approxi-
mately 25 × 10–12 siemens (S), or 25 picosiemens (pS), 
where 1 S equals 1/ohm.
The Flux of Ions Through a Channel Differs  
From Diffusion in Free Solution
The kinetic properties of ion permeation are best 
described by the channel’s conductance, which is deter-
mined by measuring the current (ion flux) through the 
open channel in response to an electrochemical driving 
force. The net electrochemical driving force is deter-
mined by two factors: the electrical potential difference 
across the membrane and the concentration gradients 
of the permeant ions across the membrane. Changing 
either one can change the net driving force (Chapter 9).
Figure 8–3  Current–voltage rela-
tions. In many ion channels, the rela-
tion between current (i) through the 
open channel and membrane voltage 
(Vm) is linear (left plot). Such channels 
are said to be “ohmic” because they 
follow Ohm’s law, i = Vm /R or Vm × γ,  
where γ is conductance. In other  
channels, the relation between current 
and membrane potential is nonlinear. 
This kind of channel is said to “rectify,” 
in the sense that it conducts current 
more readily in one direction than 
the other. The right plot shows an 
outwardly rectifying channel for which 
positive current (right side) is larger 
than the negative current (left side) for 
a given absolute value of voltage.
Ohmic channel
Rectifying channel
i (pA)
i (pA)
Slope = conductance (γ)
Vm (mV)
Vm (mV)
High
conductance (γ)
Low
conductance (γ)
In some open channels, the current varies linearly 
with driving force—that is, the channels behave as 
simple resistors. In others, the current is a nonlinear 
function of driving force. This type of channel behaves 
as a rectifier—it conducts ions more readily in one 
direction than in the other because of asymmetry in the 
channel’s structure or ionic environment (Figure 8–3).
The rate of net ion flux (current) through a channel 
depends on the concentration of the permeant ions in 
the surrounding solution. At low concentrations, the 
current increases almost linearly with concentration. 
At higher concentrations, the current tends to reach a 
point at which it no longer increases. At this point, the 
current is said to saturate. This saturation effect indi-
cates that ion flux across the cell membrane is not like 
electrochemical diffusion in free solution but involves 
the binding of ions to specific polar sites within the 
pore of the channel. A simple electrodiffusion model 
would predict that the ionic current should increase in 
proportion to increases in concentration.
The relation between current and ionic concentra-
tion for a wide range of ion channels is well described 
by a simple chemical binding equation, identical to 
the Michaelis-Menten equation for enzymes, suggest-
ing that a single ion binds within the channel during 
permeation. The ionic concentration at which cur-
rent reaches half its maximum defines the dissociation 
constant, the concentration at which half of the chan-
nels will be occupied by a bound ion. The dissocia-
tion constant in plots of current versus concentration 
is typically quite high, approximately 100 mM, indi-
cating weak binding. (In typical interactions between 
enzymes and substrates, the dissociation constant is 
below 1 μM.) The rapid rate at which an ion unbinds 
is necessary for the channel to achieve the very high 
conduction rates responsible for the rapid changes in 
membrane potential during signaling.


===== Page 9 =====
172    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Some ion channels can be blocked by certain free 
ions or molecules in the cytoplasm or extracellular 
fluid that bind either to the mouth of the aqueous pore 
or somewhere within the pore. If the blocker is an ion 
that binds to a site within the pore, it will be influenced 
by the membrane electric field as it enters the chan-
nel. For example, if a positively charged blocker enters 
the channel from outside the membrane, then making 
the cytoplasmic side of the membrane more negative 
will drive the blocker into the channel by electrostatic 
attraction, increasing the block. Although some block-
ers are toxins or drugs that originate outside the body, 
others are common ions normally present in the cell 
or its environment. Physiological blockers of certain 
classes of channels include Mg2+, Ca2+, Na+, and poly-
amines such as spermine.
The Opening and Closing of a Channel Involve 
Conformational Changes
In ion channels that mediate electrical signaling, the 
channel protein has two or more conformational states 
that are relatively stable. Each conformation repre-
sents a different functional state. For example, each 
ion channel has at least one open state and one or two 
closed states. The transition of a channel between these 
different states is called gating.
The molecular mechanisms of gating are only 
partially understood. In some cases, such as the voltage-
gated Cl- channel described later in the chapter, a local 
conformational change along the channel lumen gates 
the channel (Figure 8–4A). In most cases, channel gat-
ing involves widespread changes in the channel’s 
conformation (Figure 8–4B). For example, concerted 
movements, such as twisting, bending, or tilting, of the 
subunits that line the channel pore mediate the open-
ing and closing of some ion channels (see Figure 8–14 
and Chapters 11 and 12). The molecular rearrange-
ments that occur during the transition from closed to 
open states appear to enhance ion conduction through 
the channel not only by creating a wider lumen, but 
also by positioning relatively more polar amino acid 
constituents at the surface that lines the aqueous pore. 
In other cases (eg, inactivation of K+ channels described 
in Chapter 10), part of the channel protein acts as a par-
ticle that can close the channel by blocking the pore 
(Figure 8–4C).
Three major transduction mechanisms have 
evolved to control channel opening in neurons. Cer-
tain channels are opened by the binding of chemi-
cal ligands, known as agonists (Figure 8–5A). Some 
ligands bind directly to the channel either at an 
extracellular or intracellular site; transmitters bind 
Figure 8–4  Three physical models for the opening and closing 
of ion channels.
A. A localized conformational change occurs in one region of 
the channel.
B. A generalized structural change occurs along the length of 
the channel.
C. A blocking particle swings into and out of the channel mouth.
A  Conformational change in one region
B  General structural change
C  Blocking particle
Open
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
Closed
at extracellular sites, whereas certain cytoplasmic 
constituents, such as Ca2+, cyclic nucleotides, and 
GTP-binding proteins, bind at intracellular sites, as 
do certain dynamically regulated mobile lipid com-
ponents of the membrane (Chapter 14). Other ligands 
activate intracellular second messenger signaling 
cascades that can covalently modify channel gat-
ing through protein phosphorylation (Figure 8–5B). 
Many ion channels are regulated by changes in mem-
brane potential (Figure 8–5C). Some voltage-gated 
channels act as temperature sensors; changes in tem-
perature shift their voltage gating to higher or lower 
membrane potentials, giving rise to heat- or cold-
sensitive channels. Finally, some channels are regu-
lated by mechanical force (Figure 8–5D).


