===== Page 1 =====
1204    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–19  Some neuromuscular synapses are elimi-
nated after birth. Early in the development of the neuromus-
cular junction, each muscle fiber is innervated by several motor 
axons. After birth, all motor axons but one withdraw from each 
fiber, and the surviving axon becomes more elaborate. Synapse 
elimination occurs without any overall loss of axons—axons 
that “lose” at some muscle fibers “win” at others. Central  
synapses are also subject to elimination.
Wnt families of secreted morphogens and their recep-
tors (Figure 48–18). They are present at specific subsets 
of synapses and play distinct roles. For example, simi-
lar to neuroligin1 and neuroligin2, FGF22 and FGF7 are 
localized to and promote differentiation of excitatory 
and inhibitory synapses, respectively. Some of these 
organizing proteins may act in parallel with neurexins, 
while others may act as initial organizers, with neu-
roligins and neurexins consolidating the synapses at 
a later time and specifying their particular properties.
Together, these results suggest that central syn-
apses are not patterned by master organizers akin to 
agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminins. Indeed, loss of no 
single central organizer studied to date is lethal in the 
manner observed for agrin, MuSK, LRP4, and laminin 
mutants. Instead, the enormous variety of neuronal 
and synaptic types in the central nervous system and 
their wide range of functional properties arise from a 
multitude of organizers that act combinatorially and 
in cell type–specific ways. Consistent with this view, 
genetic variation in many central organizers and syn-
aptic recognition molecules, including neurexins, neu-
roligins, cadherins, and contactins, has been associated 
with behavioral perturbations in experimental animals 
and with behavioral disorders, including autism, in 
humans (Chapter 62).
Some Synapses Are Eliminated After Birth
In adult mammals, each muscle fiber bears only a 
single synapse. However, this is not the case in the 
embryo. At intermediate stages of development, sev-
eral axons converge on each myotube and form syn-
apses at a common site. Soon after birth, all inputs but 
one are eliminated.
The process of synapse elimination is not a mani-
festation of neuronal death. Indeed, it generally occurs 
long after the period of naturally occurring cell death 
(Chapter 46). Each motor axon withdraws branches 
from some muscle fibers but strengthens its connec-
tions with others, thus focusing its increasing capac-
ity for transmitter release on a decreasing number of 
targets. Moreover, axonal elimination is not targeted to 
defective synapses; all inputs to a neonatal myotube 
are morphologically and electrically similar, and each 
can activate the postsynaptic cell (Figure 48–19).
What is the purpose of the transient stage of poly-
neuronal innervation? One possibility is that it ensures 
that each muscle fiber is innervated. A second is that it 
allows all axons to capture an appropriate set of target 
cells. A third, intriguing idea is that synapse elimina-
tion provides a means by which activity can change 
A single motor 
axon innervates a 
single muscle ﬁber
Maturation
Polyneuronal 
innervation of
immature muscle
the strength of specific synaptic connections. We will 
explore this idea in Chapter 49.
Like synapse formation, synapse elimination 
results from intercellular interactions. Every mus-
cle fiber ends up with exactly one input: None have 
zero, and very few have more than one. It is difficult to 
imagine how this could occur without feedback from 
the muscle cell. Moreover, the axons that remain after 
partial denervation at birth have a larger number of 
synapses than they did initially. Thus, synapse elimi-
nation appears to be a competitive process.
What drives the competition, and what is the 
reward? There is good evidence that neural activity 
plays a role: Paralysis of muscle reduces synapse elimi-
nation, whereas direct stimulation enhances it. These 
findings showed that activity was involved but did not 
reveal how the outcome was determined, because all 
axons were stimulated or paralyzed together. Because 
the essence of the competitive process is that some 
synapses gain territory at the expense of others, dif-
ferential activity among axons may be a determinant 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1205
of axon winners and losers. Changing the activity of 
only a subset of axons in a living animal has been a 
technical challenge, but genetic approaches have made 
this possible in mice. In fact, when the activity of one 
of the inputs to a muscle fiber is decreased, that axon is 
highly likely to withdraw.
If the more active axon wins the competition, there 
is a new problem. Because all synapses made by an 
axon have the same activity pattern, one might predict 
that the least active axon in the muscle would eventu-
ally lose all of its synapses and the most active would 
retain all of its synapses. Yet this does not happen. 
Instead, all axons win at some sites and lose at others, 
so that every axon ends up innervating a substantial 
number of muscle fibers.
One possible resolution to this paradox is that the 
outcome of competition may not depend on the num-
ber of synaptic potentials from the winning axon at 
a synapse but rather on the total amount of synaptic 
input that the axon provides to the muscle—a product 
of the number of impulses and the amount of transmit-
ter released per impulse. In this case, an axon that loses 
at several synapses might redistribute its resources 
(eg, synaptic vesicles) so that the remaining terminals 
would be strengthened and more likely to win at their 
synapses. Conversely, an axon that wins many com-
petitions might find itself with insufficient vesicles 
to generate large synaptic potentials and thus would 
eventually lose to competitors at some synapses. 
Accordingly, the number of muscle fibers innervated 
by individual axons would vary much more among 
axons than is actually observed.
If activity drives the competition, what is the object 
of the competition? One idea is that the mechanisms are 
similar to those that determine whether neurons live or 
die. The muscle might produce limited amounts of a 
trophic substance for which the axons compete. As the 
winner grows, it either deprives the loser of its suste-
nance or gains enough strength to mount an attack that 
results in removal of its competitor. Alternatively, the 
muscle might release a toxic or punitive factor. In these 
scenarios, although the muscle does contribute a factor 
in the competition, the outcome is entirely dependent 
on differences between axons. These differences could 
be related to activity. The more active axon might be 
better able to take up trophic factor or resist a toxin. 
Such positive and negative competitive interactions 
have been demonstrated at nerve-muscle synapses in 
culture, although not in vivo.
Nevertheless, the muscle could play a selective 
role in synapse elimination rather than just providing 
a broadly distributed signal. For example, the more 
active axon might trigger a signal from the muscle 
fiber that strengthens its adhesive interactions with the 
synaptic cleft, whereas the less active axon might elicit 
a signal that weakens those interactions.
The complexity of the brain makes direct dem-
onstration of synapse elimination problematic, but 
electrophysiological evidence from many parts of 
the central nervous system indicates that synapse 
elimination is widespread. In autonomic ganglia and 
cerebellar Purkinje cells, synapse elimination has been 
documented directly and its rules seem similar to those 
found at neuromuscular junctions. Individual axons 
withdraw from some postsynaptic cells while simulta-
neously increasing the size of the synapses they form 
with other neurons.
Glial Cells Regulate Both Formation and 
Elimination of Synapses
Classical studies of synapse formation and maturation 
focused, logically enough, on the pre- and postsynap-
tic partners. More recently, however, there has been a 
growing appreciation of the role played by a third type 
of cell: the glial cells that cap nerve terminals. Schwann 
cells are the glia at neuromuscular junctions, and astro-
cytes are the glia at central synapses. Both have been 
implicated in synapse formation and maturation.
The most penetrating analyses were performed by 
the late Ben Barres and his colleagues. They devised 
methods to culture neurons in defined media and in the 
complete absence of nonneuronal cells. Using this sys-
tem, they found that neurons formed few synapses when 
cultured in isolation but many when astrocytes were 
present (Figure 48–20). The astrocytes provide multiple 
signals to neurons. Some, such as thrombospondin, pro-
mote postsynaptic maturation, whereas others, such as 
cholesterol, promote presynaptic maturation.
Another glial type, the microglial cell, also plays 
critical roles. Microglia are relatives of macrophages 
and monocytes in other tissues, sharing their ability to 
eliminate dead cells or debris. Initially thought to be 
primarily involved in the brain’s response to damage, 
they have now been found to phagocytose synaptic 
terminals during the period of synapse elimination. 
True to their phagocytic origins, they use the complex 
system of complement factors, initially studied in the 
context of immunity, to target terminals; the targeting 
is activity dependent, providing a possible mechanism 
for the activity dependence of synapse elimination 
(Figure 48–21). An intriguing possibility is that dysreg-
ulation of microglial pruning contributes to synaptic 
loss in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer 
disease and schizophrenia (see Chapters 60 and 64).


===== Page 3 =====
1206    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
40
20
0
Quantal content
Synaptic vesicle
recycling
Immunocyto-
chemistry 
D
Number of synapses per neuron
40
20
0
Quantal content
Synaptic vesicle
recycling
Immunocyto-
chemistry 
20 pA
40 pA
100 ms
C
Astrocytes          
Presynaptic 
terminal
A
Control
With astrocytes
B
Postsynaptic 
dendrite
Figure 48–20  Signals from astrocytes promote syn-
apse formation.
A. Astrocytes promote the maturation of both pre- and 
postsynaptic elements of the synapse.
B. Neurons cultured with astrocytes form more synapses, 
as assessed by expression of synaptic proteins (yellow 
dots). (Reproduced, with permission, from Ben A. Barres.)
C. Retinal neurons cultured with astrocytes form a greater 
number of synapses, as shown by increased transmitter 
release.
D. Synapse formation is enhanced in the presence of 
astrocytes by three measures.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1207
Figure 48–21  Microglia prune synapses, contributing 
to synapse elimination. Microglia engulf weak synapses. 
The engulfment is stimulated by complement components 
such as C1q, which tags the inactive terminal and marks it 
for removal by a process involving interaction of C3 with the 
complement receptor C3R on the microglia. Astrocytes play a 
role by secreting transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), which 
promotes production of C1q. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Allen 2014. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance 
Center, Inc.)
C3R
C3
Glutamate
receptors
Microglial
cell process
Astrocyte
process
Axon
Dendrite
Strong synapse
Maintained
Weak synapse
Eliminated by microglia
C1q
C1q
TGFβ
The roles of glia in synaptic development are only 
beginning to be worked out, and the assignments of 
astrocytes and microglia to synapse formation and 
elimination are clearly oversimplifications. Both glial 
types are involved in both processes, and Schwann 
cells may play both roles at the neuromuscular junc-
tion. Moreover, a complex set of signals passes between 
astrocytes and microglia, and between neurons and 
glia, all of which contribute to development and are at 
risk of going awry in brain disorders.
Highlights
  1.  Elaborate guidance mechanisms bring axons to 
appropriate target areas, but within those areas 
they still need to choose synaptic partners, often 
from among many neuronal types. Multiple 
mechanisms guide these choices.
  2.  Matching cell-surface recognition molecules on pre- 
and postsynaptic partners provide one prevalent 
mechanism for synaptic specificity. They include 
members of the cadherin, immunoglobulin, and 
leucine-rich repeat protein superfamilies. Individ-
ual members are selectively expressed by subsets 
of neurons and exhibit selective binding. Often, the 
binding is homophilic, biasing connectivity in favor 
of partners expressing the same molecule.
  3.  Other mechanisms promoting specificity include 
selective interactions among axons, the ability of 
some axons to convert their targets to the appro-
priate types, and selective elimination of inap-
propriate contacts.
  4.  At present, it remains unknown how many 
molecular species are required to wire up neural 
circuits in the mammalian brain. At one time, it 
seemed that molecular complexity might need to 
approach the complexity of circuits, but it is more 
likely that a few hundred recognition molecules 
will suffice, given their combinatorial use, as well 
as deployment of the same gene at multiple times 
and in multiple regions.


===== Page 5 =====
1208    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
  5.  Spatial constraints that enhance specificity 
include restriction of axons and dendrites to par-
ticular laminae within a target region—thereby 
restricting their choice of partners—and restric-
tion of synapses of particular types to defined 
domains on the target cell surface.
  6.  Some specificity mechanisms do not require the 
partners to be electrically active, but in many 
cases, activity-dependent mechanisms sharpen 
specificity. Activity can be spontaneous, early 
in development, or driven by experience at later 
stages.
  7.  The skeletal neuromuscular junction, at which 
the axon of a motor neuron synapses on a muscle 
fiber, has been a favored preparation for working 
out principles of synaptic development. A key 
finding is that multiple interactions between the 
synaptic partners are required for the formation, 
maturation, and maintenance of the synapse.
  8.  Motor neurons and muscle fibers can express 
genes encoding pre- and postsynaptic compo-
nents, respectively, in each other’s absence, but 
they exert profound influences on the levels and 
distribution of these components in their part-
ners. Thus, signals between synaptic partners are 
best viewed as organizers rather than inducers.
  9.  At the neuromuscular junction, a layer of basal 
lamina occupies the synaptic cleft between the 
motor nerve terminal and the postsynaptic mem-
brane. Nerve and muscle secrete signaling mole-
cules into the cleft, where they become stabilized 
and organize differentiation.
10.  A key nerve-derived organizer of postsynaptic 
differentiation is agrin. It acts through the recep-
tors MuSK and LRP4 to cluster acetylcholine 
receptors and other postsynaptic components 
beneath the nerve terminal. Nerve-evoked activ-
ity also affects postsynaptic differentiation by 
modulating expression of postsynaptic compo-
nents. Key muscle-derived organizers of pre-
synaptic differentiation include members of the 
laminin and fibroblast growth factor families.
11.  Central synapses develop in ways similar to those 
discovered at the neuromuscular junction. Many 
central synaptic organizers have now been dis-
covered, including neuroligins, neurexins, pro-
tein tyrosine phosphatases, leucine-rich repeat 
proteins, and numerous others.
12.  Many of the synapses that form initially in both 
the peripheral and central nervous systems are 
subsequently eliminated, generally by competi-
tive, activity-dependent mechanisms. The conse-
quence is that as circuits mature, the number of 
inputs a neuron receives may decrease dramati-
cally, but the size and strength of the remaining 
inputs increase even more dramatically.
13.  Along with pre- and postsynaptic partners, glial 
cells play key roles at the synapse. In particular, 
both astrocytes and microglial cells receive sig-
nals from and send signals to developing syn-
aptic partners, with these signals contributing 
to synapse formation, maturation, maintenance, 
and elimination.
 Joshua R. Sanes 
Selected Reading
Allen NJ, Lyons DA. 2018. Glia as architects of central nerv-
ous system formation and function. Science 362:181–185.
Baier H. 2013. Synaptic laminae in the visual system: molecu-
lar mechanisms forming layers of perception. Annu Rev 
Cell Dev Biol 29:385–416.
Darabid H, Perez-Gonzalez AP, Robitaille R. 2014. Neuro-
muscular synaptogenesis: coordinating partners with 
multiple functions. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:703–718.
Hirano S, Takeichi M. 2012. Cadherins in brain morphogen-
esis and wiring. Physiol Rev 92:597–634.
Krueger-Burg D, Papadopoulos T, Brose N. 2017. Organizers 
of inhibitory synapses come of age. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
45:66–77.
Nishizumi H, Sakano H. 2015. Developmental regulation of 
neural map formation in the mouse olfactory system. Dev 
Neurobiol 75:594–607.
Südhof TC. 2017. Synaptic neurexin complexes: a molecular 
code for the logic of neural circuits. Cell 171:745–769.
Takahashi H, Craig AM. 2013. Protein tyrosine phosphatases 
PTPδ, PTPσ, and LAR: presynaptic hubs for synapse 
organization. Trends Neurosci 36:522–534.
Thion MS, Ginhoux F, Garel S. 2018. Microglia and early brain 
development: an intimate journey. Science 362:185–189.
Yogev S, Shen K. 2014. Cellular and molecular mechanisms 
of synaptic specificity. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 30:417–437.
References
Allen NJ. 2014. Astrocyte regulation of synaptic behavior. 
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 30:439–463.
Anderson, MJ, Cohen MW. 1977. Nerve-induced and spon-
taneous redistribution of acetylcholine receptors on cul-
tured muscle cells. J Physiol 268:757–773.
Ango F, di Cristo G, Higashiyama H, Bennett V, Wu P, 
Huang ZJ. 2004. Ankyrin-based subcellular gradient of 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1209
neurofascin, an immunoglobulin family protein, directs 
GABAergic innervation at Purkinje axon initial segment. 
Cell 119:257–272.
Buller AJ, Eccles JC, Eccles RM. 1960. Interactions between 
motoneurons and muscles in respect of the characteristic 
speeds of their responses. J Physiol 150:417–439.
Burden SJ, Sargent PB, McMahan UJ. 1979. Acetylcholine 
receptors in regenerating muscle accumulate at origi-
nal synaptic sites in the absence of the nerve. J Cell Biol 
82:412–425.
Christopherson KS, Ullian EM, Stokes CC, et al. 2005. Throm-
bospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that promote 
CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120:421–433.
DeChiara TM, Bowen DC, Valenzuela DM, et al. 1996. The 
receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK is required for neuromus-
cular junction formation in vivo. Cell 85:501–512.
Duan X, Krishnaswamy A, De la Huerta I, Sanes JR. 2014. 
Type II cadherins guide assembly of a direction-selective 
retinal circuit. Cell 158:793–807.
Feng G, Tintrup H, Kirsch J, et al. 1998. Dual requirement for 
gephyrin in glycine receptor clustering and molybdoen-
zyme activity. Science 282:1321–1324.
Fox MA, Sanes JR, Borza DB, et al. 2007. Distinct target-
derived signals organize formation, maturation, and 
maintenance of motor nerve terminals. Cell 129:179–193.
Gautam M, Noakes PG, Moscoso L, et al. 1996. Defective 
neuromuscular synaptogenesis in agrin-deficient mutant 
mice. Cell 85:525–535.
Glicksman MA, Sanes JR. 1983. Differentiation of motor 
nerve terminals formed in the absence of muscle fibres. 
J Neurocytol 12:661–671.
Graf ER, Zhang X, Jin SX, Linhoff MW, Craig AM. 2004. 
Neurexins induce differentiation of GABA and gluta-
mate postsynaptic specializations via neuroligins. Cell 
119:1013–1026.
Hall ZW, Sanes JR. 1993. Synaptic structure and develop-
ment: the neuromuscular junction. Cell 72:99–121. Suppl.
Huang ZJ. 2006. Subcellular organization of GABAergic syn-
apses: role of ankyrins and L1 cell adhesion molecules. 
Nat Neurosci 9:163–166.
Imai T, Suzuki M, Sakano H. 2006. Odorant receptor-derived 
cAMP signals direct axonal targeting. Science 314:657–661.
Krishnaswamy A, Yamagata M, Duan X, Hong YK, Sanes JR. 
2015. Sidekick 2 directs formation of a retinal circuit that 
detects differential motion. Nature 2524:466–470.
Lupa MT, Gordon H, Hall ZW. 1990. A specific effect of mus-
cle cells on the distribution of presynaptic proteins in neu-
rites and its absence in a C2 muscle cell variant. Dev Biol 
142:31–43.
Misgeld T, Kummer TT, Lichtman JW, Sanes JR. 2005. Agrin 
promotes synaptic differentiation by counteracting an 
inhibitory effect of neurotransmitter. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 102:11088–11093.
Nishimune H, Sanes JR, Carlson SS. 2004. A synaptic laminin-
calcium channel interaction organizes active zones in 
motor nerve terminals. Nature 432:580–587.
Nja A, Purves D. 1977. Re-innervation of guinea-pig superior 
cervical ganglion cells by preganglionic fibres arising from 
different levels of the spinal cord. J Physiol 272:633–651.
Noakes PG, Gautam M, Mudd J, Sanes JR, Merlie JP. 
1995. Aberrant differentiation of neuromuscular junc-
tions in mice lacking s-laminin/laminin beta 2. Nature 
374:258–262.
Salmons S, Sreter FA. 1976. Significance of impulse activ-
ity in the transformation of skeletal muscle type. Nature 
263:30–34.
Sanes JR, Lichtman JW. 2001. Induction, assembly, matura-
tion and maintenance of a postsynaptic apparatus. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 2:791–805.
Sanes JR, Yamagata M. 2009. Many paths to synaptic specific-
ity. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 25:161–195.
Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Kautzman AG, et al. 2012. Micro-
glia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74:691–705.
Scheiffele P, Fan J, Choih J, Fetter R, Serafini T. 2000. Neuroli-
gin expressed in nonneuronal cells triggers presynaptic 
development in contacting axons. Cell 101:657–669.
Serizawa S, Miyamichi K, Takeuchi H, Yamagishi Y, Suzuki 
M, Sakano H. 2006. A neuronal identity code for the odor-
ant receptor-specific and activity-dependent axon sorting. 
Cell 127:1057–1069.
Terauchi A, Johnson-Venkatesh EM, Toth AB, Javed D,  
Sutton MA, Umemori H. 2010. Distinct FGFs promote dif-
ferentiation of excitatory and inhibitory synapses. Nature 
465:783–787.
Uezu A, Kanak DJ, Bradshaw TW, et al. 2016. Identification 
of an elaborate complex mediating postsynaptic inhibi-
tion. Science 353:1123–1129.
Vaughn JE. 1989. Fine structure of synaptogenesis in the ver-
tebrate central nervous system. Synapse 3:255–285.
Yamagata M, Sanes JR. 2012. Expanding the Ig superfamily 
code for laminar specificity in retina: expression and role 
of contactins. J Neurosci 32:14402–14414.
Yumoto N, Kim N, Burden SJ. 2012. Lrp4 is a retrograde sig-
nal for presynaptic differentiation at neuromuscular syn-
apses. Nature 489:438–442.


===== Page 7 =====
49
Experience and the Refinement of  
Synaptic Connections
Critical Periods Can Be Reopened in Adulthood
Visual and Auditory Maps Can Be Aligned in Adults
Binocular Circuits Can Be Remodeled in Adults
Highlights
T
he human nervous system is functional  at 
birth—newborn babies can see, hear, breathe, 
and suckle. However, the capabilities of human 
infants are quite rudimentary compared to those of 
other species. Wildebeest calves can stand and run 
within minutes of birth, and many birds can fly shortly 
after they hatch from their eggs. In contrast, a human 
baby cannot lift its head until it is 2 months old, cannot 
bring food to its mouth until it is 6 months old, and 
cannot survive without parental care for a decade.
What accounts for the delayed maturation of our 
motor, perceptual, and cognitive abilities? One main 
factor is that the embryonic connectivity of the nerv-
ous system, discussed in Chapters 45 through 48, is 
only a “rough draft” of the neural circuits that exist 
in our adult selves. Embryonic circuits are refined by 
sensory stimulation—our experiences. This two-part 
sequence—genetically determined connectivity fol-
lowed by experience-dependent reorganization—is 
a common feature of mammalian neural develop-
ment, but in humans, the second phase is especially 
prolonged.
At first glance, this delay in human neural devel-
opment might seem dysfunctional. It does exact a toll, 
Development of Human Mental Function Is Influenced by 
Early Experience
Early Experience Has Lifelong Effects on Social Behaviors
Development of Visual Perception Requires  
Visual Experience
Development of Binocular Circuits in the Visual Cortex 
Depends on Postnatal Activity
Visual Experience Affects the Structure and Function of 
the Visual Cortex
Patterns of Electrical Activity Organize Binocular Circuits
Reorganization of Visual Circuits During a Critical Period 
Involves Alterations in Synaptic Connections
Cortical Reorganization Depends on Changes in Both 
Excitation and Inhibition
Synaptic Structures Are Altered During the  
Critical Period
Thalamic Inputs Are Remodeled During the  
Critical Period
Synaptic Stabilization Contributes to Closing  
the Critical Period
Experience-Independent Spontaneous Neural Activity  
Leads to Early Circuit Refinement
Activity-Dependent Refinement of Connections Is a  
General Feature of Brain Circuitry
Many Aspects of Visual System Development Are 
Activity-Dependent
Sensory Modalities Are Coordinated During a  
Critical Period
Different Functions and Brain Regions Have Different 
Critical Periods of Development


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1211
but it also provides an advantage. Because our mental 
abilities are shaped largely by experience, we gain the 
ability to custom fit our nervous systems to our indi-
vidual bodies and unique environments. It has been 
argued that it is not just the large size of the human 
brain but also its experience-dependent maturation 
that makes our mental capabilities superior to those of 
other species.
The plasticity of the nervous system in response 
to experience endures throughout life. Nevertheless, 
periods of heightened susceptibility to modification, 
known as sensitive periods, occur at particular times 
in development. In some cases, the adverse effects 
of deprivation or atypical experience during circum-
scribed periods in early life cannot easily be reversed 
by providing appropriate experience at a later age. 
Such periods are referred to as critical periods. As we 
shall see, new discoveries are blurring the distinction 
between sensitive and critical periods, so we will use 
the term “critical periods” to refer to both.
Behavioral observations have helped us appre-
ciate critical periods. Imprinting, a form of learning 
in birds, is one of the most striking illustrations of a 
lifelong behavior established during a critical period. 
Just after hatching, birds become indelibly attached, or 
imprinted, to a prominent moving object in their envi-
ronment and follow it around. This is typically their 
mother, but it could be an experimenter who is near 
the newborn chick. The process of imprinting is impor-
tant for the protection of the hatchling. Although the 
attachment is acquired rapidly and persists, imprint-
ing can only occur during a critical period soon after 
hatching—in some species, only a few hours.
In humans, critical periods are evident in the ways 
children acquire the capacities to perceive the world 
around them, learn a language, or form social relation-
ships. A 5-year-old child can quickly and effortlessly 
learn a second language, whereas a 15-year-old adoles-
cent may become fluent but is likely to speak with an 
accent, even if he lives to be 90 years old. Likewise, deaf 
children fitted with a cochlear implant during the first 
3 to 4 years of life generally acquire and understand 
spoken language well, whereas neither production nor 
understanding may ever be normal following implan-
tation at later ages. Such critical periods demonstrate 
that experience-dependent neural development is con-
centrated in, although certainly not confined to, early 
postnatal life.
We begin this chapter by examining the evidence 
that early experience shapes a range of human mental 
capacities, from our ability to make sense of what we 
see to our ability to engage in appropriate social inter-
actions. The neural basis of these experiential effects 
has been analyzed in numerous parts of the brains of 
experimental animals, including the auditory, soma-
tosensory, motor, and visual systems. Here, rather 
than surveying multiple systems, we will focus pri-
marily on the visual system because research on this 
system has provided a particularly rich understanding 
of how experience shapes neural circuitry. We will see 
that experience is needed to refine patterns of synaptic 
connections and to stabilize these patterns once they 
have formed. Finally, we will consider recent evidence 
that critical periods in many systems are less restrictive 
than once thought and, in some cases, can be extended 
or even “reopened.”
Understanding critical periods in childhood and 
the extent to which they can be reopened in adult-
hood has many important practical consequences. 
First, much educational policy is based on the idea that 
early experience is crucial, so it is important to know 
exactly when a particular form of enrichment will be 
optimally beneficial. Second, medical treatment of 
many childhood conditions, such as congenital cata-
racts or deafness, is now predicated on the idea that 
early intervention is imperative if long-lasting deficits 
are to be avoided. Third, there is increasing suspicion 
that some behavioral disorders, such as autism, may 
be caused by impairment of reorganization of neural 
circuits during critical periods. Finally, the possibility 
of reopening critical periods in adulthood is leading to 
new therapeutic approaches to neural insults, such as 
stroke, that previously were thought to have irrevers-
ible consequences.
Development of Human Mental Function  
Is Influenced by Early Experience
Early Experience Has Lifelong Effects  
on Social Behaviors
One of the first indications that early social and per-
ceptual experiences have irreversible consequences for 
human development came from studies of children 
who had been deprived of these experiences early in 
life. In rare cases, children abandoned in the wild and 
later returned to human society have also been studied. 
As might be expected, these children were socially 
maladjusted, but surprisingly, the defects proved to 
persist throughout life.
In the 1940s, the psychoanalyst René Spitz pro-
vided more systematic evidence that early interactions 
with other humans are essential for normal social devel-
opment. Spitz compared the development of infants 
raised in a foundling home with the development 


===== Page 9 =====
1212    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
of infants raised in a nursing home attached to a 
women’s prison. Both institutions were clean and both 
provided adequate food and medical care. The babies 
in the prison nursing home were all cared for by their 
mothers, who, although in prison and away from their 
families, tended to shower affection on their infants in 
the limited time allotted to them each day. In contrast, 
infants in the foundling home were cared for by nurses, 
each of whom was responsible for several babies. As a 
result, children in the foundling home had far less con-
tact with other humans than did those in the prison’s 
nursing home.
The two institutions also differed in another 
respect. In the prison nursing home, the cribs were 
open, so that the infants could readily watch other 
activities in the ward; they could see other babies play 
and observe the staff go about their business. In the 
foundling home, the bars of the cribs were covered 
by sheets that prevented the infants from seeing out-
side. In reality, the babies in the foundling home were 
living under conditions of severe sensory and social 
deprivation.
Infants at the two institutions were followed 
through their early years. At the end of the first 4 months, 
the infants in the foundling home fared better on sev-
eral developmental tests than those in the prison nurs-
ing home, suggesting that intrinsic factors did not 
favor the infants in the prison nursing home. But by 
the end of the first year, the motor and intellectual per-
formance of the children in the foundling home had 
fallen far below that of children in the prison nursing 
home. Many of the children in the foundling home had 
developed a syndrome that Spitz called hospitalism and 
is now sometimes called anaclitic depression. These chil-
dren were withdrawn and displayed little curiosity or 
gaiety. Moreover, their defects extended beyond emo-
tional and cognitive signs. They were especially prone 
to infection, implying that the brain exerts complex 
controls over the immune system as well as behavior. 
By their second and third years, children in the prison 
nursing home were similar to children raised in nor-
mal families at home—they were agile, had a vocabu-
lary of hundreds of words, and spoke in sentences. In 
contrast, the development of children in the foundling 
home was still further delayed—many were unable to 
walk or to speak more than a few words.
More recent studies of other similarly deprived 
children have confirmed these conclusions and 
shown that the defects are long-lasting. Longitudi-
nal studies of orphans who were raised for several 
years in large impersonal institutions with little or 
no personal care, then adopted by caring families, 
have been especially revealing. Despite every effort 
of the adoptive parents, many of the children were 
never able to develop appropriate, caring relation-
ships with family members or peers (Figure 49–1A). 
More recent imaging studies have revealed defects in 
brain structure correlated with, and presumably due 
to, this deprivation (Figure 49–1B).
As compelling as these observations are, it is dif-
ficult to derive definitive conclusions from them. An 
influential set of studies that extended the analysis 
of social behavior to monkeys was carried out in the 
1960s by two psychologists, Harry and Margaret 
Harlow. The Harlows reared newborn monkeys in 
isolation for 6 to 12 months, depriving them of con-
tact with their mothers, other monkeys, or people. At 
the end of this period, the monkeys were physically 
healthy but behaviorally devastated. They crouched in 
a corner of their cage and rocked back and forth like 
autistic children (Figure 49–1C). They did not interact 
with other monkeys, nor did they fight, play, or show 
any sexual interest. Thus, a 6-month period of social 
isolation during the first 18 months of life produced 
persistent and serious disturbances in behavior. By 
comparison, isolation of an older animal for a compa-
rable period was found to be without such drastic con-
sequences. These results confirmed, under controlled 
conditions, the critical influence of early experience on 
later behavior. For ethical reasons, these studies would 
not be possible today.
Development of Visual Perception Requires  
Visual Experience
The dramatic dependence of the brain on experience 
and the ability of that experience to shape perception 
is evident in people born with cataracts. Cataracts are 
opacities of the lens that interfere with the optics of 
the eye but not directly with the nervous system; they 
are easily removed surgically. In the 1930s, it became 
apparent that patients who had congenital binocular 
cataracts removed after the age of 10 years experienced 
permanent deficits in visual acuity and had difficulties 
perceiving shape and form. In contrast, when cataracts 
that develop in adults are removed decades after they 
form, normal vision returns immediately.
Likewise, children with strabismus (crossed eyes) 
do not have normal depth perception (stereopsis), an 
ability that requires the two eyes to focus on the same 
location at the same time. They can acquire this abil-
ity if their eyes are aligned surgically during the first 
few years of life, but not if surgery occurs later in ado-
lescence. As a result of these observations, congenital 
cataracts are now usually removed, and strabismus 
is corrected surgically, in early childhood. Over the 


