===== Page 1 =====
420    Part IV / Perception
A  Hairy skin innervation
Aδ-LTMR
Merkel cells
Dermis
Zigzag
Guard
Awl/auchene
Epidermis
Aβ RA-LTMR
Aβ ﬁeld-LTMR
(circumferential ending)
Aβ SA1-LTMR
C-LTMR
B  Receptive ﬁelds of low-threshold mechanoreceptors
Aβ ﬁeld
Aβ RA
Aδ
C
Aβ SA1


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    421
smallest hair follicle receptive fields (see Figure 19–8B 
Aβ RA). The largest receptive fields in the skin are 
those of Aβ field receptors (see Figure 19–8B Aβ Field). 
These fibers form circumferential endings around hair 
follicles but do not respond to hair movement or air 
puffs. Instead, field receptors respond to stroking or 
stretching of the skin in their receptive fields. Field 
receptors are also excited by painful stimuli such as 
pulling hairs or strong pressure, suggesting that they 
may also mediate sensations of mechanical pain.
Proprioceptors Measure Muscle Activity  
and Joint Positions
Mechanoreceptors in muscles and joints convey 
information about the posture and movements of the 
body and thereby play an important role in proprio-
ception and motor control. Mechanical coupling of 
sensory nerve terminals to skeletal muscle, tendons, 
joint capsules, and the skin is thought to underlie 
proprioception. These receptors include two types of 
muscle-length sensors, the type Ia and II muscle spin-
dle endings; one muscle force sensor, the Golgi tendon 
organ; joint-capsule receptors, which transduce ten-
sion in the joint capsule; and Ruffini endings that sense 
skin stretch over joints.
The muscle spindle consists of a bundle of thin 
muscle fibers, or intrafusal fibers, that are aligned par-
allel to the larger fibers of the muscle and enclosed 
within a capsule (Figure 18–9A). The intrafusal fibers 
are entwined by a pair of sensory axons that detect mus-
cle stretch because of mechanoreceptive ion channels 
in the nerve terminals. Intrafusal muscles also receive 
inputs from motor axons that regulate contractile force 
and receptor sensitivity. (See Box 32–1 for details on 
muscle spindles.)
Although the receptor potential and firing rates 
of muscle spindle afferent fibers are proportional to 
muscle length (Figure 18–9B), these responses can be 
modulated by higher centers in the brain that regu-
late contraction of intrafusal muscles. Spindle affer-
ent fibers are thus able to encode the amplitude and 
speed of internally generated voluntary movements 
as well as passive limb displacement by external 
forces (Chapter 32).
Golgi tendon organs, located at the junction 
between skeletal muscle and tendons, measure the 
forces generated by muscle contraction. (See Box 32–4 
for details on Golgi tendon organs.) Although these 
receptors play an important role in reflex circuits mod-
ulating muscle force, they appear to contribute little to 
conscious sensations of muscle activity. Psychophysi-
cal experiments in which muscles are fatigued or par-
tially paralyzed have shown that perceived muscle 
force is mainly related to centrally generated effort 
rather than to actual muscle force.
Recent studies by Ardem Patapoutian and col-
leagues suggest that Piezo2 mediates the signals trans-
mitted by afferent fibers from muscle spindles and 
Golgi tendon organs, as these fibers express the Piezo2 
protein in their distal terminals and cell body.
Joint receptors play little if any role in postural 
sensations of joint angle. Instead, perception of the 
angle of proximal joints such as the elbow or knee 
Figure 18–8  (Opposite) Innervation of the hairy skin by low-
threshold mechanoreceptors.
A. Hairy skin of mammals is innervated by specific combina-
tions of low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs); these 
multiple classes of nerve fibers allow touch information to be 
transmitted along multiple parallel nerve fibers to the central 
nervous system. Touch domes of Merkel cells are located at 
the epidermal–dermal boundary surrounding large-diameter 
guard hairs. The axons of Merkel cells are classified as Aβ SA1-
LTMRs, and they compose approximately 3% of sensory fibers 
innervating hairy skin. Guard hair follicles are innervated by 
rapidly adapting touch fibers, classified as Aβ RA-LTMRs, which 
form longitudinal lanceolate (comb-like) endings surrounding 
the hair follicle. They compose another 3% of sensory fibers 
innervating hairy skin. Aβ RA-LTMR fibers also form lanceo-
late endings on medium size awl/auchene hairs; each fiber 
innervates multiple hair follicles in neighboring regions of skin. 
Awl/auchene hairs are innervated by lanceolate endings from 
three different classes of sensory fibers; Aβ RA-LTMRs (blue), 
Aδ-LTMRs (red, 7% of fibers), and C-LTMRs (green, 15%–27% 
of fibers). Zigzag, or down hairs, are the most numerous type; 
they are innervated by the smallest-diameter, slowest-conducting 
peripheral nerve fibers (Aδ- and C-LTMRs). All three types of 
hair follicles are also innervated by circumferential endings  
(yellow). (Reproduced with permission from Zimmerman,  
Bai, and Ginty 2014. Copyright © 2014 AAAS.)
B. Whole mount sections of skin illustrate the spread of LTMR 
sensory nerve terminals in hairy skin and the skin region that 
can activate an individual sensory fiber. All five classes inner-
vate multiple hair follicles and have branched sensory nerve 
endings. Scale bar (which applies to all images) = 500 μm. 
Firing rates in each of these axons reflect inputs from multiple 
receptor end organs in the skin. Aβ field-LTMRs form circumfer-
ential endings around all classes of hair follicles; they have the 
largest receptive fields in hairy skin, innervating up to 180 hair 
follicles/fibers and spanning areas up to 6 mm2. Aβ SA1-LTMRs 
have the smallest receptive fields but innervate all of the Mer-
kel cells within a touch dome; each touch dome is innervated 
by only a single Aβ SA1-LTMR. Aβ RA- Aδ-, and C-LTMRs form 
lanceolate endings enclosing up to 40 individual hair follicles 
and span skin areas of 0.5 to 4 mm2. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Bai et al. 2015. Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc.)


===== Page 3 =====
422    Part IV / Perception
depends on afferent signals from muscle spindle 
receptors and efferent motor commands. Addition-
ally, conscious sensations of finger position and hand 
shape depend on cutaneous stretch receptors as well 
as muscle spindles.
Thermal Receptors Detect Changes in  
Skin Temperature
Although the size, shape, and texture of objects held 
in the hand can be apprehended visually as well as 
Figure 18–9  The muscle spindle is the principal receptor for 
proprioception.
A. The muscle spindle is located within skeletal muscle and is 
excited by stretch of the muscle. It consists of a bundle of thin 
(intrafusal) muscle fibers entwined by a pair of sensory axons. 
It is also innervated by several motor axons (not shown) that 
produce contraction of the intrafusal muscle fibers. Stretch-
sensitive ion channels in the sensory nerve terminals are linked 
to the cytoskeleton by the protein spectrin. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Sachs 1990.)
B. The depolarizing receptor potential recorded in a group Ia 
fiber innervating the muscle spindle is proportional to both the 
velocity and amplitude of muscle stretch parallel to the myo-
filaments. When stretch is maintained at a fixed length, the 
receptor potential decays to a lower value. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Ottoson and Shepherd 1971.)
C. Patch-clamp recordings of a single stretch-sensitive channel 
in myocytes. Pressure is applied to the receptor cell membrane 
by suction. At rest (0 cm Hg) the channel opens sporadically 
for short time intervals. As the pressure applied to the mem-
brane increases, the channel opens more often and remains 
in the open state longer. This allows more current to flow 
into the receptor cell, resulting in higher levels of depolariza-
tion. (Adapted, with permission, from Guharay and Sachs 1984. 
Copyright © 1984 The Physiological Society.)
Afferent
axons
Intracellular
Cytoskeletal strands
Stretch-sensitive channels
in sensory nerves
Extracellular
Ion channel
Sensory
endings
Capsule
Intrafusal
muscle
ﬁbers
A  Muscle spindle
B  Receptor potential in nerve
0
0
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
100
200
5
10
Time (ms)
Stretch
(µm)
Amplitude of 
receptor potential (mV)
15
20
25 ms
2 pA
C  Single-channel response to stretch
0 cm Hg
–3 cm Hg
–5 cm Hg


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    423
Figure 18–10  Transient receptor potential ion channels.  TRP 
channels consist of membrane proteins with six transmem-
brane α-helices. A pore is formed between the fifth (S5) and 
sixth (S6) helices from the four subunits. Most of these recep-
tors contain ankyrin repeats in the N-terminal domains and a 
common 25-amino acid motif adjacent to S6 in the C-terminal 
domain. Individual TRP channels are composed of four identical 
TRP proteins. All TRP channels are gated by temperature and 
various chemical ligands, but different types respond to differ-
ent temperature ranges and have different activation thresh-
olds. At least six types of TRP receptors have been identified in 
sensory neurons; the thermal sensitivity of a neuron is deter-
mined by the particular TRP receptors expressed in its nerve 
terminals. At 32°C (90°F), the resting skin temperature  
(asterisk), only TRPV4 and some TRPV3 receptors are 
stimulated. TRPA1and TRPM8 receptors are activated by  
cooling and cold stimuli. TRPM8 receptors also respond to 
menthol and various mints; TRPA1 receptors respond to allium-
expressing plants such as garlic and radishes. TRPV3 receptors 
are activated by warm stimuli and also bind camphor. TRPV1 
and TRPV2 receptors respond to heat and produce burning  
pain sensations. TRPV1 channels also respond to a variety of 
substances, temperatures, or forces that can elicit pain. Their 
sites of action on the receptor include binding sites for chili 
peppers‘ active ingredient (capsaicin), acids (lemon juice), spider 
venoms, and phosphorylation sites for second messenger-
activated kinases. TRPV4 receptors are active at normal skin 
temperatures and respond to touch. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Jordt, McKemy, and Julius 2003; adapted from Dhaka, 
Viswanath, and Patapoutian 2006.)
by touch, the thermal qualities of objects are uniquely 
somatosensory. Humans recognize four distinct types 
of thermal sensation: cold, cool, warm, and hot. These 
sensations result from differences between the normal 
skin temperature of approximately 32°C (90°F) and the 
external temperature of the air or of objects contacting 
the body. Temperature sense, like the other protopathic 
modalities of pain and itch, is mediated by a combinatorial 
code of multiple receptor types, transmitted by small-
diameter afferent fibers.
Although humans are exquisitely sensitive to sud-
den changes in skin temperature, we are normally 
unaware of the wide swings in skin temperature that 
occur as our cutaneous blood vessels expand or con-
tract to discharge or conserve body heat. If skin tem-
perature changes slowly, we are unaware of changes 
in the range 31° to 36°C (88–97°F). Below 31°C (88°F), 
the sensation progresses from cool to cold and, finally, 
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
TRPV4
TRPA1
TRPA1 (< 17°) 
TRPM8 (around 8–28°)
TRPV4 (> 27°)
TRPV3
TRPV1
TRPM8
TRPV2
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
C
C
C
Ankyrin
domain
*
Receptor 
temperature 
range (°C)
TRPV3 (> 31 or 39°)
TRPV1 (> 43°)
TRPV2 (> 52°)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
beginning at 10° to 15°C (50–59°F), to pain. Above 36°C 
(97°F), the sensation progresses from warm to hot and 
then, beginning at 45°C (113°F), to pain.
Thermal sensations are mediated by free nerve end-
ings in the epidermis. The temperature ranges signaled 
by these nerve fibers are determined by the molecular 
composition of receptor molecules expressed in the 
distal nerve terminals and cell bodies of small-diameter 
DRG neurons. Studies by David Julius and his col-
leagues revealed that thermal stimuli activate specific 
classes of transient receptor potential (TRP) channels in 
these neurons (Figure 18–10). TRP channels are encoded 
by genes belonging to the same gene superfamily as 
the voltage-gated channels that give rise to the action 
potential (Chapter 8). They form nonselective cation 
channels that mediate inward depolarizing current. 
TRP channels comprise four identical protein subunits, 
each of which contains six transmembrane α-helices, 


===== Page 5 =====
424    Part IV / Perception
with a pore-forming element between the fifth and sixth 
helices. Individual TRP receptors are distinguished by 
their sensitivity to heat or cold, showing sharp increases 
in conductance to cations when their thermal threshold 
is exceeded. Their names specify the genetic subfamily 
of TRP receptors and the member number. Examples 
include TRPV1 (for TRP vanilloid-1), TRPM8 (for TRP 
melastatin-8), and TRPA1 (for TRP ankyrin-1).
Two classes of TRP receptors are activated by cold 
temperatures and inactivated by warming. TRPM8 
receptors respond to temperatures below 25°C (77°F); 
such temperatures are perceived as cool or cold. TRPA1 
receptors have thermal thresholds below 17°C (63°F); 
this range is described as cold or frigid. Both TRPM8 
and TRPA1 receptors are expressed in high-threshold 
cold receptor terminals, but only TRPM8 receptors are 
expressed in low-threshold cold receptor terminals.
Thermal signals from low-threshold cold receptors 
are transmitted by small-diameter, myelinated Aδ 
fibers with unmyelinated endings within the epider-
mis. These fibers express the transient receptor poten-
tial channel TRPM8 and respond to menthol applied 
to the skin. Cold receptors are approximately 100 times 
more sensitive to sudden drops in skin temperature 
than to gradual changes. This extreme sensitivity to 
change allows humans to detect a draft from a distant 
open window. 
Four types of TRP receptors are activated by warm 
or hot temperatures and inactivated by cooling. TRPV3 
receptors are expressed in warm type fibers; they 
respond to warming of the skin above 35°C (95°F) and 
generate sensations ranging from warm to hot. TRPV1 
and TRPV2 receptors respond to temperatures exceed-
ing 45°C (113°F) and mediate sensations of burning 
pain; they are expressed in heat nociceptors. TRPV4 
receptors are active at temperatures above 27°C and 
signal normal skin temperatures.
Warm receptors are located in the terminals of C 
fibers that end in the dermis. Unlike the cold receptors, 
warm receptors act more like simple thermometers; 
their firing rates rise monotonically with increasing 
skin temperature up to the threshold of pain and then 
saturate at higher temperatures. Warm receptors are 
less sensitive to rapid changes in skin temperature than 
cold receptors. Consequently, humans are less respon-
sive to warming than cooling; the threshold change for 
detecting sudden skin warming, even in the most sen-
sitive subject, is about 0.1°C.
Heat nociceptors are activated by temperatures 
exceeding 45°C (113°F) and inactivated by skin cool-
ing. The burning pain caused by high temperatures is 
transmitted by both myelinated Aδ fibers and unmy-
elinated C fibers.
The role of TRP receptors in thermal sensation 
was originally discovered by analyses of natural 
substances such as capsaicin and menthol that pro-
duce burning or cooling sensations when applied 
to the skin or injected subcutaneously. Capsaicin, 
the active ingredient in chili peppers, has been used 
extensively to activate nociceptive C fiber afferents 
that mediate sensations of burning pain. These stud-
ies indicate that the various TRP receptors also bind 
other molecules that induce painful sensations, such 
as toxins, venoms, and substances released by dis-
eased or injured tissue. TRPA1 receptors bind pun-
gent substances such as horseradish (wasabi), garlic, 
onions, and similar allium-expressing plants. These 
substances behave as irritants that may produce pain 
or itch through covalent modification of cysteines in 
the TRPA1 protein.
TRP channels are polymodal sensory integra-
tors, because different sections of the protein respond 
directly to changes in temperature, pH, or osmolarity; 
to the presence of noxious substances such as capsai-
cin or toxins; or to phosphorylation by intracellular 
second messengers (see Figure 20–2). Their molecular 
structure and role in pain are detailed in Chapter 20.
Nociceptors Mediate Pain
The receptors that respond selectively to stimuli that 
can damage tissue are called nociceptors (Latin nocere, 
to injure). They respond directly to mechanical and 
thermal stimuli and indirectly to other stimuli by 
means of chemicals released from cells in the trau-
matized tissue. Nociceptors signal impending tissue 
injury, and more important, they provide a constant 
reminder of tissues that are already injured and must 
be protected.
Abnormal function in major organ systems result-
ing from disease or trauma evokes conscious sensa-
tions of pain. Much of our knowledge of the neural 
mechanisms of pain is derived from studies of cuta-
neous nociceptors because the mechanisms are easier 
to study in cutaneous nerves than in visceral nerves. 
Nevertheless, the neural mechanisms underlying vis-
ceral pain are similar to those for pain arising from the 
surface of the body.
Nociceptors in the skin, muscle, joints, and visceral 
receptors fall into two broad classes based on the mye-
lination of their afferent fibers. Nociceptors innervated 
by thinly myelinated Aδ fibers produce short-latency 
pain that is described as sharp and pricking. The major-
ity are called mechanical nociceptors or high-threshold 
mechanoreceptors (HTMRs) because they are excited by 
sharp objects that penetrate, squeeze, or pinch the skin 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    425
A  Probe with blunt object
100
Afferent
ﬁber
recording
Force
(grams)
50
30
100
50
30
Squeeze
1 s
B  Pinprick
C  Pinch with serrated forceps
Figure 18–11  Mechanical nociceptors respond to stimuli 
that puncture, squeeze, or pinch the skin. Sensations of 
sharp, pricking pain result from stimulation of Aδ fibers with 
free nerve endings in the skin. These receptors respond to 
sharp objects that puncture the skin (B), but not to strong 
pressure from a blunt probe (A). The strongest responses are 
produced by pinching the skin with serrated forceps that dam-
age the tissue in the region of contact (C). (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Perl 1968.)
(Figure 18–11) or by pulling hairs in hairy skin. Many 
of these fibers also respond to temperatures above 
45°C (113°F) that burn the skin; these Aδ fibers also 
express the heat-sensitive TRPV2 channel.
Nociceptors innervated by C fibers produce dull, 
burning pain that is diffusely localized and poorly 
tolerated. The most common type encompasses poly-
modal nociceptors that respond to a variety of nox-
ious mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli, such 
as pinch or puncture, noxious heat and cold, and 
irritant chemicals applied to the skin. As detailed in 
Chapter 20, most C-polymodal nociceptors express 
TRPV1 and/or TRPA1 receptors. Electrical stimulation 
of these fibers in humans evokes prolonged sensations 
of burning pain. In the viscera, nociceptors are acti-
vated by distension or swelling, producing sensations 
of intense pain.
Itch Is a Distinctive Cutaneous Sensation
Itch is a common sensory experience that is confined 
to the skin, the ocular conjunctiva, and the mucosa. It 
has some properties in common with pain and, until 
recently, was thought to result from low firing rates 
in nociceptive fibers. Like pain, itch is inherently 
unpleasant whatever its intensity; even at the expense 
of inducing pain, we attempt to eliminate it by 
scratching.
Recent studies by Diana Bautista and Sarah Wil-
son indicate that C fibers that express both TRPV1 
and TRPA1 receptors mediate itch sensations evoked 
by pruritic (itch-producing) agents. Itch induced by 
intradermal injection of histamine or by procedures 
that release endogenous histamine activates a sub-
set of TRPV1-expressing neurons that also contain 
the H1 histamine receptor; these itch sensations are 
blocked by antihistamines. Histamine-independent 
itch appears to be mediated by C fiber DRGs that 
express TRPA1 channels. Itch sensations in this path-
way are triggered by dry skin or by pruritogens that 
bind to members of the Mas-related G protein–coupled 
receptor (Mrgpr) family, such as the antimalarial drug 
chloroquine.
How can TRPA1 receptors mediate itch when they 
are also involved in sensing noxious cold temperatures 
(<15°C)? Why do some TRPV1-expressing fibers medi-
ate itch sensations rather than sensations of noxious 
heat? The answer lies in the use of combinatorial codes 
by small-diameter sensory nerve fibers. For example, 
noxious cold is sensed when both TRPA1 and TRPM8 


===== Page 7 =====
426    Part IV / Perception
receptors are excited, but itch is perceived when 
TRPM8 receptors are silent. Likewise, heat pain is 
sensed when TRPV1-, TRPV2-, and TRPV3-expressing 
fibers are co-activated, but itch may be perceived when 
only TRPV1-expressing fibers respond and TRPV2 
and TRPV3 receptors are silent. Similar combinatorial 
codes using multiple receptors are commonly used by 
other chemical senses such as olfaction and taste.
Visceral Sensations Represent the Status of  
Internal Organs
Visceral sensations are important because they drive 
behaviors critical for survival, such as respiration, 
eating, drinking, and reproduction. The same molecu-
lar genetic strategies described earlier to study touch, 
pain, thermal senses, and proprioception in the dorsal 
root and trigeminal ganglia have been used to classify 
visceral afferents in the vagal sensory ganglia. Stephen 
Liberles and colleagues recently analyzed sensory 
responses in the vagal sensory ganglia (nodose/jugu-
lar complex) that receive mechanosensory or chem-
osensory information from the lungs, cardiovascular, 
immune, or digestive systems.
Vagal afferent fibers express a variety of G protein–
coupled receptors (GPCRs) that have been labeled 
with fluorescent antibodies to identify their periph-
eral sensory receptor sites in specific viscera, as well 
as mark their distinctive central projections to specific 
zones in the nucleus of the solitary tract in the medulla. 
By expressing genetic markers of calcium transients 
(GCaMPs) in identified vagal ganglia neurons, Liberles 
and colleagues measured their physiological responses 
to mechanical stimuli such as stretch or their activation 
by nutrients or gastric hormones (serotonin, glucagon-
like peptide 1, or cholecystokinin). The ability to label 
specific vagal afferents provides important tools for 
analyzing neural regulation of visceral function and 
tracing the pathways used to modulate these impor-
tant bodily functions.
Although their cell bodies seem to be scattered 
randomly in the vagal nucleus, individual vagal neu-
rons perform different sensory functions in specific 
organ systems. For example optogenetic stimulation 
of identified vagal sensory neurons reveals that there 
are at least two populations of vagal neurons control-
ling respiration. Neurons that express the GPCR P2ry1 
induce apnea, trapping the lung in expiration, while 
those expressing the GPCR Npy2r produce rapid shal-
low breathing. Stimulation of these neurons has no 
effect on heart rate or digestive function. Another set 
of GPCRs are used to label neurons that regulate gas-
trointestinal function. One set of gastric afferents are 
mechanoreceptors that sense distension of the stom-
ach and upper intestine and modulate gastric motil-
ity, while other gastric afferents are chemoreceptors 
that sense specific nutrients in the gut and aid their 
absorption.
Action Potential Codes Transmit 
Somatosensory Information to the Brain
In the previous sections, we learned that a variety of 
stimuli, such as mechanical forces, temperature, and 
various chemicals, interact with receptor molecules at 
the distal axon terminals of DRG neurons to produce 
local depolarization of the sensory endings. As noted 
in Chapter 17, these receptor potentials are trans-
formed into a digital pulse code of action potentials for 
transmission to the central nervous system.
The sensory terminal regions of peripheral nerve 
fibers are usually unmyelinated and do not express the 
voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels that underlie action 
potential generation. For example, the lanceolate end-
ings of hair follicle afferents are unmyelinated (Figure 
18–2H). This design optimizes information gathering 
in the receptive field by dedicating the highly branched 
terminal membrane area to sensory transduction chan-
nels such as Piezo2 or TRP receptors.
The most distal action potential ion channels in 
myelinated fibers are usually located near the initial 
myelin segment (see Figure 3–10) or at the intersection 
of branches in unmyelinated fibers. This has important 
consequences for information transmission. Depo-
larizing sensory signals from multiple branches can 
summate more easily if channels involved in action 
potential generation are absent from receptive termi-
nals, because of the regenerative properties of action 
potentials and the subsequent inactivation of the 
voltage-gated Na+ channels. Sensory messages arriv-
ing from later-activated receptors may be extinguished 
by collision with backward-propagating action poten-
tials traveling along another branch of the fiber. Thus, 
the signals transmitted along a primary afferent axon 
may be a nonlinear reflection of the sensory stimulus, 
reflecting either spatial summation of excitation from 
multiple branches or winner-take-all suppression of 
late-generated activity. Sequential activation of differ-
ent neurite branches can also aid detection of moving 
stimuli by generating long trains of action potentials if 
individual endings are stimulated at optimal rates so 
that their responses are not shunted by spikes gener-
ated earlier in other branches.
Action potential transmission along peripheral 
nerves depends on whether the axon is myelinated or 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    427
unmyelinated and on the expression of specific sub-
classes of voltage-dependent NaV and KV channels 
in each nerve fiber. Steven Waxman and colleagues 
reported that large-diameter Aα and Aβ fibers that 
innervate proprioceptors and low-threshold mechano-
receptors (LTMRs) express primarily NaV1.1 and NaV1.6 
isoforms; these fibers generally fire action potentials at 
high rates, in part because they also express KV1.1 and 
KV1.2 channels that enable rapid repolarization of 
axons. Small-diameter peripheral nerves that mediate 
pain and itch sensations express NaV1.7, NaV1.8, and 
NaV1.9 channels. The latter two NaV subtypes have 
kinetic and voltage sensitivities that promote repeti-
tive firing, thereby enhancing painful sensations: NaV 
1.8 channels inactivate incompletely during action 
potentials and recover rapidly following them; NaV 
1.9 channels activate at relatively negative potentials 
and undergo negligible inactivation, resulting in per-
sistent inward currents that can amplify subthreshold 
stimuli.
Sensory Ganglia Provide a Snapshot of Population 
Responses to Somatic Stimuli
We conclude this survey of DRG neurons by exam-
ining the distribution of sensory responses within 
an individual mammalian somatosensory ganglion. 
Typically, peripheral nerve fibers have been studied 
one at a time, usually with optimal stimuli for par-
ticular receptor classes. However, even weak voices 
contribute to the neural chorale, and those have 
been largely ignored with classic single-cell record-
ing techniques.
New in vivo functional imaging techniques provide 
useful tools for labeling, visualizing, and measuring 
ensemble responses to various types of somatosen-
sory stimuli. For example, the Ca2+ currents evoked 
by sensory stimuli provide an alternative to electro-
physiological recordings of spike trains in individual 
neurons. In the experiment illustrated in Figure 18–12, 
the genetically encoded Ca2+ sensor GCaMP6f was 
expressed in cells of the mouse trigeminal ganglia that 
also expressed the polymodal TRPV1 receptor, allow-
ing researchers to visualize and quantify the activity of 
populations of neurons activated by a variety of soma-
tosensory stimuli. Using a battery of tactile, noxious, 
and thermal stimuli first developed by William Willis 
to analyze somatosensory responses of neurons in the 
spinal cord, Nima Ghitani, Alexander Chesler, and col-
leagues recorded responses of 213 trigeminal neurons 
simultaneously. Their findings were quite remarkable. 
As shown in the heat map of Figure 18–12B1, neuronal 
responses are diverse, varying considerably in the 
intensity and duration of firing patterns to identical 
stimuli. Such ensemble recording techniques indicate 
that even at the receptor level there are no canonical 
responses to somatic stimuli, but rather common pat-
terns of responses.
Furthermore, individual somatosensory neurons 
appear to be polysensory, responding to more than one 
modality, such as touch and pain. This study shows 
that individual trigeminal neurons distinguish nox-
ious heat from mechanical pain (hair pull) and may 
respond, albeit weakly, to gentle touch or moderate 
thermal stimuli (Figure 18–12A). The most prevalent 
type of trigeminal ganglion neurons (49%) distin-
guish light touch (stroking the cheek) from thermal 
stimuli (Figure 18–12B). The next most common types 
are mechanical nociceptors (18%) or thermoreceptors 
(16%). Less common are polymodal types that respond 
to thermal and nociceptive stimuli (total 9%).
These new imaging techniques will enable neuro-
scientists to quantify sensory interactions in popula-
tions of somatosensory afferents, define combinatorial 
codes used by members of the active population, and 
thereby identify specific neural populations engaged 
in somatic sensation. Recording neurons simultane-
ously rather than one at a time is essential for decoding 
population activity and defining the circuits underly-
ing diverse sensory modalities.
Lastly, we note that neurons in the dorsal root, 
trigeminal, and vagal ganglia do not appear to be spa-
tially clustered or segregated functionally by modal-
ity such as mechanosensation or thermal or chemical 
events (Figure 18–12A). The principal organizational 
feature of these sensory ganglia is one of body topog-
raphy: which particular area of skin or which muscle 
or visceral structure is innervated by particular sensory 
neurons. Such geographical specificity extends centrally 
to higher structures in the brain that analyze the sensory 
information and that organize specific behaviors.
Somatosensory Information Enters the Central 
Nervous System Via Spinal or Cranial Nerves
As the peripheral nerve fibers exit the dorsal root 
ganglia and approach the spinal cord, the large- and 
small-diameter fibers separate into medial and lateral 
divisions, to form the spinal nerves that project to dis-
tinct locations in the spinal cord and brain stem. The 
medial division includes large myelinated Aα and 
Aβ fibers, which transmit proprioceptive and tactile 
information from the innervated body region. The lat-
eral division of a spinal nerve includes small, thinly 
myelinated Aδ fibers and unmyelinated C fibers, 
which transmit noxious, thermal, pruritic, and visceral 


===== Page 9 =====
428    Part IV / Perception
20 sec
10 s
10 cells
n = 213
Temp
Stroke
LTMR (stroke with)
LTMR (stroke with) + temp
Weak LTMR + temp
HTMR
Poymodal nociceptor
Thermoreceptor
LTMR (stroke against)
Temp
Pull
Pull
Stroke
Against
With
Against
With
n = 74
n = 10
n = 30
n = 4
n = 39
n = 24
n = 34
A1
B1
B2
B3
A2
A3
Hair pull
Hair pull
Heat (>40°C)
Heat/hair pull


