===== Page 1 =====
268    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 12–12  A high-resolution three-dimensional 
structural model of a neuronal nicotinic ACh receptor-
channel. High-resolution models of the pentameric family of 
ligand-gated channels are shown for the closed, open, and 
desensitized states of the receptor-channel. Two out of five of 
the M2 α-helixes are shown. The desensitized structure is from 
the human neuronal ACh receptor. The closed and open states 
are based on structures of neuronal glycine receptors, which 
are closely related in amino acid sequence to ACh receptor sub-
units. Key amino acid side chains are illustrated for the desen-
sitized ACh receptor with position numbering on the right and 
amino acid abbreviations on the left. According to convention, 
position 0 is near the intracellular surface of the phospholipid 
bilayer; other positions are labeled according to relative position 
in the primary amino acid sequence. A conserved leucine in 
the middle of the M2 segment (position 9) forms a gate that 
constricts the pore in the closed state. Ligand binding causes 
the subunits to tilt outward and twist, opening up the leucine 
gate. A further conformational change during desensitization 
causes the subunits to tilt inward near the bottom, constricting 
the pore near the intracellular side of the channel and thereby 
producing a nonconducting state. The negatively charged glu-
tamates at positions 20, –1, and –4 correspond to the external 
(1), middle (2), and internal (3) rings of charge in Figure 12–11C. 
The negatively charged glutamate at position –1 and the elec-
tronegative threonine at position 2 form the selectivity filter 
of the channel. (Reproduced, with permission, from Morales-
Perez et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature.)
2
–1
–4
20
9
Glu
Leu
Leu
Leu
Thr
Glu
Glu
Open 
Desensitized 
Closed 
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
M3 transmembrane segments. This motion exerts a 
force on the M2 segment that leads to its rotation and 
tilting, thereby opening up the hydrophobic leucine 
gate in the middle of the pore and allowing ion per-
meation. Although future studies will no doubt refine 
our understanding of the structural bases for nicotinic 
receptor-channel and function, these recent advances 
give us an unprecedented molecular understanding 
of one of the most fundamental processes in the nerv-
ous system: synaptic transmission and, specifically, the 
signaling of information from nerve to muscle.
Highlights
1.	 The terminals of motor neurons form synapses 
with muscle fibers at specialized regions in the 
muscle membrane called end-plates. When an 
action potential reaches the terminals of a presyn-
aptic motor neuron, it causes the release of ACh.
2.	 ACh diffuses across the narrow (100-nm) synaptic 
cleft in a matter of microseconds and binds to nic-
otinic ACh receptors in the end-plate membrane. 
The energy of binding is translated into a con-
formational change that opens a cation-selective 
channel in the protein, allowing Na+, K+, and Ca2+ 
to flow across the postsynaptic membrane. The 
net effect, due largely to the influx of Na+ ions, 
produces a depolarizing synaptic potential called 
the end-plate potential.
3.	 Because the ACh receptor-channels are concen-
trated at the end-plate, the opening of these chan-
nels produces a local depolarization. This local 
depolarization is large enough (75 mV) to exceed 
the threshold for action potential generation by a 
factor of three to four.
4.	 It is important that the safety factor of nerve-
muscle transmission be at a high level, as it deter-
mines our ability to move, breath, and escape from 
danger. Decreases in ACh receptor number or func-
tion as a result of autoimmune disease or genetic 
mutations can contribute to neurological disorders.
5.	 Patch-clamp recordings have revealed the step-
like increase and decrease in current in response 
to the opening and closing of single ACh receptor-
channels. A typical excitatory postsynaptic current 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     269
at the neuromuscular junction is generated by 
the opening of approximately 200,000 individual 
channels.
6.	 The biochemical structure of the muscle nicotinic 
ACh receptor has been determined. The receptor is 
a pentamer composed of two α-subunits and one 
β-γ-, and δ-subunit. The four genes encoding the 
subunits are closely related, and more distantly 
related to the genes encoding other pentameric 
ligand-gated channels for other transmitters.
7.	 Higher-resolution structures have provided a 
detailed view of the ACh ligand-binding pocket 
and the pore of the channel and further insight 
into how ligand binding leads to conformational 
changes associated with receptor-channel opening 
and desensitization gating reactions.
Postscript: The End-Plate Current Can Be 
Calculated From an Equivalent Circuit
The current through a population of ACh receptor-
channels can be described by Ohm’s law. However, 
to describe how the current generates the end-plate 
potential, the conductance of the resting channels in 
the surrounding membrane must also be considered. 
We must also take into consideration the capacitive 
properties of the membrane and the ionic batteries 
determined by the distribution of Na+ and K+ inside 
and outside the cell.
The dynamic relationships between these various 
components can be explained using the same rules we 
used in Chapter 9 to analyze the current in passive elec-
trical devices that consist only of resistors, capacitors, 
and batteries. We can represent the end-plate region 
with an equivalent circuit that has three parallel cur-
rent paths: (1) one for the synaptic current through the 
transmitter-gated channels, (2) one for the return cur-
rent through resting channels (the nonsynaptic mem-
brane), and (3) one for the capacitive current across the 
lipid bilayer (Figure 12–13). For simplicity, we ignore 
the voltage-gated channels in the surrounding nonsyn-
aptic membrane.
Because the end-plate current is carried by both 
Na+ and K+ flowing through the same ion channel, 
we combine the Na+ and K+ current pathways into 
a single conductance (gEPSP) representing the ACh  
receptor-channels. The conductance of this pathway 
is proportional to the number of channels opened, 
which in turn depends on the concentration of trans-
mitter in the synaptic cleft. In the absence of transmit-
ter, no channels are open and the conductance is zero. 
When a presynaptic action potential causes the release 
of ACh, the conductance of this pathway increases to 
approximately 5 × 10−6 S, which is about five times the 
conductance of the parallel branch representing the 
resting (leakage) channels (gl).
The end-plate conductance is in series with a bat-
tery (EEPSP) with a value given by the reversal potential 
for synaptic current (0 mV) (Figure 12–13). This value 
is the weighted algebraic sum of the Na+ and K+ equi-
librium potentials (see Box 12–1). The current during 
the excitatory postsynaptic potential (IEPSP) is given by
IEPSP = gEPSP × (Vm − EEPSP).
Using this equation and the equivalent circuit of 
Figure 12–13, we can now analyze the EPSP in terms of 
its components (Figure 12–14).
At the onset of the EPSP (the dynamic phase), 
an inward current (IEPSP) flows through the ACh 
Cm
gEPSP =
5.0 × 10–6 S
gl =
1.0 × 10–6 S
+
–
+
–
EEPSP
(0 mV)
El
(–90 mV)
Vm =
–15 mV
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
Channels in
synaptic membrane
Channels in
nonsynaptic
membrane
I
Switch
+
–
+
–
V
Figure 12–13  The equivalent circuit of the end-plate. The 
circuit has three parallel current pathways. One conductance 
pathway carries the end-plate current and consists of a battery 
(EEPSP) in series with the conductance of the ACh receptor-
channels (gEPSP). Another conductance pathway carries current 
through the nonsynaptic membrane and consists of a battery 
representing the resting potential (El) in series with the con-
ductance of the resting channels (gl). In parallel with both of 
these conductance pathways is the membrane capacitance 
(Cm). The voltmeter (V) measures the potential difference 
between the inside and the outside of the cell.
    When no ACh is present, the ACh receptor-channels are 
closed and carry no current. This state is depicted as an open 
electrical circuit in which the synaptic conductance is not con-
nected to the rest of the circuit. The binding of ACh opens the 
synaptic channels. This event is electrically equivalent to throw-
ing the switch that connects the gated conductance pathway 
(gEPSP) with the resting pathway (gl). In the steady state, an 
inward current through the ACh receptor-channels is balanced 
by an outward current through the resting channels. With the 
indicated values of conductances and batteries, the membrane 
will depolarize from −90 mV (its resting potential) to −15 mV 
(the peak of the end-plate potential).


===== Page 3 =====
270    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Figure 12–14  The time course of the end-plate potential  
is determined by both the ACh-gated synaptic conductance 
and the passive membrane properties of the  
muscle cell.
A. The time course of the end-plate potential and the compo-
nent currents through the ACh receptor-channels (IEPSP), the 
resting (or leakage) channels (Il), and the capacitor (Ic). There 
is a capacitive current only when the membrane potential is 
changing. In the steady state, such as at the peak of the end-
plate potential, the inward flow of positive charge through the 
ACh receptor-channels is exactly balanced by the outward ionic 
current across the resting channels, and there is no capacitive 
current.
B. Equivalent circuits for the current at times 1, 2, 3, and  
4 shown in part A. (The relative magnitude of a current is  
represented by the arrow length.)
Cm
IEPSP = 0
EEPSP
(0 mV)
Cytoplasmic side
Channels in
synaptic membrane
Channels in
nonsynaptic membrane
El
(–90 mV)
gl 
Extracellular side
gEPSP
Time 1
Vc =  Q
C
Il = 0
Ic = 0
IEPSP = Il + Ic
EEPSP
El
IEPSP
Time 2
Il
Ic
Ic
Ic = 0
IEPSP = –Il
 Il
EEPSP
El
Time 3
Steady state
(peak of synaptic action)
Il
IEPSP
IEPSP = 0
EEPSP
El
Time 4
Il
Dynamic
(decline of synaptic action)
1
2
3
4
2 ms
10 mV
IEPSP
 Ic
A
B
+
–
+
–
+ +
– –
+ +
– –
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+ +
– –
+
–
End-plate
potential
Current
Steady state
(resting potential)
Dynamic
(onset of synaptic action) 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 12 / Directly Gated Transmission: The Nerve-Muscle Synapse     271
receptor-channels because of the increased conduct-
ance to Na+ and K+ and the large inward driving 
force on Na+ at the resting potential of −90 mV  
(Figure 12–14B, time 2). Because charge flows in a 
closed loop, the inward synaptic current leaves the cell 
as outward current through two parallel pathways: a 
pathway for ionic current (Il) through the resting (or 
leakage) channels and a pathway for capacitive current 
(Ic) across the lipid bilayer. Thus,
IEPSP = −(Il +Ic).
During the earliest phase of the EPSP, the mem-
brane potential, Vm, is still close to its resting value, 
El. As a result, the outward driving force on current 
through the resting channels (Vm − El) is small. There-
fore, most of the outward current leaves the cell as 
capacitive current and the membrane depolarizes rap-
idly (Figure 12–14B, time 2). As the cell depolarizes, the 
outward driving force on current through the resting 
channels increases, while the inward driving force on 
synaptic current through the ACh receptor-channels 
decreases. Concomitantly, as the concentration of ACh 
in the synapse decreases, the ACh receptor-channels 
begin to close, and eventually the inward current 
through the gated channels is exactly balanced by out-
ward current through the resting channels (IEPSP = −Il). 
At this point, no charge flows into or out of the capaci-
tor (Ic = 0). Because the rate of change of membrane 
potential is directly proportional to Ic,
Ic /Cm = ΔVm/Δt,
the membrane potential will have reached a peak or 
new steady-state value, ΔVm/Δt = 0 (Figure 12–14B, 
time 3).
As the ACh receptor-channels close, IEPSP decreases 
further. Now IEPSP and Il are no longer in balance and 
the membrane potential starts to repolarize, because 
the outward current through leak channels (Il) becomes 
larger than the inward synaptic current. During most 
of the declining phase of the synaptic action, the ACh 
receptor-channels carry no current because they are 
all closed. Instead, current is conducted through the 
membrane only as outward current carried by rest-
ing channels, balanced by inward capacitive current 
(Figure 12–14B, time 4).
When the EPSP is at its peak or steady-state value, 
Ic = 0, and therefore the value of Vm can be easily calcu-
lated. The inward current through the ACh receptor-
channels (IEPSP) must be exactly balanced by outward 
current through the resting channels (Il):
	
IEPSP + Il = 0.	
(12–7)
The current through the ACh receptor-channels 
(IEPSP) and resting channels (Il) is given by Ohm’s law:
IEPSP = gEPSP × (Vm − EEPSP),
and
Il = gl × (Vm − El).
By substituting these two expressions into Equation 
12–7, we obtain
gEPSP × (Vm − EEPSP) + gl × (Vm − El) = 0.
Solving for Vm, we obtain
	
=
×
+
×
+
(
)
(
).
m
EPSP
EPSP
l
l
EPSP
l
V
g
E
g
E
g
g
 	
(12–8)
This equation is similar to that used to calculate 
the resting and action potentials (Chapter 9). Accord-
ing to Equation 12–8, the peak voltage of the EPSP is 
a weighted average of the electromotive forces of the 
two batteries for the ACh receptor-channels and the 
resting (leakage) channels. The weighting factors are 
given by the relative magnitude of the two conduct-
ances. Since gl is a constant, the greater the value of 
gEPSP (ie, the more ACh channels are open), the more 
closely Vm will approach the value of EEPSP.
We can now calculate the peak EPSP for the spe-
cific case shown in Figure 12–13, where gEPSP = 5 × 10−6 
S, gl = 1 × 10−6 S, EEPSP = 0 mV, and El = −90 mV. Substi-
tuting these values into Equation 12–8 yields
Vm
6
6
[(5
10
S)
(0 mV)]
[(1
10
S)
(
90 mV)
=
×
×
+
×
× −
−
−
]
(5
10
S)
(1
10
S)
6
6
×
+
×
−
−
.
or
Vm
6
6
(1
10
S)
( 90 mV)
(6
10
S)
15 mV.
=
×
× −
×
= −
−
−
The peak amplitude of the EPSP is then
ΔVEPSP = Vm − El = −15 mV − (−90 mV) = 75 mV.
 Gerald D. Fischbach 
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 


===== Page 5 =====
272    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Selected Reading
Fatt P, Katz B. 1951. An analysis of the end-plate poten-
tial recorded with an intracellular electrode. J Physiol 
115:320–370.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1977. Structure of the synapse. In: ER 
Kandel (ed). Handbook of Physiology: A Critical, Comprehen-
sive Presentation of Physiological Knowledge and Concepts, 
Sect. 1 The Nervous System, Vol. 1 Cellular Biology of Neurons, 
Part 1, pp. 261–294. Bethesda, MD: American Physiologi-
cal Society.
Hille B. 2001. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed., pp. 
169–199. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Imoto K, Busch C, Sakmann B, et al. 1988. Rings of negatively 
charged amino acids determine the acetylcholine receptor-
channel conductance. Nature 335:645–648.
Karlin A. 2002. Emerging structure of the nicotinic acetylcho-
line receptors. Nat Rev Neurosci 3:102–114.
Neher E, Sakmann B. 1976. Single-channel currents recorded 
from membrane of denervated frog muscle fibres. Nature 
260:799–802.
Nemecz Á, Prevost MS, Menny A, Corringer PJ. 2016. Emerg-
ing molecular mechanisms of signal transduction in pen-
tameric ligand-gated ion channels. Neuron 90:452–470.
References
Akabas MH, Kaufmann C, Archdeacon P, Karlin A. 1994. 
Identification of acetylcholine receptor-channel lining res-
idues in the entire M2 segment of the α-subunit. Neuron 
13:919–927.
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD. 
1989. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 2nd ed. New York: 
Garland.
Brejc K, van Dijk WJ, Klaassen RV, et al. 2001. Crystal struc-
ture of an ACh-binding protein reveals the ligand-binding 
domain of nicotinic receptors. Nature 411:269–276.
Charnet P, Labarca C, Leonard RJ, et al. 1990. An open chan-
nel blocker interacts with adjacent turns of α-helices in the 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Neuron 4:87–95.
Claudio T, Ballivet M, Patrick J, Heinemann S. 1983. Nucleo-
tide and deduced amino acid sequences of Torpedo californica 
acetylcholine receptor γ-subunit. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
80:1111–1115.
Colquhoun D. 1981. How fast do drugs work? Trends Phar-
macol Sci 2:212–217.
Dwyer TM, Adams DJ, Hille B. 1980. The permeability of the 
endplate channel to organic cations in frog muscle. J Gen 
Physiol 75:469–492.
Fertuck HC, Salpeter MM. 1974. Localization of acetylcholine 
receptor by 125 I-labeled α-bungarotoxin binding at mouse 
motor endplates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 71:1376–1378.
Heuser JE, Salpeter SR. 1979. Organization of acetylcholine 
receptors in quick-frozen, deep-etched, and rotary-replicated 
Torpedo postsynaptic membrane. J Cell Biol 82:150–173.
Ko C-P. 1984. Regeneration of the active zone at the frog neu-
romuscular junction. J Cell Biol 98:1685–1695.
Kuffler SW, Nicholls JG, Martin AR. 1984. From Neuron to 
Brain: A Cellular Approach to the Function of the Nervous 
System, 2nd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
McMahan UJ, Kuffler SW. 1971. Visual identification of syn-
aptic boutons on living ganglion cells and of varicosities 
in postganglionic axons in the heart of the frog. Proc R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 177:485–508.
Miles FA. 1969. Excitable Cells. London: Heinemann.
Miyazawa A, Fujiyoshi Y, Unwin N. 2003. Structure and gat-
ing mechanism of the acetylcholine receptor pore. Nature 
424:949–955.
Morales-Perez CL, Noviello CM, Hibbs RE. 2016. X-ray 
structure of the human α4β2 nicotinic receptor. Nature 
538:411–415.
Noda M, Furutani Y, Takahashi H, et al. 1983. Cloning and 
sequence analysis of calf cDNA and human genomic 
DNA encoding α-subunit precursor of muscle acetylcho-
line receptor. Nature 305:818–823.
Noda M, Takahashi H, Tanabe T, et al. 1983. Structural homol-
ogy of Torpedo californica acetylcholine receptor subunits. 
Nature 302:528–532.
Palay SL. 1958. The morphology of synapses in the central 
nervous system. Exp Cell Res 5:275–293. Suppl.
Revah F, Galzi J-L, Giraudat J, Haumont PY, Lederer F, 
Changeux J-P. 1990. The noncompetitive blocker [3H] 
chlorpromazine labels three amino acids of the acetylcho-
line receptor gamma subunit: implications for the alpha-
helical organization of regions MII and for the structure 
of the ion channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87:4675–4679.
Salpeter MM (ed). 1987. The Vertebrate Neuromuscular Junction, 
pp. 1–54. New York: Liss.
Takeuchi A. 1977. Junctional transmission. I. Postsynaptic 
mechanisms. In: ER Kandel (ed). Handbook of Physiology: 
A Critical, Comprehensive Presentation of Physiological 
Knowledge and Concepts, Sect. 1 The Nervous System, Vol. 1 
Cellular Biology of Neurons, Part 1, pp. 295–327. Bethesda, 
MD: American Physiological Society.
Verrall S, Hall ZW. 1992. The N-terminal domains of acetyl-
choline receptor subunits contain recognition signals for 
the initial steps of receptor assembly. Cell 68:23–31.
Villarroel A, Herlitze S, Koenen M, Sakmann B. 1991. Location 
of a threonine residue in the alpha-subunit M2 transmem-
brane segment that determines the ion flow through the 
acetylcholine receptor-channel. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
243:69–74.
Walsh J. 1773. Of the electric property of the torpedo. Phil 
Trans 63(1773):480.
Zeng H, Moise L, Grant MA, Hawrot E. 2001. The solu-
tion structure of the complex formed between alpha-
bungarotoxin and an 18-mer cognate peptide derived 
from the alpha 1 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor from Torpedo californica. J Biol Chem 276: 
22930–22940.


===== Page 6 =====
13
Synaptic Integration in the Central  
Nervous System
Subclasses of GABAergic Neurons Target  
Distinct Regions of Their Postsynaptic Target  
Neurons to Produce Inhibitory Actions With  
Different Functions
Dendrites Are Electrically Excitable Structures That Can 
Amplify Synaptic Input
Highlights
L
ike synaptic transmission  at the neuromus-
cular junction, most rapid signaling between 
neurons in the central nervous system involves 
ionotropic receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. 
Thus, many principles that apply to the synaptic con-
nection between the motor neuron and skeletal muscle 
fiber at the neuromuscular junction also apply in the 
central nervous system. Nevertheless, synaptic trans-
mission between central neurons is more complex for 
several reasons.
First, although most muscle fibers are typi-
cally innervated by only one motor neuron, a central 
nerve cell (such as pyramidal neurons in the neocor-
tex) receives connections from thousands of neurons. 
Second, muscle fibers receive only excitatory inputs, 
whereas central neurons receive both excitatory and 
inhibitory inputs. Third, all synaptic actions on mus-
cle fibers are mediated by one neurotransmitter, ace-
tylcholine (ACh), which activates only one type of 
receptor (the ionotropic nicotinic ACh receptor). A 
single central neuron, however, can respond to many 
different types of inputs, each mediated by a distinct 
transmitter that activates a specific type of receptor. 
Central Neurons Receive Excitatory and Inhibitory Inputs
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synapses Have Distinctive 
Ultrastructures and Target Different Neuronal Regions
Excitatory Synaptic Transmission Is Mediated by Ionotropic 
Glutamate Receptor-Channels Permeable to Cations
The Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors Are Encoded by a 
Large Gene Family
Glutamate Receptors Are Constructed From a Set of 
Structural Modules
NMDA and AMPA Receptors Are Organized by a 
Network of Proteins at the Postsynaptic Density
NMDA Receptors Have Unique Biophysical and 
Pharmacological Properties
The Properties of the NMDA Receptor Underlie  
Long-Term Synaptic Plasticity
NMDA Receptors Contribute to Neuropsychiatric Disease
Fast Inhibitory Synaptic Actions Are Mediated by Ionotropic 
GABA and Glycine Receptor-Channels Permeable to 
Chloride
Ionotropic Glutamate, GABA, and Glycine Receptors Are 
Transmembrane Proteins Encoded by Two Distinct Gene 
Families
Chloride Currents Through GABAA and Glycine 
Receptor-Channels Normally Inhibit the Postsynaptic 
Cell
Some Synaptic Actions in the Central Nervous System 
Depend on Other Types of Ionotropic Receptors
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synaptic Actions Are Integrated by 
Neurons Into a Single Output
Synaptic Inputs Are Integrated at the Axon Initial 
Segment


===== Page 7 =====
274    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
These receptors include ionotropic receptors, where 
binding of transmitter directly opens an ion channel, 
and metabotropic receptors, where transmitter bind-
ing indirectly regulates a channel by activating second 
messengers. As a result, unlike muscle fibers, central 
neurons must integrate diverse inputs into a single 
coordinated action.
Finally, the nerve–muscle synapse is a model of 
efficiency—every action potential in the motor neu-
ron produces an action potential in the muscle fiber. 
In comparison, connections made by a presynaptic 
neuron onto a central neuron are only modestly 
effective—in many cases at least 50 to 100 excita-
tory neurons must fire together to produce a synaptic 
potential large enough to trigger an action potential 
in postsynaptic neurons.
The first insights into synaptic transmission in 
the central nervous system came from experiments 
by John Eccles and his colleagues in the 1950s on the 
synaptic inputs onto spinal motor neurons that control 
the stretch reflex, the simple behavior we considered 
in Chapter 3. The spinal motor neurons have been par-
ticularly useful for examining central synaptic mecha-
nisms because they have large, accessible cell bodies 
and, most important, they receive both excitatory and 
inhibitory connections and therefore allow us to study 
the integrative action of the nervous system at the cel-
lular level.
Central Neurons Receive Excitatory and 
Inhibitory Inputs
To analyze the synapses that mediate the stretch reflex, 
Eccles activated a large population of axons of the sen-
sory cells that innervate the stretch receptor organs in 
the quadriceps (extensor) muscle (Figure 13–1A,B). 
Nowadays the same experiments can be done by stim-
ulating a single sensory neuron.
Passing sufficient current through a microelec-
trode into the cell body of a stretch-receptor sensory 
neuron that innervates the extensor muscle gener-
ates an action potential. This in turn produces a 
small excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in 
the motor neuron that innervates precisely the same 
muscle (in this case the quadriceps) monitored by 
the sensory neuron (Figure 13–1B, upper panel). 
The EPSP produced by one sensory cell, the unitary 
EPSP, depolarizes the extensor motor neuron by less 
than 1 mV, often only 0.2 to 0.4 mV, far below the 
threshold for generating an action potential. Typi-
cally, a depolarization of 10 mV or more is required 
to reach threshold.
The generation of an action potential in a motor 
neuron thus requires the near-synchronous firing of a 
number of sensory neurons. This can be observed in an 
experiment in which a population of sensory neurons is 
stimulated by passing current through an extracellular 
electrode. As the strength of the extracellular stimulus 
is increased, more sensory afferent fibers are excited, 
and the depolarization produced by the EPSP becomes 
larger. The depolarization eventually becomes large 
enough to bring the membrane potential of the motor 
neuron axon initial segment (the region with the low-
est threshold) to the threshold for an action potential.
In addition to the EPSP produced in the extensor 
motor neuron, stimulation of extensor stretch-receptor 
neurons also produces a small inhibitory postsynaptic 
potential (IPSP) in the motor neuron that innervates 
the flexor muscle, which is antagonistic to the extensor 
muscle (Figure 13–1B, lower panel). This hyperpolar-
izing action is generated by an inhibitory interneuron, 
which receives excitatory input from the sensory neu-
rons of the extensor muscle and in turn makes syn-
apses with the motor neurons that innervate the flexor 
muscle. In the laboratory, a single interneuron can be 
stimulated intracellularly to directly elicit a small uni-
tary IPSP in the motor neuron. Extracellular activation 
of an entire population of interneurons elicits a larger 
IPSP. If strong enough, IPSPs can counteract the EPSP 
and prevent the membrane potential from reaching 
threshold.
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synapses Have 
Distinctive Ultrastructures and Target  
Different Neuronal Regions
As we learned in Chapter 11, the effect of a synaptic 
potential—whether it is excitatory or inhibitory—is 
determined not by the type of transmitter released 
from the presynaptic neuron but by the type of ion 
channels in the postsynaptic cell activated by the 
transmitter. Although some transmitters can pro-
duce both EPSPs and IPSPs, by acting on distinct 
classes of ionotropic receptors at different synapses, 
most transmitters produce a single predominant 
type of synaptic response; that is, a transmitter is 
usually inhibitory or excitatory. For example, in 
the vertebrate central nervous system, neurons that 
release glutamate typically act on receptors that pro-
duce excitation; neurons that release γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) or glycine act on receptors that pro-
duce inhibition.
The synaptic terminals of excitatory and inhibitory 
neurons can be distinguished by their ultrastructure. 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 13 / Synaptic Integration in the Central Nervous System     275
Figure 13–1  The combination of excitatory and inhibitory 
synaptic connections mediating the stretch reflex of the 
quadriceps muscle is typical of circuits in the central nerv-
ous system.
A. A sensory neuron activated by a stretch receptor (muscle 
spindle) at the extensor (quadriceps) muscle makes an excita-
tory connection with an extensor motor neuron in the spinal 
cord that innervates this same muscle group. It also makes 
an excitatory connection with an interneuron, which in turn 
makes an inhibitory connection with a flexor motor neuron that 
innervates the antagonist (biceps femoris) muscle group. Con-
versely, an afferent fiber from the biceps (not shown) excites an 
interneuron that makes an inhibitory synapse on the extensor 
motor neuron.
B. This idealized experimental setup shows the approaches 
to studying the inhibition and excitation of motor neurons in 
the pathway illustrated in part A. Upper panel: Two alterna-
tives for eliciting excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in 
the extensor motor neuron. A single presynaptic axon can be 
stimulated by inserting a current-passing electrode into the 
sensory neuron cell body. An action potential in the sensory 
neuron stimulated in this way triggers a small EPSP in the 
extensor motor neuron (black trace). Alternatively, the whole 
afferent nerve from the quadriceps can be stimulated electri-
cally with an extracellular electrode. The excitation of many 
afferent neurons through the extracellular electrode generates 
a synaptic potential (dashed trace) large enough to initiate an 
action potential (red trace). Lower panel: The setup for eliciting 
and measuring inhibitory potentials in the flexor motor neuron. 
Intracellular stimulation of a single inhibitory interneuron receiv-
ing input from the quadriceps pathway produces a small inhibi-
tory (hyperpolarizing) postsynaptic potential (IPSP) in the flexor 
motor neuron (black trace). Extracellular stimulation recruits 
numerous inhibitory neurons and generates a larger IPSP (red 
trace). (Action potentials in the sensory neuron and interneuron 
appear smaller because they were recorded at lower amplifica-
tion than those in the motor neuron.)
Quadriceps
(extensor)
Biceps
(ﬂexor)
Inhibitory
interneuron
Spinal
cord
Extensor 
motor
neuron
Current passing
Recording
Recording
Extracellular
stimulating
electrodes
Ia sensory ﬁbers 
from muscle 
spindles of 
quadriceps
Sensory neuron
Extensor
motor neuron
Sensory
neuron
Muscle
spindle
A  Stretch reﬂex circuit for knee jerk
B  Experimental setup for recording from cells in the circuit
IPSP
Motor neuron
Interneuron
Motor neuron
Sensory neuron
EPSP
Current passing
Recording
EPSP
EPSP
IPSP
Ia sensory ﬁbers
from muscle
spindles of
quadriceps
Inhibitory
interneurons
Flexor
motor
neuron
Recording
Flexor
motor
neuron


===== Page 9 =====
276    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Two morphological types of synapses are common 
in the brain: Gray types I and II (named after E. G. 
Gray, who described them using electron microscopy). 
Most type I synapses are glutamatergic and excitatory, 
whereas most type II synapses are GABAergic and 
inhibitory. Type I synapses have round synaptic vesi-
cles, an electron-dense region (the active zone) on the 
presynaptic membrane, and an even larger electron-
dense region in the postsynaptic membrane opposed 
to the active zone (known as the postsynaptic density), 
which gives type I synapses an asymmetric appear-
ance. Type II synapses have oval or flattened synaptic 
vesicles and less obvious presynaptic membrane spe-
cializations and postsynaptic densities, resulting in a 
more symmetric appearance (Figure 13–2). (Although 
type I synapses are mostly excitatory and type II inhib-
itory, the two morphological types have proved to be 
only a first approximation to transmitter biochemistry. 
Immunocytochemistry affords much more reliable dis-
tinctions between transmitter types, as discussed in 
Chapter 16).
Although dendrites are normally postsynap-
tic and axon terminals presynaptic, all four regions 
of the nerve cell—axon, presynaptic terminals, cell 
body, and dendrites—can be presynaptic or post-
synaptic sites of chemical synapses. The most com-
mon types of contact, illustrated in Figure 13–2, are 
axodendritic, axosomatic, and axo-axonic (by con-
vention, the presynaptic element is identified first). 
Excitatory synapses are typically axodendritic and 
occur mostly on dendritic spines. Inhibitory syn-
apses are normally formed on dendritic shafts, the 
cell body, and the axon initial segment. Dendroden-
dritic and somasomatic synapses are also found, but 
they are rare.
As a general rule, the proximity of a synapse 
to the axon initial segment is thought to determine 
its effectiveness. A given postsynaptic current gen-
erated at a site near the cell body will  produce a 
greater change in membrane potential at the trigger 
zone of the axon initial segment, and therefore have 
a greater influence on action potential output than an 
equal current generated at more remote sites in the 
dendrites. This is because some of the charge enter-
ing the postsynaptic membrane at a remote site will 
leak out of the dendritic membrane as the synaptic 
potential propagates to the cell body (Chapter 9). 
Some neurons compensate for this effect by placing 
Figure 13–2  The two most com-
mon morphological types of 
synapses in the central nervous 
system are Gray type I and  
type II.  Type I is usually excitatory, 
whereas type II is usually inhibi-
tory. Differences include the shape 
of vesicles, the prominence of pre-
synaptic densities, total area of the 
active zone, width of the synaptic 
cleft, and presence of a dense 
basement membrane. Type I syn-
apses typically contact specialized 
dendritic projections, called spines, 
and less commonly contact the 
shafts of dendrites. Type II  
synapses contact the cell body 
(axosomatic), dendritic shaft (axo-
dendritic), axon initial segment 
(axo-axonic), and presynaptic 
terminals of another neuron (not 
shown).
Spine
Spine
synapse
Shaft
synapse
Axodendritic
synapse
Type I
Type II
Type II
Axosomatic
synapse
Type II
Axo-axonic
synapse
Type I
Dense
basement
membrane
Round 
synaptic
vesicles
Wide
synaptic
cleft
Postsynaptic
density
Large active
zone
Type II
Flattened 
synaptic
vesicles
Modest
basement
membrane
Small active
zone
Prominent
presynaptic
dense 
projections
Less obvious
dense 
projections
Narrow
synaptic
cleft
Postsynaptic
density


