===== Page 1 =====
820    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–2  Parietal and frontal motor areas that support 
voluntary control. For illustration purposes, the intraparietal 
sulcus is opened in the bottom panel. The parietal areas are des-
ignated in Constantin von Economo’s terminology by the letter P 
(parietal), followed by letters instead of numbers to indicate the 
cytoarchitectonically different areas. Areas PF and PFG roughly 
correspond to Brodmann’s area 7b, and areas PG and OPT to 
Brodmann’s area 7a. Areas inside the intraparietal sulcus include 
the anterior, lateral, medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP, 
LIP, MIP, VIP, respectively), as well as the PE intraparietal area 
(PEip) and visual area 6A (V6A). Arrows show the patterns of 
the principal reciprocal connections between functionally related 
parietal and frontal motor areas. (Abbreviations: CMAr, rostral 
cingulate motor area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; 
CMd, dorsal cingulate motor area; F, frontal; M1, primary motor 
cortex; OPT, occipito-parieto-temporal; P, parietal; PE, PF, and 
PFG are parietal areas according to the nomenclature of von 
Economo; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor 
cortex; Pre-PMd, predorsal premotor cortex; S-I, primary soma-
tosensory cortex; SMA, supplemental motor area.)
A  Human
B  Macaque monkey
Supplementary
motor area 
Primary
motor
cortex
Cingulate
motor areas
CMAr
CMAd
CMAv
Cingulate
motor
areas
Premotor
cortex
Leg
Arm
Leg
Face
PMd
(F2)
PMv
(F5)
(F4)
V6A
AIP
VIP
PEip
MIP
LIP
Areas on the cortical convexity
Areas inside the parietal sulcus
PE
PEc
PF
Face
PFG
PG
OPT
PMd
(F2)
Leg
Leg
Arm
Pre-PMd
(F7)
Pre-
SMA
SMA
SMA
M1
(F1)
M1
S-I
S-I
PMv
(F5)
(F4)
cortical motor areas were thought to influence vol-
untary movements via their projections to M1, which 
then formulated the descending motor command that 
was transmitted to the spinal cord. This is not correct.
Several cortical motor regions outside of M1 
project to subcortical areas of the brain as well as to 
the spinal cord in parallel with the descending pro-
jections from M1. The key descending pathway for 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    821
voluntary control is the pyramidal tract, which originates 
in cortical layer V in a number of precentral and parietal 
areas. The pyramidal tract contains axons that termi-
nate in brain stem motor structures (the corticobulbar 
tract) and axons that project down to the spinal cord 
(corticospinal tract). Precentral areas include not only 
M1 but also SMA, PMd, PMv, and the cingulate motor 
areas (Figure 34–3). Descending fibers from S-I and 
parietal areas, including PE and PFG, also travel in the 
pyramidal tract. The pre-SMA and pre-PMd do not 
send axons directly to the spinal cord; instead, their 
descending outputs reach the spinal cord indirectly 
through projections to other subcortical structures.
Most corticospinal tract axons originating in one 
hemisphere cross to the other side of the midline (decus-
sate) at the pyramid in the caudal medulla, and from 
there project to the spinal cord itself, forming the lateral 
corticospinal tract. A small portion does not decussate 
and forms the ventral corticospinal tract. Many corti-
cospinal axons in primates, and virtually all corticospi-
nal axons in other mammals, terminate only on spinal 
interneurons and exert their influence on voluntary 
movement indirectly through spinal interneuronal and 
reflex pathways. In monkeys, all corticospinal axons 
from premotor cortical areas and many from M1 termi-
nate on interneurons in the spinal intermediate zone, 
whereas postcentral and parietal areas target interneu-
rons in the dorsal horn. The terminal endings of a size-
able portion of the corticospinal axons arising from M1 
in primates, but not other mammals, arborize at their 
targets and synapse directly on spinal alpha motor neu-
rons that in turn innervate muscles; these M1 neurons 
with direct monosynaptic projections to spinal motor 
neurons are called corticomotoneuronal cells.
Any voluntary arm movement can have destabi-
lizing effects on the rest of the body due to mechanical 
interactions between body segments. Thus, control of 
voluntary arm movements requires coordination with 
neural circuits responsible for the control of posture 
and balance. This is mediated by descending projec-
tions from cortical motor areas to the reticular forma-
tion, which in turn project to the spinal cord via the 
reticulospinal tract (Chapters 33 and 36).
Imposing a Delay Period Before the Onset of 
Movement Isolates the Neural Activity Associated 
With Planning From That Associated With 
Executing the Action
Voluntary movement requires the intervention of a 
number of neural processes between the arrival of sali-
ent sensory inputs and the initiation of an appropriate 
motor response. With the development in the 1960s of 
single-cell recording in the cerebral cortex of awake 
animals, tasks that experimentally manipulate differ-
ent attributes of movements have been used to study 
every cortical area involved in the control of arm and 
hand movements to try to identify neural correlates of 
the presumed control processes in each area.
In “reaction-time” tasks, animals make a prespecified 
response when they detect a particular stimulus, such 
as reaching to a target when it appears (Figure 34–4A). 
The stimulus informs the animal both what movement 
to make and when to make it. However, reaction times 
in such tasks are typically short, often less than 300 ms, 
and most or all putative planning stages leading up to 
the initiation of the movement are accomplished within 
that brief time. This makes it very difficult to discern 
what kinds of information are represented in the activity 
of the neurons at each given moment and thus to what 
processes they are contributing (Figure 34–4B).
However, a critical feature of voluntary behavior is 
that movement initiation is not obligatory the instant 
an intention to act is formed. This volitional control 
over the timing of movement has been exploited by so-
called “instructed-delay” motor tasks (Figure 34–4A), 
in which an instructional cue informs the animal about 
specific aspects of an impending movement such as 
the location of a target, but the animal must withhold 
the response until a delayed stimulus signals when to 
make the movement. This protocol allows researchers 
to dissociate in time the neural processes associated 
with the early stages of planning the intended act from 
those that are directly coupled in real time to the initia-
tion and control of the movement.
As expected, neurons in all the movement-related 
cortical areas discharge prior to and during move-
ment execution in reaction-time tasks (Figure 34–4B), 
and their activity correlates systematically with differ-
ent properties of movements, such as their direction, 
velocity, spatial trajectory, and causal forces and mus-
cle activity. Critically, however, many neurons in the 
same areas also signal information about an intended 
motor act during an instructed-delay period long 
before its initiation (Figure 34–4B). Thus, even though 
planning and execution are distinct serial stages in 
voluntary motor control, they are not implemented by 
distinct neural populations in different cortical areas. 
Moreover, even a well-trained monkey will occasion-
ally make the wrong movement in response to an 
instructional cue. In those trials, the activity during the 
delay period generally predicts the erroneous motor 
response that the monkey will eventually make. This 
is compelling evidence that the activity is a neural cor-
relate of the monkey’s motor intentions, not a passive 
sensory response to the instructional cues.


===== Page 3 =====
822    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–3  Cortical origins of the corticospinal 
tract. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dum and Strick 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.)
A. Corticospinal neurons that modulate muscle activity in the 
contralateral arm and hand originate in the parts of the primary 
motor cortex (M1) motor map and many subdivisions of the 
premotor cortex (PMd, PMv, SMA) that are related to arm and 
hand movements (indicated by the darker zones). The axons 
from these areas project into the spinal cord cervical enlarge-
ment (see part B). Corticospinal fibers projecting to the leg, 
trunk, and other somatotopic parts of the brain stem and spinal 
motor system originate in the other parts of the motor and 
premotor cortex, indicated by the lighter zones. (Abbreviations: 
CMAd, dorsal cingulate motor area; CMAr, rostral cingulate motor 
area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; M1, primary motor 
cortex; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor 
cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area.)
B. Transverse sections of the spinal cord at the level of the cer-
vical enlargement in monkeys after injection of the anterograde 
tracer horseradish peroxidase into different arm-related cortical 
motor regions to label the distribution of corticospinal axons 
arising from each cortical region. The corticospinal axons from 
the primary motor cortex (left), supplementary motor area (middle), 
and cingulate motor areas (right) all terminate on interneuronal 
networks in the intermediate laminae (V–VIII) of the spinal cord. 
Only the primary motor cortex contains corticospinal neurons 
(corticomotoneuronal cells) whose axons terminate directly 
on spinal motor neurons in the most ventral and lateral part of 
the spinal ventral horn (Rexed’s lamina IX). Rexed’s laminae I 
to IX of the dorsal and ventral horns are shown in faint outline 
in each section. The dense cluster of labeled axons adjacent 
to the dorsal horn (upper left) in each section are corticospinal 
axons descending in the dorsolateral funiculus, before entering 
the spinal intermediate and ventral laminae.
A
B
SMA
SMA
CMAd
CMAv
CMAr
M1
PMd
PMv
Cingulate
motor areas
Primary motor cortex
Supplementary motor area
Cingulate motor areas


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    823
Figure 34–4  Neural processes related to movement planning 
and movement execution can be dissociated in time. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Crammond and Kalaska 2000.)
A. In a reaction-time task, a sensory cue instructs the subject both 
where to move (target cue) and when to move (go cue). All neural 
operations required to plan and initiate the execution of the move-
ment are performed in the brief time between the appearance of 
the cue and the onset of movement. In an instructed-delay task, 
an initial cue tells the subject where to move, and only later is the 
go cue given. The knowledge provided by the first cue permits the 
subject to plan the upcoming movement. Any changes in activity 
that occur after the first cue but before the second are presumed 
to be neural correlates of the planning stage.
B. Movement planning and execution are not completely seg-
regated at the level of single neurons or neural populations in 
a given cortical area. Raster plots and cumulative histograms 
show the responses of three premotor cortex neurons to 
movements in each cell’s preferred direction during reaction-
time trials and instructed-delay trials. In the raster plots, each 
row represents activity in a single trial. The thin tics in each 
raster row represent action potentials, and the two thicker 
tics show the onset and end of movement. In reaction-time 
trials, the monkey does not know in which direction to move 
until the target appears. In contrast, in instructed-delay trials, 
an initial cue informs the monkey where the target lies well in 
advance of the appearance of a second signal to initiate the 
movement. During the delay period, activity in many premo-
tor cells shows directionally tuned changes that signal the 
direction of the impending delayed movement. The activity in 
cell 1 appears to be strictly related to the planning phase of 
the task, for there is no execution-related activity after the go 
signal in the instructed-delay task. The other two cells show 
different degrees of activity related to both planning and 
execution.
Instructed-delay task
Velocity
Cell
  Go  
cue
Target
cue
A
B
Reaction-time task
Target and go
cue 
Target
cue
Go 
cue
Reaction-time trials
Instructed-delay trials
 Target and 
go cue 
Cell 1
Cell 2
Cell 3
500 ms
Parietal Cortex Provides Information About 
the World and the Body for State Estimation to 
Plan and Execute Motor Actions
Sensory information is essential for selecting appropri-
ate and effective actions. Before drinking from a cup, the 
brain uses visual input to identify which object is the cup, 
where it is located relative to the body, and its physical 
properties such as size, shape, and handle orientation. 
In addition, information about the current posture and 
motion of the arm and hand is provided by integrating 
proprioceptive signals from the limb with efference cop-
ies of motor commands (Chapter 30). Finally, cutane-
ous signals are critical when interacting manually with 
objects, such as grasping and lifting the cup.
Several lines of evidence implicate the parietal cor-
tex as a key brain region in sensory processing for motor 
action. The parietal lobe, especially PE, PEip, and MIP, 


===== Page 5 =====
824    Part V / Movement
receives strong somatic sensory inputs about body pos-
ture and movement from S-I. Several parietal regions 
along and within the IPS are major components of the 
dorsal visual pathway, which processes visuospatial 
information about objects that guides arm and hand 
movements while reaching to, grasping, and manip-
ulating them. The parietal lobe is also reciprocally 
interconnected with precentral cortical motor areas to 
provide the precentral cortex with signals for the sen-
sory guidance of movement and to receive efference 
copies of motor commands from those same precen-
tral areas. Finally, human subjects with lesions of the 
posterior parietal cortex often demonstrate specific 
impairments in using sensory information to guide 
motor action (Box 34–1).
The Parietal Cortex Links Sensory Information to 
Motor Actions
We experience the space that surrounds us as a single 
unified environment within which objects have spe-
cific locations relative to each other and to ourselves. 
Classical neurology suggested that the parietal lobe 
constructed a unified multimodal neural representa-
tion of the world by integration of inputs from differ-
ent sensory modalities. This single map of space was 
assumed to provide all the information necessary both 
for spatial perception and for the sensory guidance of 
movement, and so was shared by the different motor 
circuits that controlled different parts of the body, such 
as the eyes, arm, and hand.
However, the idea that the parietal cortex contains 
a single topographically organized representation of 
space is incorrect. Instead, the posterior parietal cortex 
contains several distinct functional areas that work in 
parallel and receive different combinations of sensory 
and motor inputs related to the guidance of move-
ment of different effectors, such as the eyes, arm, and 
hand. Neurons in these areas are often multimodal, 
with both visual and somatic sensory receptive fields, 
and also discharge preferentially prior to and during 
movements of a specific effector. Each functional area 
is connected to frontal motor regions involved in con-
trol of the same effectors. Finally, each region is not 
topographically organized in the familiar sense of a 
faithful point-to-point representation of surrounding 
space, but rather comprises a complex mixture of neu-
rons with different sensory inputs that may contrib-
ute to the multisensory integration required to guide 
motor actions with the environment.
Body Position and Motion Are Represented in 
Several Areas of Posterior Parietal Cortex
The S-I and adjacent superior parietal cortex regions 
PE, MIP, and PEip are a major source of propriocep-
tive and tactile sensory information about the position 
and motion of body parts. Neurons in S-I areas 1 and 2 
Naturally occurring or experimentally induced lesions 
have long been used to infer the roles of different neural 
structures. However, the effects of lesions must always 
be interpreted with caution. It is often incorrect to con-
clude that the function perturbed by an insult to a part 
of the motor system resides uniquely in the damaged 
structure or that the injured neurons explicitly perform 
that function. Furthermore, the adverse effects of lesions 
can be masked or altered by compensatory mechanisms 
in remaining, intact structures. Nevertheless, lesion 
experiments have been fundamental in differentiating 
the functional roles of brain regions.
Behavioral studies by Goodale, Milner, Rossetti, and 
others on patients with parietal cortical damage have led 
to the conclusion that a primary function of the parietal 
lobe is to extract sensory information about the external 
world and one’s own body for the planning and guidance 
of movements. Such studies have shown that patients with 
lesions of certain parts of the parietal lobe suffer specific 
deficits in the ability to direct their arm and hand accu-
rately to the spatial location of objects and to shape the ori-
entation and grip aperture of the hand prior to grasping it.
They have also shown a particularly severe deficit 
in the ability to make rapid adjustments to their ongo-
ing reach and grasping actions in response to unexpected 
changes in the location or orientation of the target object. 
This visual guidance of action is provided by visual sig-
nals that are routed through the dorsal visual stream and 
may operate in parallel with and independently of per-
ceptual processes evoked by the visual inputs that are 
routed simultaneously through the ventral visual stream 
in the temporal lobe. For instance, whereas our visual 
perception of the size and orientation of objects can be 
deceived by certain perceptual illusions, the motor sys-
tem often behaves as if it is not fooled and makes accurate 
movements.
Box 34–1  Lesion Studies of Posterior Parietal Cortex Lead to Deficits in the Use of Sensory 
Information to Guide Action


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    825
typically respond to tactile input from a limited part of 
the contralateral body or to movements of one or a few 
adjacent joints in specific directions.
In contrast, many PE and MIP neurons discharge 
during passive and active movements of multiple 
joints. Some cells also respond during combined 
movements of multiple body parts, including bilateral 
movements of both arms. Many PE and MIP neurons 
also have large tactile receptive fields whose responses 
are modulated by context during limb movement or 
posture. For instance, a neuron with a tactile receptive 
field that covers the entire glabrous (palmar) surface of 
the hand may only respond to physical contact with an 
object when the hand is close to the body and not when 
it touches the object with the arm fully extended.
These findings indicate that while area 1 and 2 neu-
rons encode the positions and movements of specific 
body parts, superior parietal neurons integrate infor-
mation on the positions of individual joints as well as 
the positions of limb segments with respect to the body. 
This integration creates a neural “body schema” that 
provides information on where the arm is located with 
respect to the body and how different arm segments 
are positioned and moving with respect to one another. 
This body schema is critical for selecting how to attain 
behavioral goals and for ongoing control of movement.
For instance, a key requirement for efficient reach-
ing is knowledge of where the arm is before and dur-
ing the reach. Monkeys with experimental lesions in 
Brodmann’s area 2 and the adjacent superior parietal 
lobule (area 5 or PE) show deficits in reaching to and 
manipulating objects under proprioceptive and tactile 
guidance without vision. Human patients with simi-
lar lesions show the same deficit, without the spatial 
neglect that is a common consequence of more lateral 
lesions in the inferior parietal lobe.
Spatial Goals Are Represented in Several Areas of 
Posterior Parietal Cortex
Functional areas within the IPS are strongly implicated 
in the processing of spatial, especially visual, informa-
tion relevant to action. Each of these areas has unique 
ways of representing objects and spatial goals rela-
tive to the body and contributes to controlling motor 
actions of different parts of the body. For instance, 
many neurons in the lateral intraparietal area (LIP) 
receive visual input from extrastriate cortical areas. 
Their receptive fields are fixed in retinal coordinates 
and shift to new spatial locations whenever the mon-
key changes its direction of gaze. Neural responses 
also often increase when the animal attends to a stim-
ulus within the receptive field even without looking 
at it, and they often discharge prior to a saccade that 
is directed toward a visual stimulus in their receptive 
field (Figure 34–5A; and see Chapter 35).
Several parietal regions are preferentially impli-
cated in the control of arm and hand movements. 
For instance, the most medial regions of the superior 
parietal cortex, areas V6A and PEc, receive input from 
extrastriate visual areas V2 and V3. Many V6A and PEc 
neurons have visual receptive fields in retinal coordi-
nates, but their activity is also frequently modulated 
by the direction of gaze, the current arm posture, and 
the direction of reaching movements.
The ventral intraparietal area (VIP) in the fundus 
of the IPS receives inputs from two components of the 
dorsal visual stream, the medial temporal cortex and 
medial superior temporal cortex, which are involved in 
the analysis of optic flow and visual motion. Many VIP 
neurons respond to visual stimuli and somatosensory 
stimuli with receptive fields on the face or head and, 
in some cases, on the arm or trunk. Neural activity is 
in head-centered coordinates, as somatosensory and 
visual information remains in register even if the eyes 
move to fixate different spatial locations (Figure 34–5B). 
Some VIP neurons respond to both visual and tactile 
stimuli moving in the same direction, whereas oth-
ers are strongly activated by visual stimuli that move 
toward their tactile receptive field but only if the path 
of motion will eventually intersect the tactile receptive 
field. These neurons may allow the monkeys to link 
the location and motion of objects in their immediate 
peripersonal space with different parts of their body.
Another area of parietal cortex related to reaching 
is the parietal reach region (PRR). The PRR likely cor-
responds to the medial intraparietal cortex (MIP) and 
adjacent arm-control parts of the superior and inferior 
parietal cortex. The activity of many PRR neurons var-
ies with the location of reach targets relative to the hand. 
However, this signal is not fixed to the current location 
of the hand or target but rather on the current direction 
of gaze (Figure 34–5C). Each time the monkey looks in 
a different direction, the reach-related activity of PRR 
neurons changes, even if the location of the target and 
hand and the required reach trajectory do not change. 
In contrast, the reach-related activity of many neurons 
in areas PE and PEip is less related to gaze and more 
strongly related to the current hand position and arm 
posture. PE and PEip neurons thus provide a more sta-
ble signal about the location of the reach target relative 
to the current position of the hand compared to PRR.
Finally, neurons in the anterior intraparietal area 
(AIP) are primarily implicated in object grasping and 
manipulation by movements of the hand. Many AIP 
neurons are preferentially active while reaching for 


===== Page 7 =====
826    Part V / Movement
B  Ventral intraparietal area (VIP)
A  Lateral intraparietal area (LIP)
D  Anterior intraparietal area (AIP)
C  Medial intraparietal area (MIP)
Receptive ﬁeld 
characteristics
Retina-centered,
attention sensitive
Retina-centered 
direction of reach;
preparation to 
reach
Retina-centered,
object-speciﬁc 
viewing, grasping
Head-centered
AIP
VIP
MIP
LIP
Other 
object
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Attend
Attend
Attend
Attend
See
Grasp
Grasp
Grasp
See
See
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
R
S
G
G
S
S
G


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    827
Figure 34–5  (Opposite) Neurons in the parietal cortex of 
the monkey are selective for the location of objects in the 
visual field relative to particular parts of the body. Each his-
togram represents the firing rate of a representative neuron as 
a function of time following presentation of a stimulus. In each 
diagram, the line emanating from the eyes indicates where the 
monkey is looking.
A. Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area have retina-centered 
receptive fields. The strength of the visual response depends 
on whether the monkey is paying attention to the stimulus (S). 
The neuron fires when a light is flashed inside its receptive field 
(dotted circle) (1). The response is more robust if the monkey 
is instructed to attend to the location of the stimulus (2). The 
neuron does not fire if the stimulus is presented outside the 
receptive field, regardless of where attention is directed (3, 4).
B. In the ventral intraparietal area, some neurons have head-
centered receptive fields. This is determined by keeping the 
head in a fixed position while the monkey is instructed to shift 
its gaze to various locations. This neuron fires when a light 
appears to the right of the midline of the head (1, 2). It does 
not fire when the light appears at another location relative to 
the head, such as the midline or to the left. (3, 4). The critical 
contrast is between situations 1 and 4. The retinal location of 
the light is the same in both (slightly to the right of the fixation 
point), yet the neuron fires in 1, when the stimulus is to the 
right of the head, but not in 4, when the stimulus is to the left 
of the head.
C. In the medial intraparietal area, neurons are selective for 
the retina-centered direction of the reach (R) and fire when 
the monkey is preparing to reach for a visual target. This neu-
ron fires when the monkey reaches for a target to the right of 
where he is looking (2, 3). It does not fire when he reaches for 
a target at which he is looking (1) or when he moves only his 
eyes to the target at the right (4). The physical direction of the 
reach is not a factor in the neuron’s firing: It is the same in 1 
and 3, and yet, the neuron fires only in 3.
D. In the anterior intraparietal area, neurons are selective for 
objects of particular shapes and fire when the monkey is look-
ing at or preparing to grasp (G) an object. This neuron fires 
when the monkey is viewing a ring (3) or making a memory-
guided reach to it in the dark (2). It fires especially strongly 
when the monkey is grasping the ring under visual guidance 
(1). It does not fire during viewing or grasping of other  
objects (4).
and grasping objects of particular shapes, sizes, and 
spatial orientations, and often even while viewing 
those objects before grasping them (Figure 34–5D). 
There is a broad range of neural response properties, 
from neurons that respond almost exclusively to visual 
input about the objects but not to the grasping actions 
to neurons that discharge only during the hand move-
ments themselves even in the dark. This suggests that 
the AIP contains neural circuits that begin to transform 
visual information about the physical properties of an 
object that are relevant to how it could be handled—
what James Gibson has called the object’s affordances—
into appropriate hand actions (Chapter 56).
A fascinating discovery about the parietal cortex 
is that the receptive fields of neurons can be altered by 
individual experience, such as tool use. Monkeys were 
trained to retrieve food pellets that were out of normal 
reach of the arm and hand by using a rake-shaped tool. 
Many VIP neurons normally respond to visual objects 
when they are either located near the current position of 
the hand or anywhere within reach with the arm. After 
training, their visual receptive fields transiently expand to 
incorporate the tool when the monkey grasps it, as if the 
distal end of the tool had become a functional extension 
of the monkey’s own hand and arm (Figure 34–6).
Internally Generated Feedback May Influence 
Parietal Cortex Activity
The delays involved in the transmission of visual and 
somatic feedback about arm movements from the 
periphery to cortical circuits can lead to oscillations 
or even instabilities in real-time sensorimotor control. 
One theoretical solution to this problem is to use a for-
ward internal model to make predictive estimates of 
body motion based on internal efference copies of out-
going motor commands as well as from slower periph-
eral feedback signals (Chapter 30).
Several lines of evidence suggest that parietal cor-
tex circuits, along with the cerebellum (Chapter 37), 
may implement a similar solution. Many reach-related 
neurons in PE, MIP, and PRR are active not only in 
response to passive sensory inputs but also before the 
onset of movement and during the instructed-delay 
period of delayed-reaching tasks. These responses sug-
gest that these neurons process centrally generated sig-
nals about motor intentions prior to movement onset. 
This premovement activity is often interpreted as evi-
dence that the parietal cortex generates feedforward 
signals that contribute to the early planning of move-
ments. However, an alternate interpretation is that the 
premovement activity is driven by an efference copy of 
the motor command for the intended movement that 
is transmitted into the parietal cortex via its reciprocal 
connections with precentral motor areas. This combi-
nation of peripheral sensory inputs and central effer-
ence copies could permit some parietal reach-related 
circuits to compute a continuously updated estimate 
of the current state of the arm and its position relative 
to the behavioral goal. This estimate could be used 
to make rapid corrections for errors in ongoing arm 
movements.
Whether the parietal circuits are primarily involved 
in the formation of a subject’s motor intentions or in 


===== Page 9 =====
828    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–6  Some neurons in the parietal cortex of the 
monkey have receptive fields that dynamically expand 
once a tool is grasped. (Adapted from Maravita and Iriki, 2004.
Copyright © 2003 Published by Elsevier Ltd.)
A. The orange area on the hand (left) indicates the somatosen-
sory receptive field for a neuron. The purple area (middle) 
indicates the neuron’s visual receptive field (vRF) region around 
the hand. The vRF is anchored to the hand and changes spatial 
location whenever the monkey moves its arm. The vRF expands 
when the monkey grasps a rake after it has learned how to use 
the rake to reach for objects in the workspace (right).
B. A single neuron that has a shoulder-centered bimodal 
somatosensory (orange) and visual (purple) receptive field is 
illustrated. The vRF for this neuron (middle) is larger than the 
one shown in part A, possibly reflecting the potential work-
space related to whole-arm function. The vRF also expands 
to incorporate the extended workspace permitted by use of a 
rake (right ).
A
B
Somatosensory
receptive ﬁeld
Somatosensory
receptive ﬁeld
Visual receptive ﬁeld before tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld before tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld after tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld after tool use
state estimation will depend on the origin of its pre-
movement activity. If it is mainly generated within the 
parietal cortex itself, this will strongly implicate the 
parietal cortex in the planning of intended movements. 
In contrast, if it is primarily driven by an efference 
copy relayed from precentral motor areas, this would 
strongly implicate the parietal circuits in state estima-
tion, including predicting how the arm should move in 
response to the motor command.
Premotor Cortex Supports Motor Selection  
and Planning
As outlined at the beginning of this chapter, a decision 
to act in a particular way in a given situation is shaped 
by many factors, including sensory information about 
objects, events, and opportunities for action from the 
environment, body position and motion, internal moti-
vational states, prior experiences, reward preferences, 
and learned arbitrary rules and strategies linking 
sensory inputs to motor actions. There can be many 
reasons why you want to drink some coffee, and that 
desire can be fulfilled by actions ranging from simply 
reaching out to your full coffee cup to making coffee at 
home or going to a café.
Frontal premotor cortical regions just rostral to M1 
play an important role in early movement planning or 
task-selection processes. Many neurons in those areas, 
such as the PMd neurons shown in Figure 34–4, gen-
erate activity during instructed-delay tasks that reflect 
the motor intentions of the monkey and even the fac-
tors that influenced those action choices. The different 
premotor cortical regions are presumed to make dif-
ferent but overlapping contributions to motor selec-
tion and planning. For instance, the lateral premotor 


