===== Page 1 =====
508    Part IV / Perception
Stimulus
Response
On area
(center)
Off area
(surround)
Lateral geniculate
nucleus neuron
Retinal 
ganglion 
cell
Figure 21–9  Receptive fields of neurons at early relays of  
visual pathways. A circular symmetric receptive field with 
mutually antagonistic center and surround is characteristic of reti-
nal ganglion cells and neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus 
of the thalamus. The center can respond to the turning on or 
turning off of a spot of light (yellow) depending on whether the 
receptived field belongs to an “on-center” or “off-center” class, 
respectively. The surround has the opposite response. Outside 
the surround, there is no response to light, thus defining the 
receptive field boundary. The response is weak when light covers 
both the center and surround, so these neurons respond  
optimally to contrast (a light–dark boundary) in the visual field.
while studying what visual stimuli provoked activ-
ity in neurons in the primary visual cortex. While 
showing an anesthetized animal slides containing 
a variety of images, they recorded extracellularly 
from individual neurons in the visual cortex. As 
they switched from one slide to another, they found 
a neuron that produced a brisk train of action poten-
tials. The cell was responding not to the image on 
the slide but to the edge of the slide as it was moved 
into position.
The Visual Cortex Is Organized Into Columns 
of Specialized Neurons
The dominant feature of the functional organization of 
the primary visual cortex is the visuotopic organiza-
tion of its cells: the visual field is systematically repre-
sented across the surface of the cortex (Figure 21–11A).
In addition, cells in the primary visual cortex with 
similar functional properties are located close together 
in columns that extend from the surface of the cortex to 
the white matter. The columns are concerned with the 
functional properties that are analyzed in any given 
cortical area and thus reflect the functional role of that 
area in vision. The properties that are developed in the 
primary visual cortex include orientation specificity 
and the integration of inputs from the two eyes, which 
is measured as the relative strength of input from each 
eye, or ocular dominance.
Ocular-dominance columns reflect the segrega-
tion of thalamocortical inputs arriving from different 
layers of the LGN. Alternating layers of this nucleus 
receive input from retinal ganglion cells located in 
either the ipsilateral or contralateral retina (Figure 
21–12). This segregation is maintained in the inputs 
from the LGN to the primary visual cortex, produc-
ing the alternating left-eye and right-eye ocular domi-
nance bands (Figure 21–11B).
Cells with similar orientation preferences are also 
grouped into columns. Across the cortical surface, there 
is a regular clockwise and counterclockwise cycling of 
orientation preference, with the full 180° cycle repeat-
ing every 750 μm (Figure 21–11C). Likewise, the left- 
and right-eye dominance columns alternate with a 
periodicity of 750 to 1,000 μm. One full cycle of orienta-
tion columns, or a full pair of left- and right-eye domi-
nance columns, is called a hypercolumn. The orientation 
and ocular dominance columns at each point on the 
cortical surface are locally roughly orthogonal to each 
other. Thus, a cortical patch one hypercolumn in extent 
contains all possible combinations of orientation pref-
erence and left- and right-eye dominance.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    509
Figure 21–10  Receptive field size, eccentricity, retinotopic 
organization, and magnification factor. The color code refers 
to position in visual space or on the retina.
A. The distance of a receptive field from the fovea is referred to 
as the eccentricity of the receptive field.
B. Receptive field size varies with distance from the fovea. The 
smallest fields lie in the center of gaze, the fovea, where the 
visual resolution is highest; fields become progressively larger 
with distance from the fovea.
C. The amount of cortical area dedicated to inputs from within 
each degree of visual space, known as the magnification factor, 
also varies with eccentricity. The central part of the visual field 
commands the largest area of cortex. For example, in area V1, 
more area is dedicated to the central 10° of visual space than to 
all the rest. The map of V1 shows the cortical sheet unfolded.
10
C  Cortical magniﬁcation varies with eccentricity
V1
20
30
20
30
40
50
60
B  Receptive ﬁeld size varies systematically with eccentricity
Eccentricity (°)
Receptive ﬁeld diameter (°)
1
2
A  Map of retinal eccentricity
10
10 20 30 40 50 60
Both types of columns were first mapped by record-
ing the responses of neurons at closely spaced electrode 
penetrations in the cortex. The ocular-dominance col-
umns were also identified by making lesions or tracer 
injections in individual layers of the LGN. More recently, 
a technique known as optical imaging has enabled 
researchers to visualize a surface representation of the 
orientation and ocular dominance columns in living ani-
mals. Developed for studies of cortical organization by 
Amiram Grinvald, this technique visualizes changes in 
surface reflectance associated with the metabolic require-
ments of active groups of neurons, known as intrinsic-
signal optical imaging, or changes in fluorescence of 
voltage-sensitive dyes. Intrinsic-signal imaging depends 
on activity-associated changes in local blood flow and 
alterations in the oxidative state of hemoglobin and other 
intrinsic chromophores. These techniques are also now 
being complemented with imaging at cellular resolution 
using genetically encoded markers of neural activity.
An experimenter can visualize the distribution of 
cells with left or right ocular dominance, for example, 
by subtracting the image obtained while stimulating 
one eye from that acquired while stimulating the other. 
When viewed in a plane tangential to the cortical sur-
face, the ocular dominance columns appear as alternat-
ing left- and right-eye stripes, each approximately 
750 μm in width (Figure 21–11B).
The cycles of orientation columns form various struc-
tures, from parallel stripes to pinwheels. Sharp jumps in 
orientation preference occur at the pinwheel centers and 
“fractures” in the orientation map (Figure 21–11C).
Embedded within the orientation and ocular-
dominance columns are clusters of neurons that have 
poor orientation selectivity but strong color prefer-
ences. These units of specialization, located within 
the superficial layers, were revealed by a histochemi-
cal label for the enzyme cytochrome oxidase, which 
is distributed in a regular patchy pattern of blobs and 
interblobs. In the primary visual cortex, these blobs are 
a few hundred micrometers in diameter and 750 μm 
apart (Figure 21–11D). The blobs correspond to clus-
ters of color-selective neurons. Because they are rich in 
cells with color selectivity and poor in cells with orien-
tation selectivity, the blobs are specialized to provide 
information about surfaces rather than edges.
In area V2, thick and thin dark stripes separated by 
pale stripes are evident with cytochrome oxidase labe-
ling (Figure 21–11D). The thick stripes contain neurons 
selective for direction of movement and for binocular 
disparity as well as cells that are responsive to illusory 
contours and global disparity cues. The thin stripes 
hold cells specialized for color. The pale stripes contain 
orientation-selective neurons.


===== Page 3 =====
510    Part IV / Perception
B  Ocular dominance columns
C  Orientation columns
Stimulus
V2
V1
Orientation
preference
A  Visuotopic map
Pattern of 
excitation
in response 
to striped 
stimulus
V2
V1
Left eye
Right eye
V2
V1
D  Blobs, interblobs (V1), and stripes (V2)
Thick 
stripe
Thin 
stripe
Blobs
Stripes


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    511
Optic 
nerve
Optic
chiasm
Optic tract
Monocular
zone
Binocular zone of
right hemiretina
Lateral 
geniculate
nucleus
Dorsal
6
5
4
3
2
1
Ventral
Optic 
tract
Parvocellular pathway
(P channel)
Magnocellular pathway
(M channel)
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
IVA
IVB
IVCα
IVCβ 
Figure 21–12  Projections from the lateral geniculate 
nucleus to the visual cortex.  The lateral geniculate nucleus 
in each hemisphere receives input from the temporal retina of 
the ipsilateral eye and the nasal retina of the contralateral eye. 
The nucleus is a layered structure comprising four parvocellular 
layers (layers 3 to 6) and two magnocellular layers (layers 1 and 2). 
Each is paired with an intercalated koniocellular layer. (These 
layers are represented here by the gaps separating the primary 
layers. They are unlabeled to avoid clutter. See Figure 21–14.) 
The inputs from the two eyes terminate in different geniculate 
layers: The contralateral eye projects to layers 1, 4, and 6, 
whereas the ipsilateral eye sends input to layers 2, 3, and 5. 
Neurons from these geniculate layers then project to different 
layers of cortex. The parvocellular geniculate neurons project 
to layer IVCβ, the magnocellular ones project to layer IVCα, and 
the koniocellular ones project to “blobs” in the upper cortical 
layers (see Figures 21–14 and 21–15). In addition, the afferents 
from the ipsilateral and contralateral layers of the lateral genicu-
late nucleus are segregated into alternating ocular-dominance 
columns.
Figure 21–11  (Opposite) Functional architecture of the 
primary visual cortex. (Courtesy of M. Kinoshita and A. Das, 
reproduced with permission.)
A. The surface of the primary visual cortex is functionally organ-
ized as a map of the visual field. The elevations and azimuths 
of visual space are organized in a regular grid that is distorted 
because of variation in the magnification factor (see Figure 21–10). 
The grid is visible here in the dark stripes (visualized with intrinsic-
signal optical imaging), which reflect the pattern of neurons that 
responded to a series of vertical candy stripes. Within this surface 
map, one finds repeated superimposed cycles of functionally spe-
cific columns of cells, as illustrated in B, C, and D.
B. The dark and light stripes represent the surface view of 
the left and right ocular dominance columns. These stripes 
intersect the border between areas V1 and V2, the representa-
tion of the vertical meridian, at right angles.
C. Some columns contain cells with similar selectivity for the 
orientation of stimuli. The different colors indicate the orienta-
tion preference of the columns. The orientation columns in 
surface view are best described as pinwheels surrounding 
singularities of sudden changes in orientation (the center of the 
pinwheel). The scale bar represents 1 mm. (Surface image of 
orientation columns on the left courtesy of G. Blasdel, repro-
duced with permission.)
D. Patterns of blobs in V1 and stripes in V2 represent other 
modules of functional organization. These patterns are visual-
ized with cytochrome oxidase.


===== Page 5 =====
512    Part IV / Perception
Figure 21–13  A cortical computational module.  
A chunk of cortical tissue roughly 1 mm square 
contains an orientation hypercolumn (a full cycle of 
orientation columns), one cycle of left- and right-
eye ocular-dominance columns, and blobs and 
interblobs. This module would presumably contain 
all of the functional and anatomical cell types of  
primary visual cortex, which would be repeated 
hundreds of times to cover the visual field. 
(Adapted from Hubel 1988.)
For every visual attribute to be analyzed at each 
position in the visual field, there must be adequate til-
ing, or coverage, of neurons with different functional 
properties. As one moves in any direction across the 
cortical surface, the progression of the visuotopic loca-
tion of receptive fields is gradual, whereas the cycling 
of columns occurs more rapidly. Any given position in 
the visual field can therefore be analyzed adequately 
in terms of the orientation of contours, the color and 
direction of movement of objects, and stereoscopic 
depth by a single computational module. The small 
segment of visual cortex that comprises such a module 
represents all possible values of all the columnar sys-
tems (Figure 21–13).
The columnar systems serve as the substrate for 
two fundamental types of connectivity along the vis-
ual pathway. Serial processing occurs in the successive 
connections between cortical areas, connections that 
run from the back of the brain forward. At the same 
time, parallel processing occurs simultaneously in sub-
sets of fibers that process different submodalities such 
as form, color, and movement, continuing the neural 
processing strategy started in the retina.
Many areas of visual cortex reflect this arrange-
ment; for example, functionally specific cells in V1 
communicate with cells of the same specificity in V2. 
These pathways are not absolutely segregated, how-
ever, for there is some mixing of information between 
different visual attributes (Figure 21–14).
Blobs
Orientation
columns
Orientation
preference
Left eye
Right eye
Ocular 
dominance 
columns:
Columnar organization confers several advantages. 
It minimizes the distance required for neurons with 
similar functional properties to communicate with one 
another and allows them to share inputs from discrete 
pathways that convey information about particular sen-
sory attributes. This efficient connectivity economizes 
on the use of brain volume and maximizes processing 
speed. The clustering of neurons into functional groups, 
as in the columns of the cortex, allows the brain to mini-
mize the number of neurons required for analyzing 
different attributes. If all neurons were tuned for every 
attribute, the resultant combinatorial explosion would 
require a prohibitive number of neurons.
Intrinsic Cortical Circuits Transform  
Neural Information
Each area of the visual cortex transforms information 
gathered by the eyes and processed at earlier synap-
tic relays into a signal that represents the visual scene. 
This transformation is accomplished by local circuits 
comprising both excitatory and inhibitory neurons.
The principal input to the primary visual cortex 
comes from three parallel pathways that originate 
in the parvocellular, magnocellular, and the blue/
yellow channels of koniocellular layers of the LGN 
(see Figure 21–12). Neurons in the parvocellular lay-
ers project to cortical layers IVCβ and 6, those in the 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    513
Thin stripe
Retina
Parvocellular
Koniocellular
II
III
V
VI
IVB
IVCα
IVCβ
LGN
V1
V2
Magnocellular
Thick stripe
From 
interblobs
Ventral
(temporal)
pathway
Dorsal
(parietal)
pathway
V4
Ventral
(temporal)
pathway
MT
V2
V2
V1
V4
Dorsal
(parietal)
pathway
LGN
Retina
Midget 
ganglion 
cells
Parasol 
ganglion 
cells
MT
Interstripe
Color
Depth
Orientation
Direction
Complex form
From
blobs
Parvo
pathway
Bistratiﬁed
ganglion 
cells
Konio
pathway
Magno
pathway
Figure 21–14  Parallel processing in visual pathways.  The 
ventral stream is primarily concerned with object identification, 
carrying information about form and color. The dorsal pathway 
is dedicated to visually guided movement, with cells selective 
for direction of movement. These pathways are not strictly 
segregated, however, and there is substantial interconnection 
between them even in the primary visual cortex. (Abbreviations: 
LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus; MT, middle temporal area.) 
(Retinal ganglion cell images courtesy of Dennis Dacey,  
reproduced with permission.)
magnocellular layers project to layer IVCα and 6, 
while the koniocellular neurons project to layer 1 and 
to the cytochrome oxidase blobs in layers 2 and 3. 
From there, a sequence of interlaminar connections, 
mediated by the excitatory spiny stellate neurons, 
processes visual information over a stereotyped set of 
connections (Figure 21–15).
This characterization of parallel pathways is only 
an approximation, as there is considerable interaction 
between the pathways. This interaction is the means 
by which various visual features—color, form, depth, 
and movement—are linked, leading to a unified vis-
ual percept. One way this linkage, or binding, may be 
accomplished is through cells that are tuned to more 
than one attribute.
At each stage of cortical processing, pyramidal neu-
rons extend output to other brain areas. Superficial-layer 
cells are responsible for connections to higher-order areas 
of cortex. Layer V pyramidal neurons project to the supe-
rior colliculus and pons in the brain stem. Layer VI cells 
are responsible for feedback projections, both to the thala-
mus and to lower-order cortical areas.
Neurons in different layers have distinctive receptive-
field properties. Neurons in the superficial layer of V1 
have small receptive fields, whereas neurons in deeper 
layers have large ones. The superficial-layer neurons are 
specialized for high-resolution pattern recognition. Neu-
rons in the deeper layers, such as those in layer V that are 
selective for the direction of movement, are specialized 
for the tracking of objects in space.


===== Page 7 =====
514    Part IV / Perception
Figure 21–15  The intrinsic circuitry of the primary visual 
cortex.
A. Examples of neurons in different cortical layers responsible 
for excitatory connections in cortical circuits. Layer IV is the 
principal layer of input from the lateral geniculate nucleus of 
the thalamus. Fibers from the parvocellular layer terminate in 
layer IVCβ, whereas the magnocellular fibers terminate in layer 
IVCα. The intrinsic cortical excitatory connections are mediated 
by spiny stellate and pyramidal cells. A variety of γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA)-ergic smooth stellate cells (not shown) are respon-
sible for inhibitory connections. Dendritic arbors are colored 
blue, and axonal arbors are shown in brown. (Cortical neurons 
courtesy of E. Callaway, reproduced with permission. Thalamic 
afferents adapted, with permission, from Blasdel and Lund 
1983. Copyright © 1983 Society for Neuroscience.)
B. Diagram of excitatory connections within the primary visual 
cortex. Output to other regions of cortex is sent from every 
layer of visual cortex.
B  Simpliﬁed diagram of intrinsic circuitry
Other
cortical
areas
Superior
colliculus
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Parvocellular
layers
II, III
IVCβ
V
VI
IVCα
IVB
Koniocellular
layers
Magno-
cellular
layers
A  Distribution of cell types in the primary visual cortex
Thalamic
afferents
Layer IVCβ
spiny stellate cell 
projecting to 
layer III
Layer IVB
pyramid
projecting to 
layers II, III, and V
Layer IVCα
spiny stellate
projecting to 
layer IV
I
II, III
IVA
IVB
IVCα
IVCβ
V
VI


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 21 / The Constructive Nature of Visual Processing    515
Feedback projections are thought to provide a 
means whereby higher centers in a pathway can influ-
ence lower ones. The number of neurons projecting 
from the cortex to the LGN is 10-fold the number pro-
jecting from the LGN to the cortex. Although this feed-
back projection is obviously important, its function is 
largely unknown.
The activity of the excitatory pyramidal and spiny 
stellate neurons that mediate information flow into or 
out of cortical regions is also tightly controlled by local 
networks of inhibitory interneurons. The spike rates of 
excitatory neurons are constantly nonlinearly balanced 
by matched inhibition that maintains the stability of 
the neural response to an input. Inhibitory interneu-
rons come in multiple classes distinguished by their 
morphology and their coexpression of distinct pep-
tides such as parvalbumin, somatostatin, or vasoactive 
intestinal polypeptide (VIP). Some of these interneu-
rons form cascading circuits where interneurons of one 
class target interneurons of another class, which then 
target excitatory neurons. This leads to multistep con-
trol mechanisms in the neural circuit whereby increas-
ing activity in the first class of inhibitory interneurons 
reduces activity in the second class, disinhibiting and 
increasing responses in the excitatory targets at the end 
of the cascade. Such motifs of inhibitory control are 
likely to be common to multiple cortical sensory areas.
In addition to serial feedforward, feedback, and 
local recurrent connections, fibers that travel parallel 
to the cortical surface within each layer provide long-
range horizontal connections (Figure 21–16). These 
connections and their role in the functional architec-
ture of cortex were analyzed by Charles Gilbert and 
Torsten Wiesel, who used intracellular recordings and 
dye injection to correlate anatomical features with cor-
tical function. Because the visual cortex is organized 
visuotopically, the horizontal connections allow target 
neurons to integrate information over a relatively large 
area of the visual field and are therefore important in 
assembling the components of a visual image into a 
unified percept.
Integration can also be achieved by other means. 
The considerable convergence and divergence of con-
nections at the synaptic relays of the afferent visual 
pathway imply that the receptive fields of neurons 
are larger and more complex at each successive relay 
and thus have an integrative function. Feedback con-
nections may also support integration, both because of 
their divergence and because they originate from cells 
with larger receptive fields.
Layer V 
pyramid
projecting to 
layers II, III
Layer V 
pyramid
projecting to 
layer VI
Layer VI 
pyramid
projecting to 
layer IV
Layer VI 
pyramid
projecting to 
layers II, III
I
II, III
IVA
IVB
IVCα
IVCβ
V
VI


===== Page 9 =====
A
B
C
I
II
III
IVA
IVB
IVC
V
VI
Connections 
with columns 
of similar 
orientation 
Site of injection
(purple column)
Axis of
orientation
Figure 21–16  Long-range horizontal connections in each 
layer of the visual cortex integrate information from differ-
ent parts of the visual field.
A. The axons of pyramidal cells extend for many millimeters 
parallel to the cortical surface. Axon collaterals form connec-
tions with other pyramidal cells as well as with inhibitory 
interneurons. This arrangement enables neurons to integrate 
information over large parts of the visual field. An important 
characteristic of these connections is their relationship to 
the functional columns. The axon collaterals are found in 
clusters (arrows) at distances greater than 0.5 mm from the 
cell body. (Reproduced, with permission, from Gilbert and 
Wiesel 1983. Copyright © 1983 Society for Neuroscience.)
B. Horizontal connections link columns of cells with similar  
orientation specificity.
C. The pattern of horizontal connections is visualized by inject-
ing an adenoviral vector containing the gene encoding green 
fluorescent protein into one orientation column and superim-
posing the labeled image (black) on an optically imaged map of 
the orientation columns in the vicinity of the injection. (Diameter 
of white circle is 1 mm.) (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Stettler et al. 2002.)


