===== Page 1 =====
412    Part IV / Perception
Table 18–1  Classification of Sensory Fibers in Peripheral Nerves1
 
Muscle nerve
Cutaneous nerve2
Fiber diameter (μm)
Conduction velocity (m/s)
Myelinated
  Large diameter
I
Aα
12–20
72–120
  Medium diameter
II
Aβ
6–12
36–72
  Small diameter
III
Aδ
1–6
4–36
Unmyelinated
IV
C
0.2–1.5
0.4–2.0
1Sensory fibers from muscle are classified according to their diameter, whereas those from the skin are classified by conduction velocity.
2The types of receptors innervated by each type of fiber are listed in Table 18–2.
Figure 18–3  Classification of mammalian peripheral nerve 
fibers.  The histograms illustrate the distribution of axon 
diameter for four groups of sensory nerve fibers innervating 
skeletal muscle and the skin. Each group has a characteristic 
axon diameter and conduction velocity (see Table 18–1). Light 
blue lines mark the boundaries of fiber profiles in each group 
in the zones of overlap. The conduction velocity (m/s) of myeli-
nated peripheral nerve fibers is approximately six times the 
fiber diameter (μm). (Adapted, with permission, from Boyd 
and Davey 1968.)
Number of ﬁbers
Number of ﬁbers
IV (C)
III (Aδ)
II (Aβ)
Axon
diameter (µm)
Cutaneous nerve
72
30
1
Conduction
velocity (m/s)
IV (C)
III (Aδ)
II (Aβ)
I (Aα)
1
5
12
20
120
Muscle nerve
organs, which signal muscle length and contractile 
force. Group II fibers innervate secondary spindle end-
ings and receptors in joint capsules; these receptors 
also mediate proprioception. Group III fibers, the small-
est myelinated muscle afferents, and the unmyelinated 
group IV afferents signal trauma or injuries in muscles 
and joints that are sensed as painful.
Nerves that innervate the skin contain two sets of 
myelinated fibers: Group II fibers innervate cutaneous 
mechanoreceptors that respond to touch, and group III 
fibers mediate thermal and noxious stimuli, as well 
as light touch in hairy skin. Unmyelinated group IV 
cutaneous afferents, like those in muscle, also mediate 
thermal and noxious stimuli.
Another method for classifying peripheral nerve 
fibers is based on electrical stimulation of whole 
nerves. In this widely used diagnostic technique, 
nerve conduction velocities are measured between 
pairs of stimulating and recording electrodes placed 
on the skin above a peripheral nerve. When studying 
conduction in the median or ulnar nerve, for exam-
ple, the stimulation electrode might be placed at the 
wrist and the recording electrode on the upper arm. 
Brief electrical pulses applied through the stimulat-
ing electrode evoke action potentials in the nerve. The 
neural signal recorded a short time later in the arm 
represents the summed action potentials of all of the 
nerve fibers excited by the stimulus pulse and is called 
the compound action potential (Chapter 9). It increases 
in amplitude as more nerve fibers are stimulated; the 
summed activity is roughly proportional to the total 
number of active nerve fibers.
Electrical stimuli of increasing strength evoke 
action potentials first in the largest axons, because they 
have the lowest electrical resistance, and then progres-
sively in smaller axons (Figure 18–4). Large-diameter 
fibers conduct action potentials more rapidly because 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    413
Figure 18–4  Conduction velocities of peripheral nerves are 
measured clinically from compound action potentials. Elec-
trical stimulation of a peripheral nerve at varying intensities 
activates different types of nerve fibers. The action potentials of 
all the nerves stimulated by a particular amount of current are 
summed to create the compound action potential. The distinct 
conduction velocities of different classes of sensory and motor 
axons produce multiple peaks. (Adapted from Erlanger and  
Gasser 1938.)
Weak nerve shock
Medium nerve shock
Strong nerve shock
Barely 
perceptible
Tingling
Pricking 
pain
Aα
Aα
Aα
Aβ
Aβ
Aδ
Stimulus
intensity
Sensation 
evoked
Nerve 
response
Very strong nerve shock
A ﬁbers
C ﬁbers
Pricking pain 
followed by
burning pain
Aα Aβ
Aδ
the internal resistance to current flow along the axon is 
low, and the nodes of Ranvier are widely spaced along 
its length (Chapter 9). The conduction velocity of large 
myelinated fibers (in meters per second) is approxi-
mately six times the axon diameter (in micrometers), 
whereas thinly myelinated fibers conduct at five times 
the axon diameter. For unmyelinated fibers, the factor 
for converting axon diameter to conduction velocity is 
1.5 to 2.5.
Following the stimulus artifact, the earliest neu-
ral signal recorded in the compound action potential 
occurs in fibers with conduction velocities greater than 
90 m/s. Called the Aα wave (Figure 18–4), this signal 
reflects the action potentials generated in group I fibers 
and in motor neurons innervating skeletal muscle. 
The sensation is barely perceived by the subject in the 
region innervated.
As more large fibers are recruited, a second signal, 
the Aβ wave, appears. This component corresponds 
to group II fibers in skin or muscle nerves that inner-
vate mechanoreceptors mediating touch and proprio-
ception and becomes larger as the shock intensity is 
increased. At higher voltages, when axons in the 
smaller Aδ range are recruited, the stimulus becomes 
painful, resembling an electric shock produced by static 
electricity. Voltages sufficient to activate unmyelinated 
C fibers evoke sensations of burning pain. As we shall 
learn later in this chapter, some Aδ and C fibers also 
respond to light touch on hairy skin, but such gentle 
tactile stimuli are masked by concurrent activation of 


===== Page 3 =====
414    Part IV / Perception
pain fibers when whole nerves are stimulated electri-
cally. Stimulation of motor neurons innervating the 
intrafusal fibers of muscle spindles (see Figure 18–9) 
evokes an intermediate wavelet called the Aγ wave, 
but this is usually difficult to discern because the 
conduction velocities of these motor neurons overlap 
those of Aβ and Aδ sensory axons. These differences in 
fiber diameter and conduction velocity of peripheral 
nerves allow signals of touch and proprioception to 
reach the spinal cord and higher brain centers earlier 
than noxious or thermal signals.
The clinician takes advantage of the known dis-
tribution of the conduction velocities of the vari-
ous afferent fibers to diagnose diseases that result in 
sensory-fiber degeneration or motor neuron loss. In 
certain conditions, the loss of peripheral nerve axons 
is selective; in the neuropathy characteristic of dia-
betes, for example, the large-diameter sensory fibers 
degenerate. Such a selective loss is reflected in a reduc-
tion in the appropriate peak of the compound action 
potential, a slowing of nerve conduction, and a corre-
sponding diminution of sensory capacity. Similarly, in 
multiple sclerosis, degeneration of the myelin sheath 
of large-diameter afferent fibers in the central nervous 
system results in slowing and, if severe enough, failure 
of nerve conduction.
A Variety of Specialized Receptors Are 
Employed by the Somatosensory System
The functional specialization of individual DRG neu-
rons is determined by the molecular mechanisms of 
sensory transduction that occur at the distal nerve 
terminals in the body. When a somatic receptor is 
activated by an appropriate stimulus, its sensory ter-
minal is typically depolarized. The amplitude and 
time course of the depolarization reflect the strength 
of the stimulus and its duration (see Figure 3–9A). 
Stimuli of sufficient strength produce action potentials 
that are transmitted along the peripheral branch of the 
DRG neuron’s axon and into the central branch that 
terminates in the spinal cord or brain stem.
The sensory neurons that mediate touch and pro-
prioception terminate in a nonneural capsule (Figure 
18–1) or form morphologically distinctive endings 
surrounding hair follicles (Figure 18–2H) or intrafusal 
muscle fibers (see Figure 18–9A). They sense mechani-
cal stimuli that indent or stretch their receptive surface. 
In contrast, the peripheral axons of neurons that detect 
noxious, thermal, or chemical events have unsheathed 
endings with multiple branches that terminate in the 
epidermis or in the viscera.
Several different morphologically specialized 
receptors underlie the various somatosensory submo-
dalities. For example, the median nerve that innervates 
the skin of the hand and some of the muscles control-
ling the hand contains tens of thousands of nerve fibers 
that can be classified into 30 functional types. Of these, 
22 types are afferent fibers (sensory axons conducting 
impulses toward the spinal cord), and eight types are 
efferent fibers (motor axons conducting impulses away 
from the spinal cord to skeletal muscle, blood vessels, 
and sweat glands). The afferent fibers convey signals 
from eight kinds of cutaneous mechanoreceptors that 
are sensitive to different kinds of skin deformation; 
five kinds of proprioceptors that signal information 
about muscle force, muscle length, and joint angle; 
four kinds of thermoreceptors that report the tempera-
tures of objects touching the skin; and four kinds of 
nociceptors that signal potentially injurious stimuli. 
The major receptor groups within each submodality 
are listed in Table 18–2.
Mechanoreceptors Mediate Touch and 
Proprioception
A mechanoreceptor senses physical deformation of the 
tissue surrounding it. Mechanical distension—such 
as pressure on the skin, stretch of muscles, suction 
applied directly to cell membranes, or osmotic swell-
ing of tissue—is transduced into electrical energy by 
the physical action of the stimulus on mechanorecep-
tor ion channels in the membrane. Mechanical stimu-
lation deforms the receptor protein, thus opening 
stretch-sensitive ion channels and increasing nonspe-
cific cation conductances that depolarize the receptor 
neuron (see Figure 3–9A). Removal of the stimulus 
relieves mechanical stress on the receptor and allows 
stretch-sensitive channels to close.
Various mechanisms for activation of mechanore-
ceptor ion channels have been proposed. Some mech-
anoreceptors appear to respond to forces conveyed 
through tension or deformation of the lipids of the 
plasma membrane, a mechanism called force from lipids 
(Figure 18–5A). Here, deformation of membrane lipids 
changes the cell surface curvature, exposing hydropho-
bic residues in the receptor protein to the membrane 
phospholipids, thereby opening the channel pore to 
cation flow. This may be the mechanism for detection 
of cellular swelling, which plays an important role in 
osmoregulation, or changes in shear stress on the walls 
of blood vessels due to altered fluid flow.
Another postulated mechanism for activation of 
mechanoreceptors involves linking the channel protein 
to the surrounding tissue through structural proteins, 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    415
Table 18–2  Receptor Types Active in Somatic Sensory Processing
Receptor type
Fiber  
group1
Fiber  
name
Receptor
Marker(s)
Modality
Cutaneous mechanoreceptors
 
 
 
 
Touch
  Meissner corpuscle 
Aα,β
RA1
Piezo2
cRet/Npy2r/
NFH
  Stroking, flutter
  Merkel disk receptor
Aα,β
SA1
Piezo2
Troma1/
Keratin8/Npy2r
  Pressure, texture
  Pacinian corpuscle2
Aα,β
RA2
Piezo2
cRet/Npy2r/
NFH
  Vibration
  Ruffini ending
Aα,β
SA2
Piezo2
 
  Skin stretch
  Hair (guard)
Aα,β
Aβ RA-LTMR
Piezo2
cRet/Npy2r/
NFH
  Stroking, hair movement
  Hair (awl/auchene)
Aδ
Aδ-LTMR
Piezo2
TrkB
  Light stroking, air puff
  Field receptor 
  (circumferential endings)
Aβ
Aβ  
Field-LTMR
Piezo2
NFH
  Skin stretch
  Hair (zigzag)
C
C-LTMR
 
TH
  Slow stroking, gentle 
touch
Thermal receptors
 
 
 
 
Temperature
  Cool receptors
Aδ
III
TRPM8
 
  Skin cooling (<25°C)
  Warm receptors 
C
IV
TRPV3
 
  Skin warming (>35°C)
  Heat nociceptors 
Aδ
III
TRPV1/
TRPV2
 
  Hot temperature (>45°C)
  Cold nociceptors 
C
IV
TRPA1/
TRPM8
 
  Cold temperature (<5°C)
Nociceptors
 
 
 
 
Pain
  Mechanical
Aδ
III
 
CGRP
  Sharp, pricking pain
  Thermal-mechanical (heat)
Aδ
III
TRPV2
 
  Burning pain
  Thermal-mechanical (cold)
C
IV
TRPV1/
TRPA1
IB4
  Freezing pain
  Polymodal
C
IV
TRPV1/
TRPA1
 
  Slow, burning pain
Muscle and skeletal 
mechanoreceptors
 
 
 
 
Limb proprioception
  Muscle spindle primary
Aα
Ia
Piezo2
PV/NFH
  Muscle length and speed
  Muscle spindle secondary
Aβ
II
Piezo2
PV/NFH
  Muscle stretch
  Golgi tendon organ
Aα
Ib
Piezo2
PV/NFH
  Muscle contraction
  Joint capsule receptors
Aβ
II
 
 
  Joint angle
  Stretch-sensitive free endings
Aδ
III
 
 
  Excess stretch or force
1See Table 18–1.
2Pacinian corpuscles are also located in the mesentery, between layers of muscle, and on interosseous membranes.
a mechanism termed force from filaments (Figure 18–5B). 
In this arrangement, mechanical force applied to the 
skin or muscle by direct pressure or lateral stretch of the 
tissue distorts the extracellular matrix or intracellular 
cytoskeletal proteins (actin, integrins, microtubules). 
These tethering molecules interact with the receptor-
channel proteins, change their conformation, and open 
cation channels. The extracellular linkage to the chan-
nel proteins is elastic and often represented as a spring-
loaded gate. Direct channel gating in this model may be 
produced by forces that stretch the extracellular linkage 
protein. The channel closes when the force is removed. 
This type of direct channel gating is used by hair cells of 
the inner ear and by some touch receptors in the skin.


===== Page 5 =====
416    Part IV / Perception
Figure 18–5  Ion channels in mechanoreceptor nerve 
terminals are activated by mechanical stimuli that 
stretch or deform the cell membrane. Mechanical 
displacement leads to channel opening, permitting the 
influx of cations. (Adapted, with permission, from Lin 
and Corey 2005. Copyright © 2005 Elsevier Ltd.)
A. Force from lipids. Channels can be directly activated 
by forces conveyed through lipid tension in the cell 
membrane, such as changes in blood pressure.
B. Force from filaments. Forces conveyed through 
structural proteins linked to the ion channel can also 
directly activate mechanosensory channels. The link-
ing structural proteins may be extracellular (attached 
to the surrounding tissue) or intracellular (bound to the 
cytoskeleton) or both.
It is remarkable that although the receptor end 
organs for touch in the skin were first studied by Edgar 
Adrian and Yngve Zotterman in the 1920s and receptor 
potentials were recorded from isolated touch receptors 
from the mesentery (Pacinian corpuscles) in the 1960s, 
there was little consensus about the molecular biology 
of mechanosensation in mammalian touch. The lead-
ing candidates were derived from invertebrate model 
organisms such as the nematode worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans whose touch receptors were identified as mem-
bers of the degenerin superfamily of ion channels and 
are similar to vertebrate epithelial Na+ channels (DEG/
ENac channels). Other candidate molecules included 
TRPV4 receptors (members of the transient receptor 
potential [TRP] receptors that are also involved in 
thermal senses), and NOMPC, a Drosophila member 
of the TRPN family. However, these molecules are not 
expressed in mammalian DRG neurons.
The Piezo protein family of transmembrane ion 
channels was recently identified by Ardem Patapou-
tian and colleagues as molecular mediators of mechan-
oreception in mammals. Piezo1 proteins are composed 
of approximately 2,500 amino acids, with at least 26 
transmembrane α-helices (Figure 18–6A). The ion 
channel is a trimer formed from three identical Piezo 
protein subunits, with two pore-forming α-helices at 
the C-terminal end of each Piezo protein. The N-terminals 
of the subunits form a propeller-like structure (Figure 
18–6B), which is thought to be involved in coupling 
mechanical stimuli to channel gating. Piezo proteins 
A  Direct activation through lipid tension
B  Direct activation through structural proteins
form nonspecific cation-permeable channels that con-
duct excitatory depolarizing current.
Two different isoforms of the Piezo proteins serve 
as mechanosensors: Piezo1 is found primarily in non-
neural tissue, such as epithelia in blood vessels, the 
kidney, and bladder, and in red blood cells. Piezo2 is 
expressed in mechanosensory DRG and trigeminal 
neurons that mediate the senses of touch and propri-
oception and in vagal afferents innervating smooth 
muscle of the lung, where they mediate the Hering-
Breuer reflex by sensing lung stretch (Chapter 32).
Specialized End Organs Contribute to 
Mechanosensation
In addition to the molecular composition of the ion 
channels expressed in the distal nerve endings, compo-
nents of surrounding tissue such as epithelial cells or 
muscle fibers play a significant role in mechanotrans-
duction. The specialized nonneural end organs that 
surround the nerve terminals of a DRG neuron must be 
deformed in specific ways to excite the fiber. For exam-
ple, individual mechanoreceptors respond selectively 
to pressure or motion, and thereby detect the direction 
of force applied to the skin, joints, or muscle fibers. The 
end organ can also amplify or modulate the sensitivity 
of the receptor axon to mechanical displacement.
Specialized epithelial cells in the skin—such as 
Merkel cells, the epithelium lining hair follicles, and the 
papillary ridges that form the fingerprints of glabrous 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    417
Cytoplasmic
side
A  Molecular organization of the Piezo1 protein
B  Structure of the Piezo1 ion channel
1  Side view
2  Top-down view
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
Extracellular
side
Plasma
membrane
Propeller
blade
Detergent
micelle
Unmodeled
density
~200Å
~140Å
Figure 18–6  Structure and molecular organization of Piezo1 
ion channels.
A. Piezo1 and Piezo2 have homologous protein structures, 
containing approximately 2,500 amino acids, with at least 
26 putative transmembrane segments. Combined as trim-
ers, they form the largest membrane ion channels in mam-
mals. (Adapted, with permission, from Murthy, Dubin, and 
Patapoutian 2017. Copyright © 2017 Springer Nature.)
B. Putative structure of the Piezo1 ion channel deduced from 
cryo-electron microscopy. 1. Side view, cytoplasmic surface 
down. 2. Top-down view from extracellular side. The receptor 
is a triskelion made up of three identical Piezo1 subunits. The 
C-terminals of the three Piezo proteins form a central extra-
cellular cap tethered to the extracellular surface of the trans-
membrane pore, which extends beyond the membrane into a 
cytoplasmic tail domain. The aqueous pore through the channel 
extends through the central axis of the cap, the transmem-
brane pore, and the cytoplasmic tail domain. The N-terminals 
of the three protein subunits are arrayed peripherally, forming 
a propeller-like helical structure. Blue indicates area of high-
resolution modeling. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Saotome et al. 2018. Copyright © 2018 Springer Nature.)
skin—play important auxiliary roles in the sense of 
touch. The best studied of these end organs are Mer-
kel cells—sensory epithelial cells that form close con-
tacts with the terminals of large-diameter (Aβ) sensory 
nerve axons at the epidermal–dermal junction, form-
ing Merkel cell–neurite complexes. Merkel cells clus-
ter in swellings of the epidermis in hairy skin called 
touch domes (Figure 18–7A) and near the center of the 
fingerprint ridges in glabrous skin (see Figure 19–3). 
When a probe contacts the touch dome, the sensory 
nerve responds with a train of action potentials whose 
frequency is proportional to the velocity and ampli-
tude of pressure applied to the skin (Figure 18–7A2). 
These spike trains typically last throughout the period 
of stimulation and are termed slowly adapting because 
the firing persists for periods of up to 30 minutes. Like-
wise, the sensory nerve is called an SA1 fiber (slowly 
adapting type 1 fiber).
Merkel cells serve a similar receptive function in 
the sense of touch as auditory hair cells in the cochlea 


===== Page 7 =====
418    Part IV / Perception
Figure 18–7  Afferent fibers innervating Merkel cells 
respond continuously to pressure on the skin.
A. 1. An individual slowly adapting type 1 (SA1) mechanorecep-
tive fiber innervates a cluster of 22 Merkel cells (each labeled 
with enhanced green fluorescent protein [eGFP]) in a touch 
dome of the hairy skin. Left: In vivo epifluorescent images of 
the isolated skin-nerve recording preparation. Asterisk (*) indi-
cates the location of the associated guard hair within the touch 
dome. Right: Confocal z-series projections of the entire touch 
dome innervated by the SA1 fiber. Arrowheads are used to 
align Merkel cells in the two images. 2. The SA1 fiber responds 
to 5-second duration steps of pressure (measured in kilopas-
cals [kPa]) applied over the touch dome (upper records) with 
irregular, slowly adapting spike trains (recorded extracellularly), 
whose mean frequency of firing is proportional to the applied 
force (lower records). The neuron fires at its highest rate at the 
start of stimulation and fires fewer spikes during maintained 
pressure. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wellnitz et al. 
2010.)
B. A model of sensory transduction in SA1 mechanorecep-
tors. Pressure on the skin opens Piezo2 channels (blue) in the 
Merkel cell and in the peripheral neurite of the SA1 fiber that 
receives synaptic input from the Merkel cell. Piezo2 channels 
in the neurite open at the onset of stimulation (1) generating 
the initial dynamic response to touch (2). Skin deformation 
simultaneously activates Piezo2 channels in the Merkel cell (3), 
depolarizing it and allowing voltage-gated CaV channels in the 
Merkel cell (4) to open and release neurotransmitter continu-
ously (5). Binding of the neurotransmitter further depolarizes 
the SA1 neurite, producing sustained firing in the principal axon 
(6). (Reproduced, with permission, from Maksimovic et al. 
2014. Copyright © 2014 Springer Nature.)
A
B
1
2
Stimulus pressure
SA1 ﬁber activity
1 s
40 µm
50 kPa
400 µV
Pressure
Merkel cell
Nucleus
Piezo2
Cav
SAI afferent
Dynamic
Static
Merkel cell clustering
Stimuli
Time
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
6


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 18 / Receptors of the Somatosensory System    419
(Chapter 26) and taste cells in the tongue (Chapter 32). 
Merkel cells studied in vitro respond to mechanical 
force such as pressure or suction with depolarizing 
currents that are similar in time course and conduct-
ance to those evoked in isolated DRG neurons. They 
express synaptic release proteins and contain vesicles 
that release excitatory neurotransmitters during sus-
tained pressure. Merkel cells express Piezo2 proteins 
and show increased cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels when 
stimulated by pressure.
The importance of Merkel cells for physiologi-
cal responses to touch is seen in mice that fail to 
develop Merkel cells in the epidermis (Atoh1 condi-
tional knockout mice). The firing rates of SA1 fibers 
in these animals are reduced in amplitude and dura-
tion compared to wild-type. These experiments indi-
cate that Merkel cells are responsible for the sustained 
response to static touch. Recently, Ellen Lumpkin and 
colleagues used optogenetic stimulation of Merkel 
cells rather than direct pressure on the skin to dem-
onstrate that SA1 fibers innervating touch domes 
use a dual-mechanism to sense pressure on the 
skin (Figure 18–7B). The initial dynamic response to 
touch is generated primarily by current flow through 
Piezo2 channels in the SA1 nerve terminal. The subse-
quent static response results from excitatory synaptic 
transmission from Merkel cells that express Piezo2 
channels and continuously release neurotransmitter 
during sustained pressure on the skin.
Hairs that protrude from the surface of the skin 
provide another important set of touch end organs. 
Sensory hair fibers are extremely sensitive to motion. 
Deflection of hairs by light breezes or air puffs evokes 
one or more action potentials from hair follicle affer-
ent fibers. Humans can perceive motion of individ-
ual hairs and localize the sensation to the base of the 
hair, where it emerges from the skin. Sensory hairs 
serve an important protective function as they detect 
objects, other organisms, or obstacles in the environ-
ment at a distance before they impact the body. Hairs 
or sensory antennae detect important object features 
such as texture, curvature, and rigidity that aid rec-
ognition as friend or foe. These neurons are named 
rapidly adapting low-threshold mechanoreceptors (RA-
LTMRs) because they respond to gentle touch or hair 
movement with brief bursts of spikes when the hair is 
moved by external forces.
Hairs are embedded in skin invaginations called 
hair follicles. Three types of hairs are found in mamma-
lian skin (Figure 18–8A). The largest, longest, and stiff-
est hairs (named guard hairs) are the first to emerge 
from the skin during development. Guard hairs are 
innervated by the largest-diameter and fastest-conducting 
sensory nerve fibers (type Aβ); these fibers form 
lanceolate (comb-like) endings in the epidermis of  
the follicle surrounding the hair (Figure 18–2H). Aβ 
RA-LTMR nerve fibers also innervate intermediate-
sized hairs (called awl/auchene hairs) with lanceolate 
endings. Awl/auchene hairs are triply innervated: 
They provide inputs to fast-conducting (Aβ) myeli-
nated fibers; smaller-diameter, slower-conducting 
myelinated (Aδ) fibers; and unmyelinated C fibers. 
The smallest and most numerous hairs (called zigzag 
or down hairs) are also innervated by Aδ and C fibers.
Until recently, Aδ and C fibers were thought to 
mediate only thermal or painful sensations. However, 
microneurography studies in humans by Johan 
Wessberg, Håkan Olausson, and Åke Vallbo demon-
strated that hairy skin is also innervated by unmyeli-
nated C-LTMR fibers that respond to slowly moving 
tactile stimuli and are thought to mediate social or 
pleasurable touch. They may also play a role in pain 
inhibition in the spinal cord dorsal horn.
The innervation pattern of hair follicles in the skin 
illustrates two important principles of sensory inner-
vation of the body: convergence and divergence. Each 
individual hair follicle in the skin provides input to 
multiple sensory afferent fibers. This pattern of over-
lap provides redundancy of sensory input from a small 
patch of skin. Shared lines of communication innervate 
each hair follicle, rather than a single labeled line. Tac-
tile information from the skin is therefore transmitted 
in parallel by an ensemble of sensory neurons.
The skin area innervated by the sensory nerve 
terminals of a DRG neuron defines the cell’s receptive 
field, the region of the body that can excite the cell. 
Each sensory nerve fiber collects information from 
a wide area of skin because its distal terminals have 
multiple branches that can be activated independently. 
This morphology enables each afferent fiber to provide 
unique patterns of sensory input to the brain.
The diversity of receptive field sizes and terri-
tories encompassed by individual classes of DRG 
neurons is illustrated in Figure 18–8B. Because of 
the large size of tactile receptive fields, gentle touch 
excites many different sensory fibers at the site of 
contact, each conveying a specific sensory message. 
The smallest tactile receptive fields are the touch 
domes innervated by SA1 fibers (see Figure 19–8B 
Aβ SA1). An individual SA1 fiber innervates all of 
the Merkel cells in a touch dome and typically col-
lects information from one to three touch domes in 
adjacent skin regions. Hair follicles innervated by 
individual RA fibers are spread further apart and 
the sensory endings differ somewhat in size, with 
the largest-diameter Aβ fibers encompassing the 


===== Page 9 =====
420    Part IV / Perception
A  Hairy skin innervation
Aδ-LTMR
Merkel cells
Dermis
Zigzag
Guard
Awl/auchene
Epidermis
Aβ RA-LTMR
Aβ ﬁeld-LTMR
(circumferential ending)
Aβ SA1-LTMR
C-LTMR
B  Receptive ﬁelds of low-threshold mechanoreceptors
Aβ ﬁeld
Aβ RA
Aδ
C
Aβ SA1


