===== Page 1 =====
804    Part V / Movement
A  Left ﬂexion and right extension
C
B  Right ﬂexion and left extension
IF
Stim
Stim
lFmn
CPG
(IF)
Stim
rFmn
CPG
(rF)
PMRF
Left
Right
IE
rF
rE
rF
lE
lF
rE
F
E
F
E
Figure 33–13  Microstimulation 
of the pontomedullary reticular 
formation (PMRF) produces phase-
dependent responses in flexor and 
extensor muscles. (Data from  
T. Drew.)
A. Stimulation of the left PMRF dur-
ing the swing phase of the left limb 
produces a transient increase in the 
electromyogram activity of the left 
flexor muscles (lF) and a simultane-
ous decrease in activity in the right 
extensor muscles (rE) (red arrows). 
There is little stimulus-evoked activity 
in the left extensor (lE) or right flexor 
(rF) muscles, which are inactive at 
this phase of the step cycle.
B. Stimulation at the same location 
in the PMRF during the swing phase 
of the right limb produces the inverse 
responses.
C.  The phase-dependent nature of 
the responses is likely determined by 
the cyclical nature of the level of excit-
ability in interneurons that are part of 
the locomotor central pattern genera-
tor (CPG). Responses are gated by 
activity in the flexor (F) and extensor 
(E) parts of the locomotor CPG. When 
the first stimulation arrives, flexor 
interneurons in the left CPG (lF) are 
active, whereas those in the right 
CPG (rF) are inactive. The stimulation 
therefore produces a response only in 
the left flexor motor neurons (lFmn). 
When the second stimulation arrives, 
flexor interneurons in the right CPG 
(rF) are active, whereas those on the 
left side are inactive, and therefore, 
the stimulation elicits a response only 
in the flexor motor neurons on the 
right (rFmn).
gait (see below). In a complementary manner, the wide-
spread effects of the PMRF on multiple limbs allow it 
to produce the coordinated changes in postural activ-
ity that accompany gait modifications. The coordina-
tion between gait modifications and postural activity 
is assured by the strong connections from the motor 
cortex to the PMRF in the same manner as for discrete 
voluntary movements (Chapter 34). The PMRF also 
contributes to the compensatory changes in posture 
that occur as a consequence of perturbations. In this 
situation, it forms part of a spino-bulbo-spinal reflex 
that contributes to the widespread postural responses 
that follow the immediate spinal reflexes activated by 
a sudden perturbation.
Visually Guided Locomotion Involves the 
Motor Cortex
Walking is most often guided by vision, and the motor 
cortex is largely essential for visually guided move-
ment, especially when gait must be modified to ensure 
precise control over limb trajectory and foot place-
ment. In mammals, lesions of the motor cortex do not 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    805
prevent animals from walking on a smooth floor, but 
they severely impair “precision locomotion,” which 
requires a high degree of visuomotor coordination, 
such as walking on the rungs of a horizontal ladder, 
stepping over a series of barriers, and stepping over 
single objects placed on a treadmill belt.
Experiments in intact cats trained to step over 
obstacles attached to a moving treadmill belt show 
that precision locomotion is associated with consider-
able modulation of the activity of numerous neurons 
in the motor cortex (Figure 33–14). Other neurons in 
the motor cortex show a more discrete pattern of activ-
ity and are activated sequentially during different 
parts of the swing phase. The activity of these cortical 
neurons correlates with the periods of modified mus-
cle activity required to produce the gait modifications 
in a similar manner to what occurs during reaching 
(see Figure 34–21). Such subpopulations of neurons 
may serve to modify the activity of the groups of syn-
ergistic muscles required to produce flexible changes 
in limb trajectory.
Many of these cortical neurons project directly to 
the spinal cord (corticospinal neurons) and thus may 
regulate the activity of spinal interneurons, including 
those within the CPG, thereby adapting the timing 
and magnitude of motor activity to a specific locomo-
tor task. Brief trains of electrical stimulation applied 
to either the motor cortex or the corticospinal tract in 
normal walking cats produce transient responses in 
the contralateral limb in a phase-dependent manner, 
similar to that produced by activity in various brain 
stem structures. However, in contrast to the situation 
500 ms
Motor
cortex
unit
EMGs from
foreleg ﬂexor
muscles
Step over obstacle
Record motor cortex
Foreleg
ﬂexor
muscle
Figure 33–14  Stepping movements 
are adapted by the motor cortex in 
response to visual inputs.  When a cat 
steps over a visible object fixed to a tread-
mill, neurons in the motor cortex increase 
in activity. This increase in cortical activity 
is associated with enhanced activity in 
foreleg muscles, as seen in the electro-
myograms (EMG). (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Drew 1988.)


===== Page 3 =====
806    Part V / Movement
observed with brain stem structures, increasing the 
duration of the stimulation train applied to the motor 
cortex frequently results in a reset of the locomo-
tor rhythm, characterized as an interruption of the 
ongoing step cycle and the initiation of a new step 
cycle. This suggests that in mammals the corticospi-
nal tract has privileged access to the rhythm genera-
tor of the CPG.
Planning of Locomotion Involves the  
Posterior Parietal Cortex
When humans and animals approach an obstacle in 
their pathway, they must adjust their walking pattern 
to move around the obstacle or step over it. Planning 
of these adjustments begins two or three steps before 
the obstacle is reached. Recent experiments suggest 
that the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is particularly 
involved in planning gait modifications. Lesions in 
this region cause walking cats to misplace the posi-
tioning of their paws as they approach an obstacle and 
increase the probability that one or more legs contact 
the obstacle as they step over it.
In contrast to what is observed in the motor cortex, 
recordings in PPC show that many neurons increase 
their activity in advance of the step over the obsta-
cle. Moreover, many cells in the PPC discharge simi-
larly regardless of which leg is first to step over the 
obstacle (Figure 33–15A,B). Such cells may provide an 
estimation of the position of the body with respect to 
objects in the environment (Figure 33–15B), allowing 
animals to modify gait as they approach the obstacle. 
The manner in which the PPC interacts with other cor-
tical and subcortical structures generally considered 
to be involved in motor planning is unknown. How-
ever, recent work shows that the premotor cortex also 
makes an important contribution to planning visually 
guided gait modifications (Figure 33–15C) and may be 
implicated in the transformation of a global signal pro-
viding information concerning obstacle location to the 
muscle-based signal necessary for the execution of the 
step over the obstacle.
Visual information about the size and location of 
an obstacle is also stored in working memory, a form of 
short-term memory (Chapter 52). This information is 
used to ensure that gait modifications in the hindlimb 
are coordinated with those of the forelimb and is nec-
essary because the obstacle is no longer within the vis-
ual field by the time the hindlimbs are stepping over it. 
The neurobiological mechanisms underlying this form 
of working memory remain to be established, but the 
persistence of the memory appears to depend, at least 
in part, on neuronal systems in the PPC. With bilateral 
lesions or cooling of the medial PPC, the memory is 
completely abolished (Figure 33–16A). Complement-
ing this observation is the finding that the activity of 
some neurons in the PPC is elevated during a step over 
an obstacle, as well as throughout the time the animal 
straddles the obstacle (Figure 33–16B). This activity 
could represent the working memory of key features 
of the obstacle such as height.
The Cerebellum Regulates the Timing and 
Intensity of Descending Signals
Damage to the cerebellum results in marked abnor-
malities in locomotor movements, including the need 
for a widened base of support, impaired coordination 
of joints, and abnormal coupling between limbs during 
stepping. These symptoms, which are characteristic of 
ataxia (Chapter 37), indicate that the cerebellum con-
tributes importantly to the regulation of locomotion.
A major function of the cerebellum is to correct 
movement based on a comparison of the motor sig-
nals sent to the spinal cord and the movement pro-
duced by that motor command (Chapter 37). In the 
context of locomotion, the motor signal is generated 
by neurons in the motor cortex and brain stem nuclei. 
Information about the movement comes from the 
ascending spinocerebellar pathways. For the hind 
legs of the cat, these are the dorsal and ventral spi-
nocerebellar tracts. Neurons in the dorsal spinocer-
ebellar tract (DSCT neurons) are strongly activated 
by numerous leg proprioceptors and thus provide 
the cerebellum with detailed information about the 
mechanical state of the hind legs. In contrast, neurons 
in the ventral tract (VSCT neurons) are activated pri-
marily by interneurons in the CPG, thus providing 
the cerebellum with information about the state of the 
spinal locomotor network.
During locomotion, the motor command (the cen-
tral efference copy), the movement (the afference copy, 
via the DSCT), and the state of the spinal networks 
(the spinal efference copy, via the VSCT) are integrated 
within the cerebellum and expressed as changes in the 
pattern of rhythmical discharge of Purkinje cells in the 
cerebellar cortex and neurons in the deep cerebellar 
nuclei. These signals from the deep cerebellar nuclei 
are then sent to the motor cortex and the various brain 
stem nuclei where they modulate descending signals 
to the spinal cord to correct any motor errors.
Behavioral experiments show that the cerebellum 
also plays an important role in the adaptation of gait. 
For example, when subjects walk on a split treadmill, 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    807
C
A
B
Right limb leads
Step over
obstacle
Step over
obstacle
Left limb leads
lF
rF
PPC
neuron
Limb state-object coupling
Storage
PPC
Movement
execution;
adaptive gait
modifications
Motor planning:
dynamic limb state-
object coupling and
limb coordination
Spinal CPGs
Cerebellum
Basal
ganglia
Premotor
cortex
Motor
cortex
Posterior
parietal cortex
Recording from
neuron in posterior 
parietal cortex
Figure 33–15  Neurons in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) 
are involved in planning voluntary gait modifications.
A. Activity of a PPC neuron in the right cortex during a step 
over the obstacle when the left or right forelimb is the first to 
step over the obstacle. In each situation, the cell in the PPC 
discharges two to three steps in advance of the step over the 
obstacle.
B.  The observation that PPC neurons discharge independent 
of which limb is the first to step over the obstacle suggests a 
global function of PPC in the planning of locomotion. In a gen-
eral scheme, the PPC neurons are involved in the estimation of 
the relative location of an object with respect to the body (limb 
state–object coupling [double arrow]) and storage information 
in the PPC for later retrieval.
C.  The PPC does not act alone in planning gait modifications. 
It is part of a cortical and subcortical network that includes, 
among other structures, the premotor cortex, the basal ganglia, 
and the cerebellum. Connections exist between each of these 
structures as well as between each of them and the motor cor-
tex, which is responsible for the execution of the gait modifica-
tion. (Abbreviation: CPG, central pattern generator.) (Adapted, 
with permission, from Drew and Marigold 2015.)
so that each leg walks at a different speed, they initially 
show a very asymmetric gait before adapting over time 
to a more asymmetric one. When the two treadmill 
belts are reset to the same speed, they again show an 
asymmetric gait, demonstrating that the experimental 
condition had produced adaptation (see Figure 30–13). 
Patients with damage to the cerebellum are not able to 
adapt to this condition.
The Basal Ganglia Modify Cortical and  
Brain Stem Circuits
The basal ganglia are found in all vertebrates from the 
oldest vertebrates to primates and probably con-
tribute to the selection of different motor patterns. 
The importance of the basal ganglia to the control of 
locomotion is clearly demonstrated by the deficits in 


===== Page 5 =====
808    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–16  The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is involved 
in maintaining an estimate of an obstacle in working mem-
ory during locomotion.
A.  Upper figure: Normal animals were trained to walk for-
ward, step over an obstacle, and then pause. While the animal 
paused, the obstacle was removed. When walking resumed, 
the hind legs stepped high to avoid the remembered obstacle. 
This memory lasted for more than 30 seconds. The trajectory 
of the hindlimbs was scaled appropriately for the height of the 
obstacle and for the relative position of the hind paws. Bilateral 
lesions of the PPC led to an impairment in the memory, making 
it impossible for the animal to pass the obstacle without hitting 
it. Lower figure: Following the lesion, animals stored the mem-
ory for only 1 to 2 seconds, and the maximum height of the 
toe was insufficient to clear the obstacle and was significantly 
lower than in the prelesion condition. (Adapted from McVea and 
Pearson 2009.)
B. Upper figure: Neurons recorded in an intact animal in the 
PPC on the right side discharged in the period between the 
passage of the left forelimb (lFL) and hindlimb (lHL) over an 
obstacle (represented by electromyogram activity from repre-
sentative flexor muscles in each limb). This discharge may be 
used to coordinate the movement of the hindlimb with that of 
the forelimb during the visually guided gait modification. Lower 
figure: When the cat steps over an obstacle and pauses, as in 
part A, cells in the PPC show a maintained discharge that could 
provide the neural representation of the working memory. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Lajoie et al. 2010.)
10 s
PPC
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Pause duration (s)
Maximum toe height (cm)
Intact
Hind legs step high to avoid
remembered position of obstacle
Left limb leads over obstacle
Step over
obstacle
Lesioned
B
A
Prelesion
Postlesion
Straddle obstacle;  
obstacle is lowered
Straddle
Spikes/s
PPC
neuron
Forelimbs
step over
Hindlimbs
step over
IFL
IHL
Spikes/s
PPC
neuron
IFL
IHL
200
0
70
0
locomotion observed in patients with Parkinson dis-
ease, which disrupts the normal functioning of the 
basal ganglia due to degradation of their dopamin-
ergic inputs from the substantia nigra (Chapter 38).
Such patients show a characteristic slow, shuffling 
gait and, in later stages of the disease, can also show 
“freezing” of gait. Patients with Parkinson disease also 
show problems with balance during locomotion and 
with the anticipatory postural adjustments that occur 
at the initiation of a gait pattern. These deficits suggest 
that the basal ganglia contribute to the initiation, regula-
tion, and modification of gait patterns. This regulation is 
mediated by the two major projections of the basal gan-
glia to the brain stem pathways and cortical structures.
The basal ganglia influence brain stem activity 
through their projections to the PPN. The PPN receives 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    809
inhibitory inputs from GABAergic inhibitory neu-
rons in the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) as 
well as from the globus pallidus pars interna (GPi); 
it also receives glutamatergic input from neurons in 
the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Decreased inhibitory 
input and increased glutamatergic input to PPN from 
the basal ganglia are thought to promote activity in 
PPN and favor exploratory locomotion. The STN and 
GPi are major targets of deep brain stimulation for 
improvement of motor symptoms such as rigidity and 
reduced mobility in patients with Parkinson disease.
The basal ganglia influence cortical activity by 
means of its connections via the thalamus to different 
parts of the frontal cortex, including the supplemen-
tary motor regions. These connections allow the basal 
ganglia to exert a modulatory effect on visually guided 
locomotion, possibly by selecting the appropriate motor 
patterns required in different behavioral situations.
Computational Neuroscience Provides  
Insights Into Locomotor Circuits
While functional studies have revealed much about 
the organization of the locomotor networks, their over-
all complexity makes it difficult to capture the integra-
tive function of synaptic and cellular properties of the 
circuit. Computational network modeling, however, 
allows one to simulate the circuit activity and to inves-
tigate the dynamic interactions between the circuit 
elements. Computational models can be developed at 
many levels: to study the ionic basis of neural activ-
ity within a given circuit, to study the connectivity 
between different groups of neurons in a particular cir-
cuit, or to better understand the interactions between 
different structures in the locomotor network. Compu-
tational models at each of these levels have been devel-
oped to study rhythm and pattern generation in both 
invertebrates and vertebrates and in the latter, ranging 
from the lamprey to mammals. As in other domains, 
approaches combining experimental manipulation 
and computational modeling are likely to increase in 
the coming years and have the potential to advance 
our understanding of the complex systems and inter-
connections between structures that are required to 
produce the full locomotor repertoire.
Neuronal Control of Human Locomotion  
Is Similar to That of Quadrupeds
By necessity, most of our understanding of the neu-
ral mechanisms underlying the control of locomotion 
comes from experiments on quadrupedal animals. 
Nonetheless, the available evidence suggests that all 
the major principles concerning the origin and regula-
tion of walking in quadrupeds also pertain to locomo-
tion in humans. Although the issue of whether CPGs 
exist in humans remains contentious, several obser-
vations are compatible with the view that CPGs are 
important for human locomotion.
For example, observations of some patients with 
spinal cord injury parallel the findings from studies 
of spinal cats. Striking cases of patients with nearly 
complete transection of the spinal cord have shown 
uncontrollable, spontaneous, rhythmic movements of 
the legs when the hips were extended. This behavior 
closely parallels the rhythmic stepping movements in 
chronic spinal cats. Moreover, tonic electrical stimula-
tion of the spinal cord below the injury can evoke 
locomotor-like activity, as in other mammals.
Parallels between human and quadrupedal walk-
ing have also been found in patients trained after spinal 
cord injury. Daily training combined with drug treat-
ments restores stepping in spinal cats and improves 
stepping in patients with chronic spinal injuries. Peo-
ple with severe spinal cord injury who have been 
exposed to both treadmill-induced stepping and drug 
treatments similar to those that have been shown to 
activate the CPG in cats have demonstrated dramatic 
improvements in the ability to produce locomotion 
(Box 33–4). These results suggest that CPGs are present 
in humans and share functional similarities with CPGs 
found in other vertebrates.
Compelling evidence for the existence of spinal 
CPGs in humans also comes from studies in human 
infants who make rhythmic stepping movements 
immediately after birth if held upright and moved 
over a horizontal surface. This strongly suggests that 
some of the basic neuronal circuits for locomotion are 
innate and present at birth when descending control 
systems are not well developed. Because stepping can 
also occur in infants who lack cerebral hemispheres 
(anencephaly), these circuits must be located at or 
below the brain stem, perhaps entirely within the 
spinal cord.
During the first year of life, as automatic stepping 
is transformed into functional walking, these basic 
circuits are thought to be brought under supraspinal 
control. In particular, the stepping pattern gradually 
develops from a more primitive flexion-extension pat-
tern that generates little effective forward movement 
to the mature pattern of complex movements. It is 
plausible, based on studies of cats, that this adaptation 
reflects maturation of descending systems that origi-
nate in the motor cortex and brain stem nuclei and are 
modulated by the cerebellum.


===== Page 7 =====
810    Part V / Movement
According to the World Health Organization, between 
250,000 and 500,000 people worldwide incur spinal 
cords injuries annually. For many, this results in per-
manent loss of sensation, movement, and autonomic 
function. The devastating loss of functional abilities, 
together with the enormous cost of treatment and care, 
creates an urgent need for effective methods to repair 
the injured spinal cord and to facilitate functional 
recovery.
Over the past decades, progress has been made in 
animal research aimed at preventing secondary dam-
age after injury, repairing the axons of lesioned neurons 
in the spinal cord, and promoting the regeneration of 
severed axons through and beyond the site of injury. 
In many instances, the regeneration of axons has been 
associated with modest recovery of locomotor func-
tion. However, none of the regeneration strategies has 
reached the point where they can be confidently used in 
humans with spinal cord injury.
Thus, rehabilitative training is the preferred treat-
ment for people with spinal cord injury. One especially 
successful technique for enhancing walking in patients 
with partial damage to the spinal cord is repetitive, 
weight-supported stepping on a treadmill (Figure 33–17). 
This technique is based on the observation that spinal 
cats and rodents can be trained to step with their hind 
legs on a moving treadmill.
For humans, partial support of the body weight 
through a harness system is critical to the success of 
training; presumably, it facilitates the training of spinal 
cord circuits by reducing the requirements for supraspi-
nal control of posture and balance.
Although the neural basis for the improvement in 
locomotor function with treadmill training has not been 
established, it is thought to depend on synaptic plastic-
ity in local spinal circuits as well as successful transmis-
sion of at least some command signals from the brain 
through preserved descending pathways if the spinal 
cord injury is only partial.
Locomotor training is sometimes combined with 
other treatments. These include different types of medi-
cation designed to reduce spasticity, seen as involuntary 
muscle contractions, and facilitation of activity in spinal 
circuits by electrical transcutaneous activation of spinal 
circuits and/or activation of corticospinal pathways by 
transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Box 33–4  Rehabilitative Training Improves Walking After Spinal Cord Injury in Humans
Figure 33–17  Treadmill training improves locomotor 
function in patients with partial spinal cord injury.
A.  The patient is partially supported on a moving treadmill 
by a harness, and stepping movements are assisted by 
therapists.
B. Locomotor function improvement in 44 patients with 
chronic spinal cord injury after daily training lasting from 3 
to 20 weeks. The functional rating ranges from 0 (unable to 
stand or walk) to 5 (walking without devices for more than five 
steps). (Adapted, with permission, from Wernig et al. 1995. 
Copyright © 2006, John Wiley and Sons.)
20
15
10
5
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Number of patients
Functional rating
Before training
A
B
After training
Weight support
Harness


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    811
At the cortical level, stroke involving the motor 
cortex or damage to the corticospinal tracts leads 
to deficits in locomotion, as in cats. However, the 
deficits in humans are much stronger than in cats 
or even nonhuman primates, suggesting that the 
motor cortex in humans plays a more important role 
in locomotion than in other mammals. Studies using 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to modulate 
motor cortical activity also show that the motor cor-
tex contributes importantly to the control of human 
locomotion. TMS parameters that result in cortical 
inactivation, for example, produce a decrease in the 
level of muscle activity during locomotion. In con-
trast, TMS parameters that activate the motor cor-
tex improve the recovery of locomotion following 
incomplete spinal cord injury.
Imaging studies, together with high-resolution 
electroencephalogram recordings, show changes in the 
activity of several cortical regions, including the motor 
cortex, premotor cortex, and PPC, during locomotion 
and particularly during imagined locomotion over 
obstacles. Imaging studies have also shown increased 
activity during locomotion in those parts of the mid-
brain shown to be important for the initiation and 
speed control of locomotion in animals. Similarly, neu-
rons in the pedunculopontine nucleus can be affected 
in Parkinson disease, contributing to the severe gait 
disturbances seen in the late phase of the disease.
Highlights
  1.  Locomotion is a highly conserved behavior that 
is essential for the survival of the species. Our 
understanding of the neuronal mechanisms 
involved in the generation and control of locomo-
tion came initially from the study of phylogeneti-
cally older animals, such as the lamprey and the 
tadpole. More recently, in mammals, with their 
more complex nervous systems, the organization 
of the different neural pathways involved in the 
generation and regulation of locomotion has also 
been determined in significant detail.
  2.  The spinal cord, in isolation from descending and 
rhythmical peripheral afferent inputs, can gener-
ate a complex locomotor pattern that contains 
elements of the rhythms and patterns observed 
in intact animals. The circuits responsible for pro-
ducing this activity are referred to as central pat-
tern generators (CPGs). Activity in spinal circuits 
can be modified by experience.
  3.  The basic components of CPGs controlling swim-
ming are excitatory rhythm-generating neurons 
together with commissural inhibitory neurons 
responsible for left–right alternation. This organ-
izational principle is also found in CPGs con-
trolling limbed movements with the addition 
of flexor-extensor pattern-generating circuits 
and additional commissural neuronal networks. 
The circuits in the locomotor networks have a 
modular organization with distinct transmitter 
and molecular codes for the constituent neurons. 
Descending command signals act on these circuit 
elements to produce the diverse aspects of loco-
motor behavior.
  4.  Ionic membrane properties in interneurons and 
motor neurons contribute to rhythm and pattern 
generation. Cell-specific manipulation of these 
properties will enable a precise understand-
ing of their relative contributions to locomotor 
production.
  5.  Peripheral afferent inputs modulate the func-
tion of spinal locomotor circuits. Proprioceptive 
sensors are used to stabilize phase transitions 
between stance and swing (and vice versa), 
whereas input from exteroceptors is used to 
modify limb activity in response to unexpected 
perturbations.
  6.  Circuits that are involved in initiating loco-
motion, controlling speed of locomotion, and 
selecting gaits are localized in the midbrain and 
encompass excitatory neurons in the pedunculo-
pontine and cuneiform nuclei. These excitatory 
nuclei serve diverse roles in controlling either 
slow explorative locomotion or the full range of 
speeds and gaits including fast escape locomo-
tion. Molecular-genetically driven cell-specific 
approaches allow unparalleled access to the 
organization of these pathways in the brain stem 
and how they integrate with spinal locomotor 
networks.
  7.  Activity in the three main structures in the brain 
stem with axons that descend to the spinal cord 
(the pontomedullary reticular formation, the 
lateral vestibular nucleus, and the red nucleus) 
contributes to the control of posture and inter-
limb coordination. Signals from these structures 
modify the level of muscle activity in a structure-
specific manner.
  8.  The motor cortex provides precise control of 
muscle activity patterns to allow animals to 
make visually guided anticipatory adjustments 
of their gait. The signal from the motor cortex is 
integrated into the ongoing rhythm.
  9.  The posterior parietal cortex (PPC) is part of a net-
work that contributes to the advanced planning 


===== Page 9 =====
812    Part V / Movement
of gait based on visual information. PPC neu-
rons estimate the relative location of objects 
with respect to the body and retain information 
in working memory to facilitate coordination of 
the limbs. The contribution of other cortical and 
subcortical areas to locomotor planning remains 
little studied.
10.  Inputs from the cerebellum and the basal ganglia 
are used to correct motor errors and select the 
appropriate patterns of motor activity. The contri-
bution of the basal ganglia to the control of locomo-
tion is complex and is only now being determined.
11.  The available evidence suggests that the neural 
control mechanisms determined from experi-
ments in animals are also used to control locomo-
tion in humans, including the existence of a CPG. 
Major advances remain to be made in under-
standing the mechanisms of spinal and supraspi-
nal influences on human locomotor control.
12.  Recent technological advances now give us an 
unparalleled opportunity to investigate the con-
trol mechanisms underlying locomotion. Molec-
ular and genetic advances provide the ability 
to manipulate behavior at both the cellular and 
systems level and allow detailed study of the 
contributions of brain stem and spinal circuits 
to the initiation and regulation of locomotion. 
Advances in multineuronal recording tech-
niques in animals, as well as the development 
of high-resolution recordings of human brain 
activity, will facilitate our understanding of the 
contribution of cortical structures to the control 
of locomotion.
 Trevor Drew  
 Ole Kiehn 
Suggested Reading
Armstrong DM. 1988. The supraspinal control of mamma-
lian locomotion. J Physiol 405:1–37.
Brown T. 1911. The intrinsic factors in the act of progression 
in mammals. Proc R Soc B 84:308–319.
Drew T, Andujar JE, Lajoie K, Yakovenko S. 2008. Cortical 
mechanisms involved in visuomotor coordination during 
precision walking. Brain Res Rev 57:199–211.
Grillner S. 2006. Biological pattern generation: the cellular 
and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 
52:751–766.
Jankowska E. 2008. Spinal interneuronal networks in the cat: 
elementary components. Brain Res Rev 57:46–55.
Kiehn O. 2016. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits 
that control locomotion. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:224–238.
Orlovsky G, Deliagina TG, Grillner S. 1999. Neuronal Control of 
Locomotion: From Mollusc to Man. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Pearson KG. 2008. Role of sensory feedback in the control of 
stance duration in walking cats. Brain Res Rev 57:222–227.
Rossignol S. 1996. Neural control of stereotypic limb move-
ments. Supplement 29. In: Handbook of Physiology, Exercise: 
Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. New York: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Sherrington CS. 1913. Further observations on the produc-
tion of reflex stepping by combination of reflex excitation 
with reflex inhibition. J Physiol 47:196–214.
Takakusaki K, Chiba R, Nozu T, Okumura T. 2016. Brainstem 
control of locomotion and muscle tone with special refer-
ence to the role of the mesopontine tegmentum and med-
ullary reticulospinal systems. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 
123:695–729.
References
Ampatzis K, Song J, Ausborn J, El Manira A. 2014. Separate 
microcircuit modules of distinct v2a interneurons and 
motoneurons control the speed of locomotion. Neuron 
83:934–943.
Bouvier J, Caggiano V, Leiras R, et al. 2015. Descending com-
mand neurons in the brain stem that halt locomotion. Cell 
163:1191–1203.
Brocard F, Tazerart S, Vinay L. 2010. Do pacemakers drive 
the central pattern generator for locomotion in mammals? 
Neuroscientist 16:139–155.
Buchanan JT, Grillner S. 1987. Newly identified “glutamate 
interneurons” and their role in locomotion in the lamprey 
spinal cord. Science 236:312–314.
Butt SJ, Kiehn O. 2003. Functional identification of interneu-
rons responsible for left-right coordination of hindlimbs 
in mammals. Neuron 38:953–963.
Caggiano V, Leiras R, Goni-Erro H, et al. 2018. Midbrain cir-
cuits that set locomotor speed and gait selection. Nature 
553:455–460.
Capelli P, Pivetta C, Soledad Esposito M, Arber S. 2017. 
Locomotor speed control circuits in the caudal brainstem. 
Nature 551:373–377.
Choi JT, Bouyer LJ, Nielsen JB. 2015. Disruption of locomotor 
adaptation with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion over the motor cortex. Cereb Cortex 25:1981–1986.
Conway BA, Hultborn H, Kiehn O. 1987. Proprioceptive 
input resets central locomotor rhythm in the spinal cat. 
Exp Brain Res 68:643–656.
Crone SA, Quinlan KA, Zagoraiou L, et al. 2008. Genetic 
ablation of V2a ipsilateral interneurons disrupts left-right 
locomotor coordination in mammalian spinal cord. Neuron 
60:70–83.
Dougherty KJ, Zagoraiou L, Satoh D, et al. 2013. Locomotor 
rhythm generation linked to the output of spinal shox2 
excitatory interneurons. Neuron 80:920–933.


