===== Page 1 =====
1188    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–6  Electrical activity refines the specificity of 
synaptic connections of retinal ganglion cells. Some retinal 
ganglion cells initially form dendritic arbors that are limited to 
specific sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer of the retina, 
whereas others initially form diffuse arbors that are later 
pruned to form large specific patterns. Similarly, the axonal 
arbors of retinal ganglion cells initially innervate a large region 
of their target fields in the superior colliculus. This expan-
sive axonal arbor is then refined so as to concentrate many 
branches in a small region. Abolishing electrical activity in reti-
nal ganglion cells decreases the remodeling of dendritic and 
axonal arbors.
Retinal 
ganglion cells
Circuit
activity
Light
Retina
Optic 
tectum
On layer
Off layer
through neural activity. In the visual system, sharpen-
ing involves loss of synapses. We will return to this 
process of synapse elimination at the end of this 
chapter and consider its consequences for behavior in 
the next chapter.
In a few cases, neural activity promotes specific-
ity in a different way, by turning an inappropriate tar-
get into an appropriate one. This mechanism has been 
most clearly demonstrated in skeletal muscle, where 
mammalian muscle fibers can be divided into several 
categories according to their contractile characteristics 
(Chapter 31). Muscle fibers of particular types express 
genes for distinctive isoforms of the main contractile 
proteins, such as myosins and troponins.
Few muscles are composed exclusively of a single type 
of fiber; most have fibers of all types. Yet the branches 
of an individual motor axon innervate muscle fibers of 
a single type, even in “mixed” muscles in which fibers 
of different types are intermingled (Figure 48–7A). 
This pattern implies a remarkable degree of synaptic 
specificity. However, matching does not always come 
about through recognition in the motor axon of the 
appropriate type of muscle fiber. The motor axon can 
also convert the target muscle fiber to an appropriate 
type. When a muscle is denervated at birth, before the 
properties of its fibers are fixed, a nerve that normally 
innervates a slow muscle can be redirected to inner-
vate a muscle destined to become fast, and vice versa. 
Under these conditions, the contractile properties of 
the muscle are partially transformed in a direction 
imposed by the firing properties of the motor nerve 
(Figure 48–7B,C).
Different patterns of neural activity in fast and 
slow motor neurons are responsible for the switch in 
muscle properties. Most strikingly, direct electrical 
stimulation of a muscle with patterns normally evoked 
by slow or fast nerves leads to changes that are nearly 
as dramatic as those produced by cross-innervation 
(Figure 48–7D). Although activity-based conversion 
of the type observed at the neuromuscular junction is 
unlikely to be a major contributor to synaptic specific-
ity in the central nervous system, it is likely that central 
axons modify the properties of their synaptic targets, 
contributing to the diversification of neuronal sub-
types and refining connectivity imposed by recogni-
tion molecules.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1189
Figure 48–7  The pattern of motor neuron activity can 
change the biochemical and functional properties of  
skeletal muscle cells.
A. Muscle fibers have characteristic metabolic, molecular, and 
electrical properties that identify them as “slow” (tonic) or 
“fast” (phasic) types. The micrograph on the right shows a  
section of muscle tissue with histochemical staining for myosin 
ATPase. The middle sketch shows a section through the mus-
cle, in which motor neurons (green and brown) form synapses 
on a single type of muscle fiber. (Photo on right reproduced, 
with permission, from Arthur P. Hays.)
B. Motor neurons that connect with fast and slow muscle fibers 
(fast and slow motor neurons) exhibit distinct patterns of electri-
cal activity: steady low-frequency (tonic) firing for slow fibers and 
intermittent high-frequency bursts (phasic) for fast fibers.
C. Cross-innervation experiments showed that some property 
of the motor neuron helps to determine whether muscle fibers 
are fast or slow. Cross-innervation was achieved by surgically 
rerouting fast axons to slow muscle and vice versa. Although 
the properties of the motor neurons are little changed, the 
properties of the muscle change profoundly. For example, fast 
motor neurons induce fast properties in the slow  
muscle. (Adapted, with permission, from Salmons and  
Sreter 1976.)
D. The effects of innervation by fast and slow nerves on mus-
cle are mediated in part by their distinct patterns of activity. 
Stimulation of a fast muscle in a slow tonic pattern converts the 
muscle into a slow type. Conversely, fast phasic stimulation of 
a slow muscle can convert it to a faster type.
C  Cross-innervation
B  Activity pattern
D  Electrical stimulation
Phasic
activity
Tonic
activity
Slow
motor
neuron
Fast
motor
neuron
Slow
motor
neuron
Fast
motor
neuron
Slow
muscle
Fast
muscle
Slow muscle
with fast
properties
Fast muscle
with slow
properties
Slow muscle
Fast muscle
A
Principles of Synaptic Differentiation Are 
Revealed at the Neuromuscular Junction
The neuromuscular junction comprises three types of 
cells: a motor neuron, a muscle fiber, and Schwann 
cells. All three types are highly differentiated in the 
region of the synapse.
The process of synapse formation is initiated when 
a motor axon, guided by the multiple factors described 
in Chapter 47, reaches a developing skeletal muscle 
and approaches an immature muscle fiber. Contact is 
made, and the process of synaptic differentiation gets 
underway. As the growth cone begins its transforma-
tion into a nerve terminal, the portion of the muscle 


===== Page 3 =====
1190    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
surface opposite the nerve terminal begins to acquire 
its own specializations. As development proceeds, 
synaptic components are added and structural signs 
of synaptic differentiation become apparent in the pre- 
and postsynaptic cells and in the synaptic cleft. Even-
tually, the neuromuscular junction acquires its mature 
and complex form (Figure 48–8).
Three general features of neuromuscular junction 
development have provided clues about the molecu-
lar mechanisms that underlie synapse formation. 
First, nerve and muscle organize each other’s differ-
entiation. In principle, the precise apposition of pre- 
and postsynaptic specializations might be explained 
by independent programming of nerve and muscle 
properties. However, in muscle cells cultured alone, 
acetylcholine (ACh) receptors are generally distrib-
uted uniformly on the surface, although some are 
clustered as in mature postsynaptic membranes. Yet, 
when motor neurons are added to the cultures, they 
extend neurites that contact the muscle cells more or 
less randomly, instead of seeking out the ACh receptor 
clusters. New receptor clusters appear precisely at the 
points of contact with the presynaptic neurites, while 
preexisting uninnervated clusters eventually disperse 
(Figure 48–9). Thus, factors on or released by motor 
axons exert a profound influence on the synaptic 
organization of the muscle cell.
Likewise, muscles signal retrogradely to motor 
nerve terminals. When motor neurons in culture 
extend neurites, they assemble and transport synap-
tic vesicles, some of which form aggregates similar 
to those found in nerve terminals. When the neurites 
contact muscle cells, new vesicle clusters form oppo-
site the muscle membrane, and most of the preexisting 
clusters disperse.
These studies also revealed a second feature of 
neuromuscular development: that motor neurons and 
muscle cells can synthesize and arrange most syn-
aptic components without each other’s help. Unin-
nervated myotubes can synthesize functional ACh 
receptors and gather them into high-density aggre-
gates. Likewise, motor axons can form synaptic vesi-
cles and cluster them into varicosities in the absence of 
muscle. In fact, vesicles in growth cones can synthesize 
and release ACh in response to electrical stimulation, 
before the growth cone has reached its target cells. 
Thus, the developmental signals that pass between 
nerve and muscle do not induce wholesale changes 
in cell properties; rather, they assure that components 
of the pre- and postsynaptic machinery are organized 
at the correct time and in the right places. It is useful 
therefore to think of the intercellular signals that con-
trol synaptogenesis as organizers rather than inducers.
A third key feature of neuromuscular junction 
development is that new synaptic components are 
added in several distinct steps. The newly formed 
synapse is not simply a prototype of a fully developed 
synapse. Although nerve and muscle membrane form 
close contacts at early stages of synaptogenesis, only 
later does the synaptic cleft widen and the basal lam-
ina appear. Similarly, ACh receptors accumulate in the 
postsynaptic membrane before acetylcholinesterase 
accumulates in the synaptic cleft, and the postsynap-
tic membrane acquires junctional folds only after the 
nerve terminal has matured. Several different axons 
innervate each myotube around the time of birth, but 
during early postnatal life, all but one axon withdraws.
This elaborate sequence is not orchestrated by 
the simple act of contact between nerve and muscle. 
Instead, multiple signals pass between the cells—the 
nerve sends a signal to the muscle that triggers the 
first steps in postsynaptic differentiation, at which 
point the muscle sends a signal that triggers the initial 
steps of nerve terminal differentiation. The nerve then 
sends further signals to the muscle, and this interac-
tion continues.
We now consider retrograde (from muscle to 
nerve) and anterograde (from nerve to muscle) organ-
izers in more detail.
Differentiation of Motor Nerve Terminals Is 
Organized by Muscle Fibers
Soon after the growth cone of a motor axon contacts 
a developing myotube, a rudimentary form of neuro-
transmission begins. The axon releases ACh in vesic-
ular packets, the transmitter binds to receptors, and 
the myotube responds with depolarization and weak 
contraction.
The onset of transmission at the new synapse 
reflects the intrinsic capabilities of each synaptic part-
ner. Nevertheless, these intrinsic capabilities cannot 
readily explain the marked increase in the rate of trans-
mitter release that occurs after nerve-muscle contact is 
made, nor can they explain the accumulation of syn-
aptic vesicles and the assembly of active zones in the 
small portion of the motor axon that contacts the mus-
cle surface. These developmental steps require signals 
from muscle to nerve.
A clue to the source of these signals came from 
studies on the reinnervation of adult muscle. Although 
axotomy leaves muscle fibers denervated and leads to 
insertion of ACh receptors in nonsynaptic regions, the 
postsynaptic apparatus remains largely intact. It is still 
recognizable by its synaptic nuclei, junctional folds, 
and the ACh receptors, which remain far more densely 


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 48–8  The neuromuscular junction develops in 
sequential stages.
A. A growth cone approaches a newly fused myotube (1)  
and forms a morphologically unspecialized but functional  
contact (2). The nerve terminal accumulates synaptic  
vesicles and a basal lamina forms in the synaptic cleft (3).  
As the muscle matures, multiple axons converge on a single 
site (4). Finally, all axons but one are eliminated and the  
surviving terminal matures (5). As the synapse matures, 
acetylcholine (ACh) receptors become concentrated in the 
postsynaptic membrane and depleted from the extrasynaptic 
membrane. (Adapted, with permission, from Hall and Sanes 
1993.)
B. At the mature neuromuscular junction, pre- and postsynap-
tic membranes are separated by a synaptic cleft that contains 
basal lamina and extracellular matrix proteins. Vesicles are 
clustered at presynaptic release sites, transmitter receptors are 
clustered in the postsynaptic membrane, and nerve terminals 
are coated by Schwann cell processes. (Micrograph repro-
duced, with permission, from T. Gillingwater.)
ACh
receptors
Synaptic vesicles 
Mitochondrion
Junctional
fold
1
2
3
4
5
A  Development stages
B  Mature neuromuscular junction
Active        
zone
Nerve 
terminal
Schwann 
cell
Basal 
lamina


===== Page 5 =====
1192    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–9  Nerve and muscle cells express synaptic 
components, but synaptic organization requires cell inter-
actions. Acetylcholine receptors (AChR) are synthesized by 
muscle cells cultured without neurons. Many receptors are 
diffusely distributed, but some form high-density aggregates 
similar to those found in the postsynaptic membrane of the 
neuromuscular junction. When neurons first contact muscle, 
they do not restrict themselves to the receptor-rich aggregates. 
Instead, new receptor aggregates form at sites of neurite-
muscle contact, and many of the preexisting clusters disperse. 
Similarly, motor axons contain synaptic vesicles that cluster at 
sites of neurite contact with muscle cells. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Anderson and Cohen 1977; Lupa, Gordon, and 
Hall 1990.)
Myocyte
Motor 
neuron
AChR
cluster
packed in synaptic areas than in extrasynaptic areas of 
the cell. Damaged peripheral axons regenerate readily 
(unlike those in the central nervous system) and form 
new neuromuscular junctions that look and perform 
much like the original ones.
A century ago, Fernando Tello-Muñóz, a student of 
Santiago Ramón y Cajal, noted that the new junctions 
form at preexisting synaptic sites on the denervated 
muscle fibers even though the postsynaptic speciali-
zations occupy only 0.1% of the muscle fiber surface 
(Figure 48–10A). Later, electron microscopy showed 
that specialization in the axon occurs only in the termi-
nals that contact the muscle. For example, active zones 
form directly opposite the mouths of the postsynaptic 
junctional folds. This striking example of subcellular 
specificity implies that motor axons recognize signals 
associated with the postsynaptic apparatus.
When regenerating axons reach a muscle fiber, 
they encounter the basal lamina of the synaptic cleft. 
To explore the significance of this association, muscles 
were damaged in vivo in a way that killed the mus-
cle fibers but left their basal lamina intact. The necrotic 
fibers were phagocytized, leaving behind basal lamina 
sheaths on which synaptic sites were readily recogniz-
able. At the same time that the muscle was damaged, 
the nerve was cut and allowed to regenerate. Under 
these conditions, motor axons reinnervated the empty 
basal lamina sheaths, contacting synaptic sites as pre-
cisely as they would have if muscle fibers were present. 
Moreover, nerve terminals developed at these sites and 
active zones even formed opposite struts of basal lam-
ina that once lined junctional folds. These observations 
implied that components of the basal lamina organize 
presynaptic specialization (Figure 48–10B).
Several such molecular organizers have now been 
identified. Among the best studied are isoforms of the 
protein laminin. Laminins are major components of all 
basal laminae and promote axon outgrowth in many 
neuronal types. They are heterotrimers of α, β, and γ 
chains, comprising a family of five α, four β, and three γ 
chains (Chapter 47). Muscle fibers synthesize multiple 
laminin isoforms and incorporate them into the basal 
lamina. Laminin-211, a heterotrimer containing the 
α2, β1, and γ1 chains, is the major laminin in the basal 
lamina, and its absence leads to severe muscular dys-
trophy. In the synaptic cleft, however, isoforms bearing 
the β2 chain predominate (Figure 48–11A), and nerve 
terminals fail to differentiate fully in mutant mice that 
lack the β2 laminin (Figure 48–11B). The β2 laminins 
appear to act by binding to voltage-sensitive calcium 
channels that reside in the axon terminal membrane, 
where they couple activity to transmitter release. 
Laminins act on the extracellular domain of the chan-
nels, whereas the intracellular segment recruits or 
stabilizes other components of the release apparatus.
The finding that presynaptic differentiation is 
only partially compromised in the absence of laminins 
indicated that additional muscle-derived organizers 
of axonal specialization must exist. Several have now 
been identified, including members of the fibroblast 


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 48–10  Synaptic portions of basal lamina contain 
proteins that organize developing and regenerating nerve 
terminals.
A. Damaged motor axons regenerate and form new neuromus-
cular junctions. Nearly all of the new synapses form at the  
original synaptic sites. (Micrograph reproduced, with  
permission, from Glicksman and Sanes 1983.)
B. A strong preference for innervation at original synaptic sites 
persists even after the muscle fibers have been removed, leav-
ing behind basal lamina “ghosts.” Regenerated axons develop 
synaptic specialization on contact with the original synaptic 
sites on the basal lamina. (Micrograph reproduced, with per-
mission, from Glicksman and Sanes 1983.)
C. Following denervation of a skeletal muscle fiber and  
elimination of mature muscle fibers, muscle satellite cells  
proliferate and differentiate to form new myofibers. The  
expression of acetylcholine (ACh) receptors on the regener-
ated myofiber surface is concentrated in the synaptic areas of 
basal lamina, even when reinnervation is prevented. (Micro-
graph reproduced, with permission, from Burden, Sargent, and 
McMahan 1979. © The Rockefeller University Press.  Permis-
sion conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
B
A  
C
Nerve regeneration
Nerve regeneration
Muscle regeneration
Muscle satellite cells
Original
basal lamina
Regenerated
presynaptic terminal
Muscle regenerated
in absence of nerve
Motor
nerve
Postsynaptic
receptors
Muscle ﬁber
Basal
lamina
Synaptic
basal lamina
ACh
receptors
Basal
lamina
Denervation
Persistent denervation 
and muscle elimination 
Persistent denervation 
and muscle elimination 


===== Page 7 =====
1194    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–11  Different laminin isoforms are localized at 
synaptic and extrasynaptic areas of the basal lamina.
A. Different laminin isoforms are found in synaptic (brown) and 
extrasynaptic (green) areas of basal lamina. Isoforms, contain-
ing the β2 chain, are concentrated in the synaptic areas.
B. Maturation of neuromuscular junctions is impaired in mice 
lacking β2 laminins. These mutants have few active zones, and 
the synaptic cleft is invaded by Schwann cell processes (blue). 
(Micrograph reproduced, with permission, from Noakes et al. 
1995.)
B  Laminin  mutant
Schwann cell
Schwann cell invasion of synaptic cleft
A  Wild type
Schwann cell
Nerve
terminal
Basal 
lamina
Muscle
growth factor and collagen IV families, as well as a 
muscle membrane-associated protein, LRP4, that we 
will soon encounter again in the context of postsynap-
tic differentiation. Thus target-derived proteins from 
multiple families collaborate to organize the presynap-
tic nerve terminal.
Differentiation of the Postsynaptic Muscle 
Membrane Is Organized by the Motor Nerve
Soon after myoblasts fuse to form myotubes, the genes 
that encode ACh receptor subunits are activated. 
Receptor subunits are synthesized, assembled into 
pentamers in the endoplasmic reticulum, and inserted 
into the plasma membrane. As noted above, some 
receptors spontaneously form aggregates, but the 
majority are distributed throughout the membrane at a 
low density, approximately 1,000 per μm2.
Once synapse formation is complete, however, the 
distribution of the receptors changes drastically. The 
receptors become concentrated at the synaptic sites of 
the membrane (to a density up to 10,000 per μm2) and 
depleted in the nonsynaptic membrane (reduced 
to 10 per μm2 or less). This thousand-fold difference 
in ACh receptor density occurs within a few tens of 
micrometers from the edge of the nerve terminal.
Appreciation of the critical role of the nerve in the 
redistribution of ACh receptors inspired a search for 
factors that might promote their clustering. This quest 
led to the discovery of a proteoglycan, agrin. Agrin is 
synthesized by motor neurons, transported down the 
axon, released from nerve terminals, and incorporated 
into the synaptic cleft (Figure 48–12A,B). Some agrin 
isoforms are also made by muscle cells, but the neu-
ronal isoforms are about a thousand-fold more active 
in aggregating ACh receptors.
The phenotype of mutant mice lacking agrin 
shows that agrin has a central role in the organization 
of ACh receptors. Agrin mutants have grossly per-
turbed neuromuscular junctions and die at birth. The 
number, size, and density of ACh receptor aggregates 
are severely reduced in these mice (Figure 48–12C). 
Other components of the postsynaptic apparatus—
including cytoskeletal, membrane, and basal lamina 
proteins—are also reduced. Interestingly, the differ-
entiation of presynaptic elements is also perturbed. 
However, the defects in the presynaptic element do not 
result directly from lack of agrin in the motor neuron, 
but rather indirectly from the failure of the disorgan-
ized postsynaptic apparatus to generate signals for 
presynaptic specialization.
How does agrin work? Agrin’s major receptor is 
a complex of a muscle-specific tyrosine kinase called 
MuSK (muscle-specific trk-related receptor with a 
kringle domain) and a coreceptor subunit called LRP4 
(Figure 48–12A). MuSK and LRP4 are normally concen-
trated at synaptic sites in the muscle membrane, and 
muscles of mutant mice lacking MuSK or LRP4 do not 
have ACh receptor clusters (Figure 48–12C). Myotubes 
generated in vitro from these mutants express normal 
levels of ACh receptors, but these receptors cannot 
be clustered by agrin. Binding of agrin to the MuSK/
LRP4 complex initiates a chain of events that ends in 
receptor clustering. Key events are agrin-induced acti-
vation of MuSK’s kinase activity; autophosphoryla-
tion of the MuSK intracellular domain; recruitment of 


===== Page 8 =====
Figure 48–12  Agrin induces aggregation of acetylcholine 
(ACh) receptors at synaptic sites.
A. Agrin is a large (~400 kDa) extracellular matrix proteoglycan. 
Alternative splicing includes a “z” exon that confers the ability 
to cluster ACh receptors. When released by a nerve terminal, 
agrin binds Lrp4 on the muscle membrane, activating the  
membrane-associated receptor tyrosine kinase MuSK and 
triggering an intracellular cascade that results in ACh receptor 
clustering. Key intracellular signaling molecules are Dok7, Crk, 
and CrkL. These signal to rapsyn, a cytoplasmic ACh receptor–
associated protein, which physically interacts with and clusters 
the ACh receptors. (Adapted, with permission, from DeChiara 
et al. 1996.)
B. Few ACh receptor clusters form on myofibers grown in  
culture under control conditions, but addition of agrin induces 
ACh receptor clustering. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Misgeld et al. 2005.)
C. Muscles from wild-type neonatal mice and from three mutant 
types. Muscles were labeled for ACh receptors (green) and 
motor axons (brown). In wild-type mice, ACh receptor clusters 
have formed under each nerve terminal by birth, whereas in agrin 
mutants, most clusters have dispersed. ACh receptor clusters 
are also absent in MuSK, Dok7, and rapsyn mutant mice. When 
the genes for agrin and ChAT (choline acetyltransferase) are 
mutated, clusters of ACh receptors remain, indicating that agrin 
works by counteracting receptor dispersion mediated by ACh. 
All mutant conditions also show axonal abnormalities, reflecting 
defects in retrograde signaling to the motor axon. (Abbreviation: 
 MuSK, muscle-specific trk-related receptor with a kringle 
domain.) (Adapted, with permission, from Gautam et al. 1996.)
C
Wild type
Agrin mutant
MuSK mutant
Agrin / ChAT mutant
ACh receptors
Rapsyn
Lrp4
ACh receptors
MuSK
MuSK
MuSK
Rapsyn
Lrp4
Agrin
z
Agrin
Cultured muscle ﬁber
Cultured muscle ﬁber + agrin
A
B


===== Page 9 =====
1196    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
adaptor proteins Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL; and strength-
ening of an interaction between a cytoplasmic protein 
rapsyn and the ACh receptors. Rapsyn may be the final 
element in the sequence: It binds directly to the ACh 
receptors and can induce their aggregation in vitro. 
In mice lacking rapsyn, muscles form normally and 
ACh receptors accumulate in normal numbers but fail 
to aggregate at the synaptic sites on the membrane. 
Accordingly, muscles of mutant mice lacking Dok7 or 
rapsyn resemble those lacking MuSK or LRP4: They 
synthesize ACh receptors but do not have ACh recep-
tor clusters.
Thus, an extracellular protein (agrin), transmem-
brane proteins (MuSK and LRP4), adaptor proteins 
(Dok-7, Crk, and CrkL), and a cytoskeletal protein 
(rapsyn) form a chain that links commands from the 
motor axon to ACh receptor clustering in the muscle 
membrane.
Nevertheless, postsynaptic differentiation can 
occur in the absence of agrin signaling. This capacity 
was apparent in early studies on cultured muscle (see 
Figure 48–9) and is also seen in vivo: ACh receptor clus-
ters form initially but then disperse in agrin mutants 
(Figure 48–12C). Clustering also occurs in muscles that 
lack innervation entirely. Thus, the signaling pathway 
that initiates postsynaptic differentiation can be acti-
vated without agrin, but agrin is required to maintain 
clustering of ACh receptors.
The role of agrin is perhaps best understood in 
terms of the requirement that pre- and postsynap-
tic specializations be perfectly aligned. ACh recep-
tor aggregates persist in uninnervated muscles but 
disappear in agrin mutant muscles, suggesting that 
axons sculpt the postsynaptic membrane through 
the combined action of agrin and a dispersal factor. 
One major dispersal factor is ACh itself; clustering 
persists in mutants that lack both agrin and ACh  
(Figure 48–12C). Thus, agrin may render ACh recep-
tors immune to the declustering effects of ACh. 
Through a combination of positive and negative fac-
tors, the motor neuron ensures that the patches of 
postsynaptic membrane contacted by axon branches 
are rich in ACh receptors.
The Nerve Regulates Transcription of  
Acetylcholine Receptor Genes
Along with redistribution of ACh receptors in the 
plane of the membrane, the motor nerve orchestrates 
the transcriptional program responsible for expres-
sion of ACh receptor genes in muscle. To understand 
this aspect of transcriptional control, it is important to 
appreciate the geometry of the muscle.
Individual muscle fibers are often more than a 
centimeter long and contain hundreds of nuclei along 
their length. Most nuclei are far from the synapse, but 
a few are clustered beneath the synaptic membrane, so 
that their transcribed and translated products do not 
have far to go to reach the synapse. In newly formed 
myotubes, most nuclei express genes encoding ACh 
receptor subunits. In adult muscles, however, only 
synaptic nuclei express ACh receptor genes; nonsyn-
aptic nuclei do not. Two processes contribute to this 
transformation.
First, as synapses begin to form, expression of the 
ACh receptor subunit genes is increased in synaptic 
nuclei (Figure 48–13). Signals acting through MuSK 
are needed for this specialization. Second, around 
the time of birth, ACh receptor gene expression shuts 
down in nonsynaptic nuclei. This change reflects a 
repressive effect of the nerve, as originally shown by 
studies of denervated muscle. When muscle fibers are 
denervated, as happens when the motor nerve is dam-
aged, the density of ACh receptors in the postsynaptic 
membrane increases markedly, a phenomenon termed 
denervation supersensitivity.
This repressive effect of the nerve is mediated by 
electrical activation of the muscle. Under normal con-
ditions, the nerve keeps the muscle electrically active, 
and fewer ACh receptors are synthesized in active 
muscle than in inactive muscle. Indeed, direct stimu-
lation of denervated muscle through implanted elec-
trodes decreases ACh receptor expression, preventing 
or reversing the effect of denervation (Figure 48–13B). 
Conversely, when nerve activity is blocked by applica-
tion of a local anesthetic, the number of ACh receptors 
throughout the muscle fiber increases, even though the 
synapse is intact.
In essence, then, the nerve uses ACh to repress 
expression of ACh receptor genes extrasynaptically. 
Current that passes through the channel of the receptor 
leads to an action potential that propagates along the 
entire muscle fiber. This depolarization opens voltage-
dependent Ca2+ channels, leading to an influx of Ca2+, 
which activates a signal transduction cascade that 
reaches nonsynaptic nuclei and regulates transcription 
of ACh receptor genes. Thus, the same voltage changes 
that produce muscle contraction over a period of mil-
liseconds also regulate transcription of ACh receptor 
genes over a period of days.
The increase in transcription of ACh receptor 
genes in nuclei beneath the synapse, along with the 
decrease in nuclei distant from synapses, leads to local-
ization of ACh receptor mRNA and thus preferential 
synthesis and insertion of ACh receptors near synap-
tic sites. This local synthesis is reminiscent of that seen 


