===== Page 1 =====
540    Part IV / Perception
depends on the point of recombination. In tritanopes, 
the loss of S-cone function arises from mutations in the 
S-pigment gene.
Rod and Cone Circuits Merge in the Inner Retina
For vision under low-light conditions, the mammalian 
retina has an ON bipolar cell that is exclusively con-
nected to rods (see Figure 22–3B). By collecting inputs 
from up to 50 rods, this rod bipolar cell can pool the 
effects of dispersed single-photon absorptions in a 
small patch of retina. There is no corresponding OFF 
bipolar cell dedicated to rods.
Unlike all other bipolar cells, the rod bipolar cell 
does not contact ganglion cells directly but instead 
excites a dedicated neuron, the AII amacrine cell. This 
amacrine cell receives inputs from several rod bipolar 
cells and conveys its output to cone bipolar cells. It 
provides excitatory signals to ON bipolar cells through 
gap junctions as well as glycinergic inhibitory signals 
to OFF bipolar cells. These cone bipolar cells in turn 
excite ON and OFF ganglion cells, as described earlier. 
Thus, the rod signal is fed into the cone system after 
a detour that produces the appropriate signal polari-
ties for the ON and OFF pathways. The purpose of the 
added interneurons may be to allow greater pooling of 
rod signals than of cone signals.
Rod signals also enter the cone system through 
two other pathways. Rods can drive neighboring 
cones directly through electrical junctions, and they 
make connections with an OFF bipolar cell that ser-
vices primarily cones. Once the rod signal has reached 
the cone bipolars through these pathways, it can take 
advantage of the same intricate circuitry of the inner 
retina. Thus, the rod system of the mammalian retina 
may have been an evolutionary afterthought added to 
the cone circuits.
The Retina’s Sensitivity Adapts to Changes in 
Illumination
Vision operates under many different lighting condi-
tions. The intensity of the light coming from an object 
depends on the intensity of the ambient illumination 
and the fraction of this light reflected by the object’s 
surface, called the reflectance. The range of intensities 
encountered in a day is enormous, with variation span-
ning 10 orders of magnitude, but most of this variation 
is useless for the purpose of guiding behavior.
The illumination intensity varies by about nine 
orders of magnitude, mostly because our planet turns 
about its axis once a day, while the object reflectance 
varies much less, by about one order of magnitude 
in a typical scene. But this reflectance is the interest-
ing quantity for vision, for it characterizes objects and 
distinguishes them from the background. In fact, our 
visual system is remarkably good at calculating sur-
face reflectances independently of ambient illumina-
tion (Figure 22–18).
With an overall increase in ambient illumination, 
all points in the visual scene become brighter by the 
same factor. If the eye could simply reduce its sensi-
tivity by that same factor, the neural representation of 
the image would remain unchanged at the level of the 
ganglion cells and could be processed by the rest of the 
brain in the same way as before the change in illumina-
tion. Moreover, the retinal ganglion cells would only 
need to encode the 10-fold range of image intensities 
owing to the different object reflectances, instead of the 
10-billion-fold range that includes variations in ambi-
ent illumination. Some of this adjustment in sensitivity 
is performed by the pupil, which contracts in bright 
light, reducing retinal illumination by up to a factor of 
10. In addition, the retina itself performs an automatic 
gain control, called light adaptation, that approaches the 
ideal normalization we have imagined here.
Light Adaptation Is Apparent in Retinal Processing 
and Visual Perception
When flashes of light of different intensity are pre-
sented with a constant background illumination, the 
responses of a retinal ganglion cell fit a sigmoidal 
curve (Figure 22–19A). The weakest flashes elicit no 
response, a graded increase in flash intensity elicits 
graded responses, and the brightest flashes elicit satu-
ration. When the background illumination is increased, 
the response curve maintains the same shape but is 
shifted to higher flash intensities. Compensating for 
the increase in background illumination, the ganglion 
cell is now less sensitive to light variations: In the pres-
ence of a higher background, a larger change is needed 
to cause the same response. This lateral shifting of the 
stimulus–response relationship is a hallmark of light 
adaptation in the retina.
The consequences of this gain change for human 
visual perception are readily apparent in psychophysi-
cal experiments. When human subjects are asked to 
detect a flash in a background field of constant illu-
mination, detection on a brighter background neces-
sitates a brighter flash (Figure 22–19B). Under the ideal 
gain-control mechanism discussed earlier, two stimuli 
would produce the same response if they caused the 
same fractional change from the background inten-
sity. In that case, the threshold flash intensity should 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    541
Figure 22–18  A brightness illusion.
A. The two tiles marked with small dots appear to have differ-
ent color but actually reflect the same light intensity. (To see 
this, fold the page so they touch.) The trace underneath plots 
a profile of light intensity at the level of the arrowheads. Your 
visual system interprets this retinal image as a regular tile pat-
tern under spatially varying illumination with a diffuse shadow 
in the right half. Under that interpretation, the right tile must 
have a lighter color than the left, which is what you perceive. 
This process is automatic and requires no conscious analysis.
B. Retinal processing contributes to the perception of “light-
ness” by discounting the shadow’s smooth gradients of 
illumination and accentuating the sharp edges between 
checkerboard fields. The receptive field for a visual neuron with 
an excitatory center and inhibitory surround is shown at the 
top. As shown in a hundredfold magnification at the bottom, 
the surround is weak but extends over a much larger area than 
the center.
C. The result when a population of visual neurons with 
receptive fields as in B processes the image in A. This opera-
tion—the convolution of the image in A with the profile in 
B—subtracts from each point in the visual field the average 
intensity in a large surrounding region. The neural representa-
tion of the object has largely lost the effects of shading, and 
the two tiles in question do indeed have different brightness 
values in this representation.
x100
A
B
C
be proportional to the background intensity, a rela-
tionship known as Weber’s law of adaptation, which we 
encountered in considering somatic receptor sensitiv-
ity (Chapter 17). The visual system follows Weber’s law 
approximately: Over the entire range of vision, sensi-
tivity decreases somewhat less steeply with increasing 
background intensity (Figure 22–19B).
Multiple Gain Controls Occur Within the Retina
The enormous change in gain required for light adap-
tation arises at multiple sites within the retina. In star-
light, a single rod cell is stimulated by a photon only 
every few seconds, a rate insufficient to alter the cell’s 
adaptation status. However, a retinal ganglion cell 
combines signals from many rods, thus receiving a 
steady stream of photon signals that can elicit a light-
dependent gain change in the cell.
At somewhat higher light intensities, a rod bipo-
lar cell begins to adapt, changing its responsiveness 
depending on the average light level. Next, we reach 
a light intensity at which the gain of individual rod 
cells gradually decreases. Beyond that, the rods satu-
rate: All their cGMP-dependent channels are closed, 
and the membrane potential no longer responds to the 
light stimulus. By this time, around dawn, the much 
less sensitive cone cells are being stimulated effectively 
and gradually take over from the rods. As the ambient 
light increases further, toward noon, light adaptation 
results principally from gain changes within the cones.
The cellular mechanisms of light adaptation are 
best understood in the photoreceptors. The calcium-
dependent feedback pathways discussed earlier have 
a prominent role. Recall that when a light flash closes 
the cGMP-gated channels, the resulting decrease 
in intracellular Ca2+ accelerates several biochemi-
cal reactions that terminate the response to the flash 
(see Figure 22–7B). When illumination is continuous, 
however, the Ca2+ concentration remains low, and 
all these reactions are therefore in a steady state that 
both lowers the gain and accelerates the time course 
of the receptor’s response to light (Figure 22–19C). As 
a result, the light-adapted photoreceptor can respond 
to rapid changes in intensity much more quickly. This 
has important consequences for human visual percep-
tion; the contrast sensitivity to high-frequency flicker 
increases with intensity, an effect observed in primate 
retinal ganglion cells as well (see Figure 22–14).


===== Page 3 =====
542    Part IV / Perception
Discharge rate (spikes/s)
300
Response (mV/Rh*)
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
Normalized response
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
0.0
0.5
Time (s)
1.0
1.5
2.0
9⋅10–5
9⋅10–4
9⋅10–3
9⋅10–2
9⋅10–1
9
Log (threshold ﬂash)
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
–8
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
–7
–8
–9
(Zero)
log
(background)
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
200
100
0
A  Cat ganglion cell
B  Human subjects
C  Macaque rod cell
Test spot luminance (cd/m2)
Slope of
Weber’s law
Rods
Cones
log (background)
starlight
dusk
noon
1
2
3
4
0
5
4
3
2
1
0
Figure 22–19  Light adaptation.
A. The receptive field of a cat retinal ganglion cell was illumi-
nated uniformly at a steady background intensity, and a test 
spot was flashed briefly on the receptive field center. The peak 
firing rate following the flash was measured and plotted against 
the logarithm of the flash intensity. Each curve corresponds 
to a different background intensity, increasing by factors of 10 
from left to right. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sakmann 
and Creutzfeldt 1969. Copyright © 1969 Springer.)
B. A small test spot was flashed briefly on a steadily illumi-
nated background, and the flash intensity gradually increased to 
where a human subject could just detect it. The procedure was 
repeated at different background intensities. Here, the thresh-
old flash intensity is plotted against the background intensity. 
The curve has two branches connected by a distinct kink: These 
correspond to the regimes of rod and cone vision. The slope 
of Weber’s law represents the idealization when the threshold 
intensity is proportional to the background intensity. (Adapted 
from Wyszecki and Stiles 1982.)
C. The top plot shows the responses of a macaque monkey’s 
rod cell to flashes presented at varying background intensi-
ties. The cell’s single-photon response was calculated from 
the recorded membrane potential divided by the number of 
rhodopsins (Rh) activated by the flash. The gain of the single-
photon response decreases substantially with increasing back-
ground intensity. The background intensity, in photon/μm2/s, is 
0 for trace 0, 3.1 for trace 1, 12 for trace 2, 41 for trace 3, 84 for 
trace 4, and 162 for trace 5. In the bottom plot, the same data 
(except for the smallest response) are normalized to the same 
amplitude, showing that the time course of the single-photon 
response accelerates at high intensity. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Schneeweis and Schnapf 2000.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 22 / Low-Level Visual Processing: The Retina    543
Light Adaptation Alters Spatial Processing
In addition to the sensitivity and speed of the retinal 
response, light adaptation also changes the rules of 
spatial processing. In bright light, many ganglion cells 
have a sharp center-surround structure in their recep-
tive fields (see Figure 22–10). As the light dims, the 
antagonistic surround becomes broad and weak and 
eventually disappears. Under these conditions, the cir-
cuits of the retina function to simply accumulate the 
rare photons rather than computing local intensity 
gradients. These changes in receptive-field proper-
ties occur because of changes in the lateral inhibition 
produced by the networks of horizontal and amacrine 
cells (see Figure 22–3). An important regulator of these 
processes is dopamine, released in a light-dependent 
manner by specialized amacrine cells.
These retinal effects leave their signature on human 
perception. In bright light, our visual system prefers 
fine gratings to coarse gratings. But in dim light, we are 
most sensitive to coarse gratings: With the loss of center-
surround antagonism, the low spatial frequencies are no 
longer attenuated (see Box 22–1 and Figure 22–13).
In conclusion, light adaptation has two important 
roles. One is to discard information about the inten-
sity of ambient light while retaining information about 
object reflectances. The other is to match the small 
dynamic range of firing in retinal ganglion cells to the 
large range of light intensities in the environment. These 
large gain changes must be accomplished with graded 
neuronal signals before action potentials are produced 
in optic nerve fibers, because the firing rates of these fib-
ers can vary effectively over only two orders of magni-
tude. In fact, the crucial need for light adaptation may 
be why this neural circuitry resides in the eye and not in 
the brain at the other end of the optic nerve.
Highlights
1.	 The retina transforms light patterns projected 
onto photoreceptors into neural signals that are 
conveyed through the optic nerve to specialized 
visual centers in the brain. Different populations 
of ganglion cells transmit multiple neural rep-
resentations of the retinal image along parallel 
pathways.
2.	 The retina discards much of the stimulus informa-
tion available at the receptor level and extracts 
certain low-level features of the visual field useful 
to the central visual system. Fine spatial resolution 
is maintained only in a narrow region at the center 
of gaze. Intensity gradients in the image, such as 
object edges, are emphasized over spatially uni-
form portions; temporal changes are enhanced 
over unchanging parts of the scene.
3.	 The retina adapts flexibly to the changing con-
ditions for vision, especially the large diurnal 
changes in illumination. Information about the 
absolute light level is largely discarded, favor-
ing the subsequent analysis of object reflectances 
within the scene.
4.	 The transduction of light stimuli begins in the 
outer segment of the photoreceptor cell when a 
pigment molecule absorbs a photon. This sets 
in motion an amplifying G protein cascade that 
ultimately reduces the membrane conductance, 
hyperpolarizes the photoreceptor, and decreases 
glutamate release at the synapse. Multiple feed-
back mechanisms, in which intracellular Ca2+ has 
an important role, serve to turn off the enzymes in 
the cascade and terminate the light response.
5.	 Rod photoreceptors are efficient collectors of light 
and serve nocturnal vision. Cones are much less 
sensitive and function throughout the day. Cones 
synapse onto bipolar cells that in turn excite gan-
glion cells. Rods connect to specialized rod bipo-
lar cells whose signals are conveyed through 
amacrine cells to the cone bipolar cells.
6.	 The vertical excitatory pathways are modulated 
by horizontal connections that are primarily inhib-
itory. Through these lateral networks, light in the 
receptive-field surround of a ganglion cell coun-
teracts the effect of light in the center. The same 
negative-feedback circuits also sharpen the tran-
sient response of ganglion cells.
7.	 The segregation of information into parallel path-
ways and the shaping of response properties by 
inhibitory lateral connections are pervasive organ-
izational principles in the visual system.
 Markus Meister 
 Marc Tessier-Lavigne 
Selected Reading
Dowling JE. 2012. The Retina: An Approachable Part of the Brain. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
Fain GL, Matthews HR, Cornwall MC, Koutalos Y. 2001. Adap-
tation in vertebrate photoreceptors. Physiol Rev 81:117–151.


===== Page 5 =====
544    Part IV / Perception
Field GD, Chichilnisky EJ. 2007. Information processing in 
the primate retina: circuitry and coding. Ann Rev Neurosci 
30:1–30.
Gollisch T, Meister M. 2010. Eye smarter than scientists 
believed: neural computations in circuits of the retina. 
Neuron 65:150–164.
Lamb TD. 2016. Why rods and cones? Eye (Lond) 30:179–185.
Masland RH. 2012. The tasks of amacrine cells. Vis Neurosci 
29:3–9.
Meister M, Berry MJ. 1999. The neural code of the retina. 
Neuron 22:435–450.
Oyster CW. 1999. The Human Eye: Structure and Function. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Roof DJ, Makino CL. 2000. The structure and function of 
retinal photoreceptors. In: DM Albert, FA Jakobiec (eds). 
Principles and Practice of Ophthalmology, pp. 1624–1673. 
Philadelphia: Saunders.
Shapley R, Enroth-Cugell C. 1984. Visual adaptation and reti-
nal gain controls. Prog Retin Eye Res 3:223–346.
Wandell BA. 1995. Foundations of Vision. Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer.
Wässle H. 2004. Parallel processing in the mammalian retina. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 5:747–757.
Williams DR. 2011. Imaging single cells in the living retina. 
Vision Res 51:1379–1396.
References
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 
2008. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 5th ed. New York: 
Garland Science.
Boycott BB, Dowling JE. 1969. Organization of the primate 
retina: light microscopy. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci 255:109–184.
Boycott B, Wässle H. 1999. Parallel processing in the mam-
malian retina: the Proctor Lecture. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 40:1313–1327.
Curcio CA, Hendrickson A. 1991. Organization and develop-
ment of the primate photoreceptor mosaic. Prog Retinal 
Res 10:89–120.
Derrington AM, Lennie P. 1984. Spatial and temporal con-
trast sensitivities of neurones in lateral geniculate nucleus 
of macaque. J Physiol 357:219–240.
De Valois RL, Morgan H, Snodderly DM. 1974. Psychophysi-
cal studies of monkey vision. 3. Spatial luminance contrast 
sensitivity tests of macaque and human observers. Vision 
Res 14:75–81.
Enroth-Cugell C, Robson JG. 1984. Functional characteristics 
and diversity of cat retinal ganglion cells. Basic character-
istics and quantitative description. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci 25:250–227.
Hurvich LM. 1981. Color Vision. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Ishihara S. 1993. Ishihara’s Tests for Colour-Blindness. Tokyo: 
Kanehara.
Lee BB, Pokorny J, Smith VC, Martin PR, Valberg A. 1990. 
Luminance and chromatic modulation sensitivity of 
macaque ganglion cells and human observers. J Opt Soc 
Am A 7:2223–2236.
Nathans J, Hogness DS. 1984. Isolation and nucleotide 
sequence of the gene encoding human rhodopsin. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 81:4851–4855.
Nathans J, Thomas D, Hogness DS. 1986. Molecular genet-
ics of human color vision: the genes encoding blue, green, 
and red pigments. Science 232:193–202.
O’Brien DF. 1982. The chemistry of vision. Science 
218:961–966.
Polyak SL. 1941. The Retina. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Rodieck RW. 1965. Quantitative analysis of cat retinal gan-
glion cell response to visual stimuli. Vision Res 5:583–601.
Sakmann B, Creutzfeldt OD. 1969. Scotopic and mesopic 
light adaptation in the cat’s retina. Pflügers Arch 313: 
168–185.
Schnapf JL, Kraft TW, Nunn BJ, Baylor DA. 1988. Spec-
tral sensitivity of primate photoreceptors. Vis Neurosci 
1:255–221.
Schneeweis DM, Schnapf JL. 1995. Photovoltage of rods and 
cones in the macaque retina. Science 228:1053–1056.
Schneeweis DM, Schnapf JL. 2000. Noise and light adaptation 
in rods of the macaque monkey. Vis Neurosci 17:659–666.
Solomon GS, Lennie P. 2007. The machinery of color vision. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 8:276–286.
Stryer L. 1988. Biochemistry, 3rd ed. New York: Freeman.
Wade NJ. 1998. A Natural History of Vision. Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Wald G, Brown PK. 1956. Synthesis and bleaching of rhodopsin. 
Nature 177:174–176.
Wyszecki G, Stiles WS. 1982. Color Science: Concepts and 
Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulas, Chapter 7 “Visual 
Thresholds.” 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Young RW. 1970. Visual cells. Sci Am 223:80–91.


===== Page 6 =====
23
Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and  
Visual Primitives
These two steps, local analysis of orientation and 
contour integration, exemplify two distinct stages of 
visual processing. Computation of local orientation 
is an example of low-level visual processing, which is 
concerned with identifying local elements of the light 
structure of the visual field. Contour integration is an 
example of intermediate-level visual processing, the 
first step in generating a representation of the unified 
visual field. At the earliest stages of analysis in the cer-
ebral cortex, these two levels of processing are accom-
plished together.
A visual scene comprises many thousands of line 
segments and surfaces. Intermediate-level visual pro-
cessing is concerned with determining which bounda-
ries and surfaces belong to specific objects and which 
are part of the background (see Figure 21–4). It is also 
involved in distinguishing the brightness and color of 
a surface from the intensity and wavelength of light 
reflected from that surface. The physical characteristics 
of reflected light result as much from the intensity and 
color balance of the light that illuminates a surface as 
from the color of that surface. Determining the actual 
surface color of a single object requires comparison of 
the wavelengths of light reflected from multiple sur-
faces in a scene.
Intermediate-level visual processing thus involves 
assembling local elements of an image into a unified 
percept of objects and background. Although deter-
mining which elements belong together in a single 
object is a highly complex problem with an astro-
nomical number of potential solutions, each relay in 
the visual circuity of the brain has built-in logic that 
Internal Models of Object Geometry Help the Brain  
Analyze Shapes
Depth Perception Helps Segregate Objects From Background
Local Movement Cues Define Object Trajectory and Shape
Context Determines the Perception of Visual Stimuli
Brightness and Color Perception Depend on Context
Receptive-Field Properties Depend on Context
Cortical Connections, Functional Architecture, and Perception 
Are Intimately Related
Perceptual Learning Requires Plasticity in  
Cortical Connections
Visual Search Relies on the Cortical Representation of 
Visual Attributes and Shapes
Cognitive Processes Influence Visual Perception
Highlights
W
e have seen in Chapters 21 and 22 that the 
eye is not a mere camera, but instead con-
tains sophisticated retinal circuitry that 
decomposes the retinal image into signals represent-
ing contrast and movement. These data are conveyed 
through the optic nerve to the primary visual cortex, 
which uses this information to analyze the shape of 
objects. It first identifies the boundaries of objects, rep-
resented by numerous short line segments, each with 
a specific orientation. The cortex then integrates this 
information into a representation of specific objects, a 
process referred to as contour integration.


===== Page 7 =====
546    Part IV / Perception
Figure 23–1  Illusory contours and perceptual fill-in.  The vis-
ual system uses information about local orientation and contrast 
to construct the contours and surfaces of objects. This construc-
tive process can lead to the perception of contours and surfaces 
that do not appear in the visual field, including those seen in 
illusory figures. Top left: In the Kanizsa triangle illusion, one per-
ceives continuous boundaries extending between the apices of 
a white triangle, even though the only real contour elements are 
those formed by the Pac-Man–like figures and the acute angles. 
Top right: The inside and outside of the illusory pink square are 
the same white color as the page, but a continuous transparent 
pink surface within the square is perceived. Bottom: Occlud-
ing surfaces can also facilitate contour integration and surface 
segmentation. The irregular shapes on the left appear to be 
unrelated, but when they are partially occluded by black shapes 
(right), they are easily seen as fragments of the letter B.
allows assumptions to be made about the likely spatial 
relationships between elements. In certain cases, these 
inherent rules can lead to the illusion of contours and 
surfaces that do not actually exist in the visual field 
(Figure 23–1).
Three features of visual processing help overcome 
ambiguity in the signals from the retina. First, the way 
in which a visual feature is perceived depends on eve-
rything that surrounds it. The perception of a point, 
line, or surface, for example, depends on the relation-
ship between that feature and what else is present 
in the scene. That is, the response of a neuron in the 
visual cortex is context-dependent: It depends as much 
on the presence of contours and surfaces outside the 
cell’s receptive field as on the attributes within it. 
Second, the functional properties of neurons in the 
visual cortex can be altered by visual experience or 
perceptual learning. Finally, visual processing in the 
cortex is subject to the influence of cognitive functions, 
specifically attention, expectation, and “perceptual 
task” (the active engagement in visual discrimination or 
detection). The interaction between these three factors—
the context or entire set of signals representing a scene, 
experience-dependent changes in cortical circuitry, 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 23 / Intermediate-Level Visual Processing and Visual Primitives     547
Figure 23–2  Cortical areas involved with intermediate-level 
visual processing. Many cortical areas in the macaque mon-
key, including V1, V2, V3, V4, and middle temporal area (MT), 
are involved with integrating local cues to construct contours 
and surfaces and segregating foreground from background. 
The shaded areas extend into the frontal and temporal lobes 
because cognitive output from these areas, including attention, 
expectation, and behavioral task, contributes to the process of 
scene segmentation. (Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal 
cortex; FEF, frontal eye fields; IT, inferior temporal cortex; LGN, 
lateral geniculate nucleus; LIP, lateral intraparietal cortex; MD, 
medial dorsal nucleus of thalamus; MIP, medial intraparietal 
cortex; MST, medial superior temporal cortex; MT, middle tem-
poral cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; PL, pulvinar; PMd, dorsal 
premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; SC, superior 
colliculus; TEO, occipitotemporal cortex; VIP, ventral intrapa-
rietal cortex; V1, V2, V3, V4, primary, secondary, third, and 
fourth visual areas.)
and expectation—is vital to the visual system’s analy-
sis of complex scenes.
In this chapter, we examine how the brain’s 
analysis of the local features in a visual scene, or  
visual primitives, proceeds in parallel with the analy-
sis of more global features. Visual primitives include 
contrast, line orientation, brightness, color, movement, 
and depth. Each type of visual primitive is subject to 
the integrative action of intermediate-level processing. 
Lines with particular orientations are integrated into 
object contours, local contrast information into sur-
face brightness and surface segmentation, wavelength 
selectivity into color constancy, and directional selec-
tivity into object motion.
The analysis of visual primitives begins in the 
retina with the detection of brightness and color and 
continues in the primary visual cortex with the analy-
sis of orientation, direction of movement, and stereo-
scopic depth. Properties related to intermediate-level 
visual processing are analyzed together with visual 
primitives in the visual cortex starting in the primary 
visual cortex (V1), which plays a role in contour inte-
gration and surface segmentation. Other areas of the 
visual cortex specialize in different aspects of this task: 
V2 analyzes properties related to object surfaces, V4 
integrates information about color and object shape, 
and V5—the middle temporal area or MT—integrates 
motion signals across space (Figure 23–2).
Feedforward 
Feedback 
PMd
PMv
PF
FEF
AIP
MT/
MST
MD
PL
LGN
TEO
IT
SC
VIP
V1
V3
V2
V4
Dorsal
pathway
Ventral
pathway
MIP
LIP
Internal Models of Object Geometry Help the 
Brain Analyze Shapes
A first step in determining an object’s contour is identi-
fication of the orientation of local parts of the contour. 
This step commences in V1, which plays a critical role 
in both local and global analysis of form.
Neurons in the visual cortex respond selectively 
to specific local features of the visual field, including 
orientation, binocular disparity or depth, and direc-
tion of movement, as well as to properties already ana-
lyzed in the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus, such 
as contrast and color. Orientation selectivity, the first 
emergent property identified in the receptive fields of 
cortical neurons, was discovered by David Hubel and 
Torsten Wiesel in 1959.
Neurons in both the retina (Chapter 22) and the 
lateral geniculate nucleus (Chapter 21) have circular 
receptive fields with a center-surround organization. 
They respond to the light–dark contrasts of edges or 
lines in the visual field but are not selective for the ori-
entations of those edges (see Figure 21–9). In the visual 
cortex, however, neurons respond selectively to lines 
of particular orientations. Each neuron responds to a 
narrow range of orientations, approximately 40°, and 
different neurons respond optimally to distinct orien-
tations. Hubel and Wiesel proposed that this orienta-
tion selectivity reflects the arrangement of the inputs 


===== Page 9 =====
548    Part IV / Perception
Figure 23–3  Orientation selectivity and mechanisms.
A. A neuron in the primary visual cortex responds selectively to 
line segments that fit the orientation of its receptive field. This 
selectivity is the first step in the brain’s analysis of an object’s 
form. (Reproduced, with permission, from Hubel and Wiesel 
1968. Copyright © 1968 The Physiological Society.)
B. The orientation of the receptive field is thought to result from 
the alignment of the circular center-surround receptive fields of 
several presynaptic cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus. In the 
monkey, individual neurons in layer IVCβ of V1 have unoriented 
receptive fields. However, when several neighboring IVCβ cells 
project to a neuron in layer IIIB they create a receptive field with 
a specific orientation for that postsynaptic cell.
from the lateral geniculate nucleus, and there is now 
a body of supportive evidence for the idea. Each 
V1 neuron receives input from several neighboring 
geniculate neurons whose center-surround receptive 
fields are aligned so as to represent a particular axis 
of orientation (Figure 23–3). Two principal types of 
orientation-selective neurons, simple and complex, 
have been identified.
Simple cells have receptive fields divided into ON and 
OFF subregions (Figure 23–4). When a visual stimulus 
such as a bar of light enters the receptive field’s ON sub-
region, the neuron fires; the cell also responds when the 
bar leaves the OFF subregion. Simple cells have a charac-
teristic response to a moving bar; they discharge briskly 
when a bar of light leaves an OFF region and enters an 
ON region. The responses of these cells are therefore 
highly selective for the position of a line or edge in space.
Complex cells are less selective for the position of 
object boundaries. They lack discrete ON and OFF 
subregions (Figure 23–4) and respond similarly to light 
and dark at all locations across their receptive fields. 
They fire continuously as a line or edge stimulus trav-
erses their receptive fields. Hubel and Wiesel proposed 
that the complex cells are a second stage of the elabora-
tion of receptive fields after simple receptive fields and 
are built by overlapping simple receptive fields.
IIIB
IVCβ
Neurons
Receptive ﬁelds
Cortical
layer
A
B
As one considers the range of receptive field prop-
erties that have been described in the early visual cor-
tical areas, it is important to point out phylogenetic 
differences, with different species differing in the loca-
tion in which these properties are first expressed and in 
the kinds of properties that are represented. In the cat, 
the target layer of the visual cortex for lateral genicu-
late neurons has oriented simple cells; it had been pre-
sumed that these cortical cells represent an obligatory 
first stage in the cortical processing of visual informa-
tion, between the center-surround circularly symmet-
ric receptive fields in the lateral geniculate nucleus and 
the receptive fields of complex cells in the superficial 
cortical layers. In primates, however, the geniculate 
target layers, 4Cα and β, have circularly symmetric, 
unoriented receptive fields. The postsynaptic target of 
the layer 4C cells, predominantly the superficial layers 
of the cortex, is populated with complex cells, there-
fore skipping a simple cell stage. In the mouse, orientation 
selectivity is seen in the lateral geniculate nucleus. The 
preceding comparison points out a few characteris-
tics of the evolution of visual processing. One is the 
encephalization of function, where properties such 
as orientation are shifted to later stages of process-
ing over stages of evolution. Another is the develop-
ment of new pathways. It has been suggested that the 


