===== Page 1 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 2 =====
40
The Brain Stem
Pain Perception Is Modulated by  
Monoamine Antinociceptive Pathways
Motor Activity Is Facilitated by  
Monoaminergic Pathways
Ascending Monoaminergic Projections Modulate 
Forebrain Systems for Motivation and Reward
Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Neurons Maintain 
Arousal by Modulating Forebrain Neurons
Highlights
I
n primitive vertebrates—reptiles,  amphibians, 
and fish—the forebrain is only a small part of the 
brain and is devoted mainly to olfactory process-
ing and to the integration of autonomic and endocrine 
function with the basic behaviors necessary for sur-
vival. These basic behaviors include feeding, drinking, 
sexual reproduction, sleep, and emergency responses. 
Although we are accustomed to thinking that the fore-
brain orchestrates most human behaviors, many com-
plex responses, such as feeding—the coordination of 
chewing, licking, and swallowing—are actually made 
up of relatively simple, stereotypic motor responses 
governed by ensembles of neurons in the brain stem.
The importance of this pattern of organization in 
human behavior is clear from observing infants born 
without a forebrain (hydranencephaly). Hydranence-
phalic infants are surprisingly difficult to distinguish 
from normal babies. They cry, smile, suckle, and move 
their eyes, face, arms, and legs. As these sad cases illus-
trate, the brain stem can organize virtually all of the 
behavior of the newborn.
The Cranial Nerves Are Homologous to the Spinal Nerves
Cranial Nerves Mediate the Sensory and Motor 
Functions of the Face and Head and the Autonomic 
Functions of the Body
Cranial Nerves Leave the Skull in Groups and Often Are 
Injured Together
The Organization of the Cranial Nerve Nuclei Follows the 
Same Basic Plan as the Sensory and Motor Areas of the 
Spinal Cord
Embryonic Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a  
Segmental Organization
Adult Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a  
Columnar Organization
The Organization of the Brain Stem Differs From the 
Spinal Cord in Three Important Ways
Neuronal Ensembles in the Brain Stem Reticular Formation 
Coordinate Reflexes and Simple Behaviors Necessary for 
Homeostasis and Survival
Cranial Nerve Reflexes Involve Mono- and Polysynaptic 
Brain Stem Relays
Pattern Generators Coordinate More Complex 
Stereotypic Behaviors
Control of Breathing Provides an Example of How 
Pattern Generators Are Integrated Into More  
Complex Behaviors
Monoaminergic Neurons in the Brain Stem Modulate 
Sensory, Motor, Autonomic, and Behavioral Functions
Many Modulatory Systems Use Monoamines as 
Neurotransmitters
Monoaminergic Neurons Share Many  
Cellular Properties
Autonomic Regulation and Breathing Are Modulated by 
Monoaminergic Pathways


===== Page 3 =====
982    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
In this chapter, we describe the functional anat-
omy of the brain stem, particularly the cranial nerves, 
as well as the ensembles of local circuit neurons that 
organize the simple behaviors of the face and head. 
Finally, we consider the modulatory functions of nuclei 
in the brain stem that adjust the sensitivity of sensory, 
motor, and arousal systems.
The brain stem is the rostral continuation of the 
spinal cord, and its motor and sensory components 
are similar in structure to those of the spinal cord. But 
the portions of the brain stem that control the cranial 
nerves are much more complex than the correspond-
ing parts of the spinal cord that control the spinal 
nerves because cranial nerves mediate more complex 
behaviors. The core of the brain stem, the reticular 
formation, is homologous to the intermediate gray mat-
ter of the spinal cord but is also more complex. Like the 
spinal cord, the reticular formation contains ensembles 
of local-circuit interneurons that generate motor and 
autonomic patterns and coordinate reflexes and sim-
ple behaviors. In addition, the brain stem contains 
glutamatergic and GABAergic circuitry that regulates 
arousal, wake–sleep cycles, breathing, and other vital 
functions, as well as monoaminergic modulatory neu-
rons that act to optimize the functions of the nervous 
system.
The Cranial Nerves Are Homologous to the 
Spinal Nerves
Because the spinal nerves reach only as high as the 
first cervical vertebra, the cranial nerves provide the 
somatic and visceral, sensory and motor innervation 
for the head. Two cranial nerves, the glossopharyngeal 
and vagus nerves, also supply visceral sensory and 
motor innervation of the neck, chest, and most of the 
abdominal organs with the exception of the pelvis. In 
addition, some cranial nerves are associated with spe-
cialized functions, such as vision or hearing, that go 
beyond the sensory and motor plan of the spinal cord.
Assessment of the cranial nerves is an important 
part of the neurological examination because abnor-
malities of function can pinpoint a site in the brain 
stem that has been damaged. Therefore, it is important 
to know the origins of the cranial nerves, their intracra-
nial course, and where they exit from the skull.
The cranial nerves are traditionally numbered I 
through XII in rostrocaudal sequence. Cranial nerves 
I and II enter at the base of the forebrain. The other 
cranial nerves arise from the brain stem at character-
istic locations (Figure 40–1). All but one exit from 
the ventral surface of the brain stem (Figure 40–2).  
The exception is the trochlear (IV) nerve, which leaves 
the midbrain from its dorsal surface just behind the 
inferior colliculus and wraps around the lateral surface 
of the brain stem to join the other cranial nerves con-
cerned with eye movements. The cranial nerves with 
sensory functions (V, VII, VIII, IX, and X) have associ-
ated sensory ganglia that operate much as dorsal root 
ganglia do for spinal nerves. These ganglia are located 
along the course of individual nerves as they enter 
the skull.
The olfactory (I) nerve, which is associated with 
the forebrain, is described in detail in Chapter 29; the 
optic (II) nerve, which is associated with the dienceph-
alon, is described in Chapters 21 and 22. The spinal 
accessory (XI) nerve can be considered a cranial nerve 
anatomically but actually is a spinal nerve originating 
from the higher cervical motor rootlets. It runs up into 
the skull before exiting through the jugular foramen to 
innervate the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid mus-
cles in the neck.
Cranial Nerves Mediate the Sensory and Motor 
Functions of the Face and Head and the Autonomic 
Functions of the Body
Three ocular motor nerves control movements of the 
eyes. The abducens (VI) nerve has the simplest action; 
it contracts the lateral rectus muscle to move the globe 
laterally. The trochlear (IV) nerve also innervates a single 
muscle, the superior oblique, which both depresses the 
eye and rotates it inward depending on the eye’s posi-
tion. The oculomotor (III) nerve supplies all of the other 
muscles of the orbit, including the retractor of the lid. It 
also provides the parasympathetic innervation respon-
sible for pupillary constriction in response to light and 
accommodation of the lens for near vision. The ocular 
motor system is considered in detail in Chapter 35.
The trigeminal (V) nerve is a mixed nerve (contain-
ing both sensory and motor axons) that leaves the 
brain stem in two roots. The motor root innervates the 
muscles of mastication (the masseter, temporalis, and 
pterygoids) and a few muscles of the palate (tensor veli 
palatini), inner ear (tensor tympani), and upper neck 
(mylohyoid and anterior belly of the digastric muscle). 
The sensory fibers arise from neurons in the trigeminal 
ganglion, located at the floor of the skull in the middle 
cranial fossa.
Three branches emerge from the trigeminal gan-
glion. The ophthalmic division (V1) runs with the ocu-
lar motor nerves through the superior orbital fissure 
(Figure 40–2A) to innervate the orbit, nose, and fore-
head and scalp back to the vertex of the skull (Figure 
40–3). Some fibers from this division also innervate 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    983
Figure 40–1  The origins of cranial nerves in the brain 
stem (ventral and lateral views).  The olfactory (I) nerve is 
not shown because it terminates in the olfactory bulb in the 
forebrain. All of the cranial nerves except one emerge from the 
ventral surface of the brain; the trochlear (IV) nerve originates 
from the dorsal surface of the midbrain.
Pyramid
Olive
Basis pedunculi
Cerebellar peduncles:
Superior
Lateral geniculate
body
Trochlear 
nerve (IV)
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (VIII)
Glossopharyngeal
(IX) and vagus 
nerves (X)
Cervical
ventral
roots
Inferior colliculus
Accessory
nerve (XI)
Pons
Medulla
Pyramid
Hypoglossal
nerve (XII)
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Facial and intermediate
nerves (VII)
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (VIII)
Glossopharyngeal (IX)
and vagus nerves (X)
Hypoglossal nerve (XII)
Accessory nerve (XI)
Pyramidal decussation
Cervical ventral roots
Optic nerve (II)
Optic
nerve (II)
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Basis
pedunculi
Diencephalon
Midbrain
Inferior
Middle
the meninges and blood vessels of the anterior and 
middle intracranial fossas. The maxillary division (V2) 
runs through the round foramen of the sphenoid bone 
to innervate the skin over the cheek and the upper 
portion of the oral cavity. The mandibular division (V3), 
which also contains the motor axons of the trigeminal 
nerve, leaves the skull through the oval foramen of the 
sphenoid bone. It innervates the skin over the jaw, the 
area above the ear, and the lower part of the oral cavity, 
including the tongue.
Complete trigeminal sensory loss results in numb-
ness of the entire face and the inside of the mouth. 
One-sided trigeminal motor weakness does not cause 
much weakness of jaw closure because the muscles of 
mastication on either side are sufficient to close the jaw. 
Nevertheless, the jaw tends to deviate toward the side 
of the lesion when the mouth is opened because the 
internal pterygoid muscle on the opposite side, when 
unopposed, pulls the jaw toward the weak side.
The facial (VII) nerve is also a mixed nerve. Its 
motor root innervates the muscles of facial expres-
sion as well as the stapedius muscle in the inner ear, 
stylohyoid muscle, and posterior belly of the digastric 
muscle in the upper neck. The sensory root runs as a 
separate bundle, the intermediate nerve, through the 
internal auditory canal and arises from neurons in 
the geniculate ganglion, located near the middle ear. 
Distal to the geniculate ganglion, the sensory fibers 
diverge from the motor branch. Some innervate skin 
of the external auditory canal while others form the 
chorda tympani, which joins the lingual nerve and 
conveys taste sensation from the anterior two-thirds 
of the tongue. The autonomic component of the facial 
nerve includes parasympathetic fibers that travel 
through the motor root to the sphenopalatine and 
submandibular ganglia, which innervate lacrimal 
and salivary glands (except the parotid gland) and 
the cerebral vasculature.
The facial nerve may suffer isolated injury in Bell 
palsy, a common complication of certain viral infec-
tions. Early on, the patient may complain mainly of 
the face pulling toward the unaffected side because of 
the weakness of the muscles on the side of the lesion. 
Later, the ipsilateral corner of the mouth droops, food 
falls out of the mouth, and the eyelids no longer close 
on that side. Loss of blinking may result in drying 


===== Page 5 =====
984    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Midbrain
Optic nerve (II)
Pituitary gland
Cavernous sinus
Superior
orbital
ﬁssure
Trigeminal
nerve (V) divisions
Trigeminal
ganglion
Optic
foramen
Superior orbital 
ﬁssure
Petrous
temporal
bone
V
VI
Lateral sinus
Dorsum sellae
Petrous
temporal
bone
Pons
VII and VIII
enter
internal
auditory
canal
IX, X, XI in
jugular
foramen
XII in
anterior
condylar canal
Internal
auditory canal
Posterior
cranial fossa
Middle
cranial
fossa
Anterior
cranial
fossa
Fourth
ventricle
Cerebello-
pontine
angle
Cerebellar
hemispheres
V1
V2
V3
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
A
B
Figure 40–2  The cranial nerves exit the skull in  
groups.
A. Cranial nerves II, III, IV, V, and VI exit the skull near the pitui-
tary fossa. The optic (II) nerve enters the optic foramen, but 
the oculomotor (III), trochlear (IV), and abducens (VI) nerves, 
and the first division of the trigeminal (V) nerve leave through 
the superior orbital fissure. The second and third divisions of 
the trigeminal nerve exit through the round and oval foramina, 
respectively.
B. In the posterior fossa, the facial (VII) and vestibulocochlear 
(VIII) nerves exit through the internal auditory canal, whereas 
the glossopharyngeal (IX), vagus (X), and accessory (XI) nerves 
leave through the jugular foramen. The hypoglossal nerve (XII) 
has its own foramen.
and injury to the cornea. The patient may complain 
that sound has a booming quality in the ipsilateral ear 
because the stapedius muscle fails to tense the ossi-
cles in response to a loud sound (the stapedial reflex). 
Taste may also be lost on the anterior two-thirds of the 
tongue on the ipsilateral side. If the Bell palsy is caused 
by a herpes zoster infection of the geniculate ganglion, 
small blisters may form in the outer ear canal, the gan-
glion’s cutaneous sensory field.
The vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerve contains two main 
bundles of sensory axons from two ganglia. Fibers from 
the vestibular ganglion relay sensation of angular 
and linear acceleration from the semicircular canals, 
utricle, and saccule in the inner ear. Fibers from the 
cochlear ganglion relay information from the coch-
lea concerning sound. A vestibular schwannoma, one 
of the most common intracranial tumors, may form 
along the vestibular component of cranial nerve VIII 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    985
Figure 40–3  The three sensory divisions of the trigeminal 
(V) nerve innervate the face and scalp.  The V2 and V3 divi-
sions also innervate the upper and lower parts of the oral 
cavity, including the tongue. The C2 cervical root innervates 
the back of the head. The area around the ear is innervated by 
branches of the VII and X nerve.
Vertex
Ophthalmic
division (V1)
Maxillary
division (V2)
Mandibular
division (V3)
as it runs within the internal auditory meatus. Most 
patients complain only about hearing loss, as the brain 
is usually able to adapt to the gradual loss of vestibular 
input from one side.
The glossopharyngeal (IX) nerve and vagus (X) nerve 
are mixed nerves and provide parasympathetic auto-
nomic input to thoracic and visceral organs. These 
closely related nerves transmit sensory information 
from the pharynx and upper airway as well as taste 
from the posterior third of the tongue and oral cavity. 
The glossopharyngeal nerve transmits visceral infor-
mation from the neck (for example, information on 
blood oxygen and carbon dioxide from the carotid 
body, and arterial pressure from the carotid sinus), 
whereas the vagus nerve transmits visceral informa-
tion from the thoracic and abdominal organs except for 
the distal colon and pelvic organs. Both nerves include 
parasympathetic motor fibers. The glossopharyngeal 
nerve provides parasympathetic control of the parotid 
salivary gland, whereas the vagus nerve innervates 
the rest of the internal organs of the neck, thorax, and 
abdomen. The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates only 
one muscle of the palate, the stylopharyngeus, which 
raises and dilates the pharynx. The remaining striated 
muscles of the larynx and pharynx are under control of 
the vagus nerve.
The vagal sensory neurons innervate the length of 
the gastrointestinal tract and thus are able to regulate 
multiple postprandial functions. One excellent exam-
ple is the role of vagal afferents in regulating food 
intake following a meal. Cholecystokinin (CCK) is an 
endogenous peptide secreted by duodenal enteroendo-
crine cells during meals, which helps to induce satiety. 
CCK acts (at least in part) via action on vagal affer-
ents in the gut, stimulating a feeling of fullness. Exog-
enous electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve is now 
being used clinically to treat a wide variety of condi-
tions including obesity, intractable epilepsy, and even 
depression. However, the neuroanatomic and molecu-
lar mechanisms underlying these effects remain poorly 
understood. Similarly, bariatric surgery remains one of 
the most widely used and effective strategies to com-
bat obesity. Some studies have suggested that surgical 
alterations in the responsiveness of vagal afferents to 
gut signals may contribute to the sustained weight loss 
following these surgeries.
Because many of the functions of nerves IX and X 
are bilateral and partially overlapping, unilateral injury 
of nerve IX may be difficult to detect. Patients with uni-
lateral cranial nerve X injury are hoarse, because one 
vocal cord is paralyzed, and they may have some diffi-
culty swallowing. Examination of the oropharynx shows 
weakness and numbness of the palate on one side.
The spinal accessory (XI) nerve is purely motor and 
originates from motor neurons in the upper cervical 
spinal cord. It innervates the trapezius and sterno-
cleidomastoid muscles on the same side of the body. 
Because the mechanical effect of the sternocleidomas-
toid is to turn the head toward the opposite side, an 
injury of the left nerve causes weakness in turning the 
head to the right. A lesion of the cerebral cortex on 
the left will cause weakness of voluntary muscles on 
the entire right side of the body except for the sterno-
cleidomastoid; instead, the ipsilateral sternocleido-
mastoid will be weak (because the left cerebral cortex 
is concerned with muscles that interact with the right 
side of the world, and the left sternocleidomastoid 
turns the head to the right).
The hypoglossal (XII) nerve is also purely motor, 
innervating the muscles of the tongue. When the nerve 
is injured, for example during surgery for head and 
neck cancer, the tongue atrophies on that side. The 
muscle fibers exhibit twitches of muscle fascicles (fas-
ciculations), which may be seen clearly through the 
thin mucosa of the tongue.
Cranial Nerves Leave the Skull in Groups and Often 
Are Injured Together
In assessing dysfunction of the cranial nerves, it is 
important to determine whether the injury is within 


===== Page 7 =====
986    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 40–4  The developmental plan of the brain stem is 
the same general plan as that of the spinal cord.
A. The neural tube is divided into a dorsal sensory portion (the 
alar plate) and a ventral motor portion (the basal plate) by a  
longitudinal groove, the sulcus limitans.
B–D. During development, the sensory and motor cell groups 
migrate into their adult positions but largely retain their relative 
locations. In maturity (part D), the sulcus limitans (dashed line) 
is still recognizable in the walls of the fourth ventricle and the 
cerebral aqueduct, demarcating the border between dorsal sen-
sory (orange) and ventral motor (green) structures. The section 
in part D is from the rostral medulla.
the brain or further along the course of the nerve. As 
cranial nerves leave the skull in groups through spe-
cific foramina, damage at these locations can affect 
several nerves.
The cranial nerves concerned with orbital sen-
sation and movement of the eyes—the oculomotor, 
trochlear, and abducens nerves, as well as the ophthal-
mic division of the trigeminal nerve—are gathered 
together in the cavernous sinus, along the lateral mar-
gins of the sella turcica, and then exit the skull through 
the superior orbital fissure adjacent to the optic foramen 
(Figure 40–2A). Tumors in this region, such as those 
arising from the pituitary gland, often make their pres-
ence known first by pressure on these nerves or the 
adjacent optic chiasm.
Cranial nerves VII and VIII exit the brain stem at 
the cerebellopontine angle, the lateral corner of the brain 
stem at the juncture of the pons, medulla, and cerebel-
lum (Figure 40–2B), and then leave the skull through 
the internal auditory meatus. A common tumor of 
the cerebellopontine angle is the vestibular schwan-
noma (sometimes erroneously called an “acoustic 
neuroma”), which derives from Schwann cells in the 
vestibular component of nerve VIII. A large tumor of 
the cerebellopontine angle may not only impair the 
function of nerves VII and VIII but may also press on 
nerve V near its site of emergence from the middle 
cerebellar peduncle, causing facial numbness, or com-
press the cerebellum or its peduncles on the same side, 
causing ipsilateral clumsiness.
The lower cranial nerves (IX, X, and XI) exit through 
the jugular foramen (Figure 40–2B) and are vulnerable 
to compression by tumors at that site. Nerve XII leaves 
the skull through its own (hypoglossal) foramen and 
is generally not affected by tumors located in the adja-
cent jugular foramen, unless the tumor becomes quite 
large. If a tumor involves nerves IX and X, but nerve XI 
is spared, it is generally within or near the brain stem 
rather than near the jugular foramen.
The Organization of the Cranial Nerve Nuclei 
Follows the Same Basic Plan as the Sensory and 
Motor Areas of the Spinal Cord
Cranial nerve nuclei are organized in rostrocaudal col-
umns that are homologous to the sensory and motor 
laminae of the spinal cord (Chapters 18 and 31). This 
pattern is best understood from the developmental 
plan of the caudal neural tube that gives rise to the 
brain stem and spinal cord.
The transverse axis of the embryonic caudal neural 
tube is subdivided into alar (dorsal) and basal (ventral) 
plates by the sulcus limitans, a longitudinal groove 
along the lateral walls of the central canal, fourth ventri-
cle, and cerebral aqueduct (Figure 40–4). The alar plate 
forms the sensory components of the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord, whereas the basal plate forms the motor 
components of the ventral horn. The intermediate gray 
matter is made up primarily of the interneurons that 
coordinate spinal reflexes and motor responses.
The brain stem shares this basic plan. As the cen-
tral canal of the spinal cord opens into the fourth ven-
tricle, the walls of the neural tube are splayed outward 
A
B
C
D
Sulcus limitans
Alar plate
Basal plate
Special somatic
sensory
General
visceral motor
Special
visceral motor
General somatic
motor
Solitary nucleus
(N. VII, IX, X)
Hypoglossal
nucleus (N. XII)
Dorsal motor
nucleus of
vagus (N. X)
Nucleus
ambiguus (N. X)
General and special
visceral sensory
General somatic
sensory
Vestibular nucleus (N. VIII)
Spinal
trigeminal
nucleus
(N. V, VII, IX, X)


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 40 / The Brain Stem    987
Adult Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a  
Columnar Organization
Overall, the brain stem nuclei on each side are organ-
ized in six rostrocaudal columns, three of sensory 
nuclei and three of motor nuclei (Figure 40–6). These 
are considered later, in dorsolateral to ventromedial 
sequence. Although the columns are discontinuous 
along the rostrocaudal axis of the brain stem, nuclei 
with similar functions (sensory or motor, somatic or 
visceral) have similar dorsolateral-ventromedial posi-
tions at each level of the brain stem.
Within each motor nucleus, motor neurons for an 
individual muscle are also arranged in a cigar-shaped 
longitudinal column. Thus, each motor nucleus in 
cross section forms a mosaic map of the territory that is 
innervated. For example, in a cross section through the 
facial nucleus, the clusters of neurons that innervate 
the different facial muscles form a topographic map of 
the face.
General Somatic Sensory Column
The general somatic sensory column occupies the most 
lateral region of the alar plate and includes the trigemi-
nal sensory nuclei (N. V). The spinal trigeminal nucleus 
is a continuation of the dorsal-most laminae of the spi-
nal dorsal horn (Figure 40–5A) and is sometimes called 
the medullary dorsal horn. Along its outer surface lies 
the spinal trigeminal tract, a direct continuation of 
Lissauer’s tract of the spinal cord (Chapter 20), thus 
allowing some cervical sensory fibers to reach the 
trigeminal nuclei and some trigeminal sensory axons 
to reach the dorsal horn in upper cervical segments. 
This arrangement allows dorsal horn sensory neu-
rons to have a range of inputs that are much broader 
than that of individual spinal or trigeminal segments 
and ensures the integration of trigeminal and upper 
cervical sensory maps.
The spinal trigeminal nucleus receives sensory 
axons from the trigeminal ganglion (N. V) and from 
all cranial nerve sensory ganglia concerned with pain 
and temperature in the head, including geniculate gan-
glion (N. VII) neurons that relay information from the 
external auditory meatus, petrosal ganglion (N. IX) 
cells that convey information from the posterior part of 
the palate and tonsillar fossa, and nodose ganglion 
(N. X) axons that relay information from the posterior 
wall of the pharynx. The spinal trigeminal nucleus 
thus represents the entire oral cavity as well as the sur-
face of the face.
The somatotopic organization of the afferent fibers in 
the spinal trigeminal nucleus is inverted: The forehead 
so that the dorsal sensory structures (derived from the 
alar plate) are displaced laterally, whereas the ventral 
motor structures (derived from the basal plate) remain 
more medial. The nuclei of the brain stem are divided 
into general nuclei, which serve functions similar to 
those of the spinal cord laminae, and special nuclei, 
which serve functions unique to the head, such as 
hearing, balance, taste, and control of the musculature 
related to the jaw, face, oropharynx, and larynx.
Embryonic Cranial Nerve Nuclei Have a  
Segmental Organization
Although the columns of sensory and motor nuclei in 
the adult hindbrain are organized rostrocaudally, the 
arrangement of neurons at each level derives from 
a strikingly segmental pattern in the early embryo. 
Before neurons appear, the future hindbrain region of 
the neural plate becomes subdivided into a series of 
eight segments of approximately equal size, known as 
rhombomeres (Figure 40–5A).
Each rhombomere develops a similar set of dif-
ferentiated neurons, as if the developing hindbrain is 
made up of series of modules. Pairs of rhombomeres 
are associated with specific sets of muscles derived 
from the embryonic branchial arches (eg, rhom-
bomeres 2 and 3 with the muscles of mastication and 
4 and 5 with the muscles of facial expression) (Figure 
40–5A). The even-numbered rhombomeres differenti-
ate ahead of the odd-numbered ones. Rhombomeres 2, 
4, and 6 form the branchial motor nuclei of the trigemi-
nal, facial, and glossopharyngeal nerves, respectively. 
Later, rhombomeres 3, 5, and 7 contribute motor neu-
rons to these nuclei, again respectively; in each case, 
the axons of individual motor neurons from odd-
numbered rhombomeres extend rostrally as they join 
those of their even-numbered neighbors.
At this developmental stage, each of these nuclei 
is composed of homologous neurons derived from 
two adjacent segments. This early transverse seg-
mental organization changes later in development, as 
rhombomere boundaries disappear and the dorsolat-
eral migration of the cell bodies aligns the cells into 
rostrocaudal columns. Ultimately, some somatic and 
parasympathetic motor neurons migrate into the ven-
trolateral tegmentum; for example, the migration of 
the facial motor neurons of rhombomere 4 around the 
abducens nucleus generates the internal genu of the 
facial nerve (Figure 40–5A). Furthermore, neural crest 
cells from each rhombomere migrate into the corre-
sponding branchial arches where they provide sensory 
and autonomic ganglion cells, as well as positional 
cues for the development of the arch muscles.


===== Page 9 =====
988    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
r2
r1
N. III
N. IV
N. V
N. VII
N. IX
N. X
N. XII
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Somatic
motor nuclei
Visceral
motor nuclei
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
Floor
plate
A
B
2nd arch
3rd arch
1st arch
N. VI
Figure 40–5  Embryonic cranial nerve nuclei are organized 
segmentally.
A. In the developing hindbrain (seen here from the ventral side), 
special and general visceral motor neurons (represented on the 
right side of the brain stem) form in each hindbrain segment 
(rhombomere) except rhombomere 1 (r1). Each special visceral 
motor nucleus comprises neurons in two rhombomeres: the 
trigeminal motor nucleus is formed by neurons in r2 and r3, the 
facial nucleus by neurons in r4 and r5, the glossopharyngeal 
nucleus by neurons in r6 and r7, and the motor nuclei of the 
vagus by neurons in r7 and r8. Axons of neurons in each of these 
nuclei course laterally within the brain, leaving the brain through 
exit points in the lateral neuroepithelium (of r2, r4, r6, and r7) and 
running together outside the brain to form the respective cranial 
motor nerves (V, VII, IX, X). The trigeminal (V) nerve innervates 
muscles in the 1st branchial arch, the facial (VII) nerve innervates 
muscles in the 2nd branchial arch, and the glossopharyngeal (IX) 
nerve innervates muscles in the 3rd branchial arch.
    All of the visceral motor neurons (various shades of green, 
represented on the right side of the brain stem) develop initially 
next to the floor plate at the ventral midline; after extending 
their axons toward their respective exit points, the cell bodies 
then migrate laterally (arrows). Exceptions are the facial motor 
neurons formed in r4 (red); the cell bodies, after extending their 
axons toward the exit point, migrate caudally to the axial level 
of r6 before migrating laterally. General visceral (parasympa-
thetic) motor neurons associated with nerve VII (light green) 
take a more conventional course (see panel B).
    General somatic motor nuclei (various shades of blue, 
represented on the left side of the brain stem) are formed in 
r1 (trochlear nucleus), r5 and r6 (abducens nucleus), and r8 
(hypoglossal nucleus). The cell bodies of these neurons remain 
close to their place of birth, next to the floor plate. The axons of 
abducens and hypoglossal neurons exit the brain directly ven-
trally, without coursing laterally. The axons of trochlear neurons 
(light blue) extend laterally and dorsally within the brain until, 
caudal to the inferior colliculus, they turn medially, decussate 
just behind the inferior colliculus, and exit near the midline of 
the opposite side.
B. The brain stem of a mouse embryo in which fluorescent dyes 
label different populations of cranial nerve VII motor neurons. A 
red-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of facial motor neurons 
via retrograde transport from the motor root of the facial nerve. 
These neurons develop initially in r4 and then migrate posteri-
orly, alongside the floor plate, to r6 (see red neurons in part A). 
A green-fluorescing dye fills the cell bodies of general visceral 
motor neurons in r5 (see light green neurons in part A) via retro-
grade transport from the root of the intermediate nerve (sensory 
and preganglionic general visceral motor axons). (Micrograph 
reproduced, with permission, from Dr. Ian McKay.)


