===== Page 1 =====
588    Part IV / Perception
B
A
C
Receptive
ﬁeld
Fix center
Fix left
Fix: (–20,20)
(0,20)
(20,20)
(–20,0)
(0,0)
(20,0)
(–20,–20)
(0,–20)
(20,–20)
40°
10
20
40
Figure 25–6  The position of the eye in the orbit affects the 
responses of parietal visual neurons with retinotopic recep-
tive fields.
A. Receptive field relative to the fovea. Contour plot indicates 
spike rates for different spatial locations. Numbers are spikes 
per second for each contour at the maximum position.
B. The receptive field moves in space with the eye. On the left 
the monkey is fixating the center of the screen. On the right 
the same monkey is fixating 20° to the left of center. For the 
recordings in C, the stimulus (blue square) is always presented 
in the center of the receptive field.
C. Responses to a stimulus at the optimum location in the 
receptive field change as a function of the position of the eye 
in the orbit, from a maximum when the monkey fixates a point 
at −20°,20° to a minimum when the monkey fixates a point at 
20°,−20°. Arrows indicate onset of stimulus flash. Trial duration, 
1.5 sec; ordinate, 25 spikes/division. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Andersen, Essick, and Siegel 1985. Copyright © 1985 AAAS.)
exists that the brain calculates the spatial location of 
an object that appeared before an eye movement using 
two mechanisms: a corollary discharge that is rapid 
and a proprioceptive signal that is slow but can be 
more accurate than the corollary discharge. The pro-
prioceptive signal can also be used to calibrate the cor-
ollary discharge.
Visual Scrutiny Is Driven by Attention and 
Arousal Circuits
In the 19th century, William James described atten-
tion as “the taking possession by the mind in clear and 
vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultane-
ously possible objects or trains of thought. It implies 
withdrawal from some things in order to deal effec-
tively with others.” James went on to describe two dif-
ferent kinds of attention: “It is either passive, reflex, 
non-voluntary, effortless or active and voluntary. In 
passive immediate sensorial attention the stimulus is a 
sense-impression, either very intense, voluminous, or 
sudden … big things, bright things, moving things … 
blood.”
Your attention to this page as you read it is an 
example of voluntary attention. If a bright light sud-
denly flashed, your attention would probably be pulled 
away involuntarily from the page. Large changes in 
the visual scene that occur outside the focus of atten-
tion are often missed until the subject directs attention 
to them, a phenomenon referred to as change blind-
ness (Figure 25–8).
Voluntary attention is closely linked to saccadic 
eye movements because the fovea has a much denser 
array of cones than the peripheral retina (Chapter 17) 
and moving the fovea to an attended object permits a 
finer-grain analysis than is possible with peripheral 
vision. Attention that selects a point in space, whether 
or not it is accompanied by a saccade, is called spatial 
attention. Searching for a specific kind of object, for 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    589
Figure 25–7  Eye position neuron in somatosensory cortex 
area 3a. Each panel shows horizontal (H) and vertical (V) eye 
position and the activity of the neuron after the monkey made 
a saccade to the eye position indicated above each raster. The 
neuron responds much more briskly when the eye is at 0°,15° 
than when it is at 0°,0°. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Wang et al. 2007.)
200 ms
50
spikes/s
Area 3a
–10.6°, 10.6°
10.6°, 10.6°
0°, 15°
0°, 0°
+15
0
–15
+15
0
–15
+15
0
–15
+15
0
–15
V
H
V
H
V
H
V
H
example a red O among red and green Qs, involves 
a second kind of attention, feature attention: In your 
search, you ignore the green letters and attend only to 
the red ones.
Attention, both voluntary and involuntary, short-
ens reaction time and makes visual perception more 
sensitive. This increased sensitivity includes the abili-
ties to detect objects at a lower contrast and ignore 
distracters close to an attended object. The abrupt 
appearance of a behaviorally irrelevant cue, such as a 
light flash, reduces the reaction time to a test stimulus 
presented 300 ms later in the same place. Conversely, 
when the cue appears away from the test stimulus, the 
reaction time is increased. The light flash draws invol-
untary attention to its location, thus accelerating the 
visual response to the test stimulus. Similarly, when a 
subject plans a saccade to a particular part of the visual 
field, the contrast threshold at which any object there 
can be detected is improved 50% by a cue.
Clinical studies have long implicated the parietal 
lobe in visual attention. Patients with lesions of the 
right parietal lobe have normal visual fields. When 
their visual perception is studied with a single stim-
ulus in an uncomplicated visual environment, their 
responses are normal. However, when presented with 
a more complicated visual environment, with objects 
in the left and right visual hemifields, these patients 
tend to report less of what lies in the left hemifield 
(contralateral to their lesion) than in the right hemi-
field (ipsilateral to their lesion). This deficit, known as 
neglect (Chapter 59), arises because attention is focused 
on the visual hemifield ipsilateral to the lesion. Even 
when patients are presented with only two stimuli, one 
in each hemifield, they report seeing only the stimulus 
in the ipsilateral hemifield. When attention is focused 
on one stimulus in the affected hemifield and a sec-
ond stimulus is presented in the unaffected hemifield, 
patients do not have the ability to shift attention to the 
new stimulus, even though the sensory pathway from 
the eye to the striate and prestriate cortex is intact.
This neglect of the contralateral visual hemifield 
extends to the neglect of the contralateral half of 


===== Page 3 =====
590    Part IV / Perception
Figure 25–9  Drawing of a candlestick by a patient with a 
lesion of the right parietal lobe.  The patient neglects the left 
side of the candlestick, drawing only its right half. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Halligan and Marshall 2001. Copyright © 
2001 Academic Press.)
individual objects (Figure 25–9). Patients with right 
parietal lobe deficits often have difficulty reproducing 
drawings. When asked to draw a clock, for example, 
they may force all of the numbers into the right side 
of the clock’s face, or when asked to bisect a line, they 
may place the midline well to the right of the line’s 
actual center.
The process of attentional selection is evident at 
the level of single parietal neurons in the monkey. The 
responses of neurons in the lateral intraparietal area 
to a visual stimulus depend not only on the physical 
properties of the stimulus but also on its importance 
Figure 25–8  Change blindness. In a test for change blindness, 
one picture is presented followed by a blank screen for 80 ms, 
followed by the second picture, another blank screen, and a 
repeat of the cycle (left). The subject is asked to report what 
changed in the scene. Although there is a substantial difference 
between the two pictures, it takes multiple repetitions for most 
observers to detect the difference. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Ronald Rensink.)
Blank (80 ms)
Blank (80 ms)
Blank (80 ms)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    591
Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area of the monkey 
represent only those objects of potential importance 
to the monkey, a priority map of the visual field. This 
selectivity for objects of behavioral importance can be 
demonstrated by recording from neurons in a monkey 
while the animal makes eye movements across a stable 
array of objects.
Stable objects in the visual world are rarely the 
objects of attention. In the lateral intraparietal area, as 
in most other visual centers of the brain, neuronal recep-
tive fields are retinotopic; that is, they are defined rela-
tive to the center of gaze. As a monkey scans the visual 
field, fixed objects enter and leave the receptive fields of 
neurons with every eye movement without disrupting 
the monkey’s attention (Figure 25–10).
The abrupt appearance of a visual stimulus invol-
untarily evokes attention. When a task-irrelevant light 
flashes in the receptive field of a lateral intraparietal 
Box 25–1  The Priority Map in Parietal Cortex
Fixation point
Receptive ﬁeld
Saccade
Figure 25–10  Exploring a stable array of objects.  The 
monkey views a screen with a number of objects that 
remain in place throughout the experiment. The monkey’s 
gaze can be positioned so that none of the objects are 
included in the receptive field of a neuron (left), or the 
monkey can make a saccade that brings one of the objects 
into the receptive field (right). (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Kusunoki, Gottlieb, and Goldberg 2000.)
(continued)
to the monkey. Thus, the responses to a behaviorally 
irrelevant stimulus are much smaller than for any 
event that evokes attention, such as the abrupt onset of 
a visual stimulus in the receptive field or the planning 
of a saccade to the receptive field of the neuron.
Although neurons in the lateral intraparietal area 
collectively represent the entire visual hemifield, the 
neurons active at any one moment represent only the 
important objects in the hemifield, a priority map of 
the visual field. The lateral intraparietal area acts as a 
summing junction for a number of different signals: 
saccade planning, abrupt stimulus onset, and the cog-
nitive aspects of a searched-for feature.
The absolute value of the neuronal response evoked 
by an object does not by itself determine whether that 
animal is attending to that object. When a monkey plans 
a saccade to a stimulus in the visual field, attention is on 
the goal of the saccade, and the activity evoked by the 
saccade plan lies at the peak of the priority map. How-
ever, if a bright light appears elsewhere in the visual 
field, attention is involuntarily drawn to the bright light, 
which evokes more neuronal activity than does the sac-
cade plan. Thus, the locus of attention can be identified 
only by examining the entire priority map and choosing 
its peak; it cannot be identified by monitoring activity at 
any one point alone (Box 25–1).


===== Page 5 =====
592    Part IV / Perception
Figure 25–11  A neuron in the lateral intraparietal area 
fires only in response to salient stimuli. In each panel, 
neuronal activity and eye positions are plotted across time.
A. A stimulus flashes in the receptive field while the mon-
key fixates.
B. The monkey makes a saccade that brings a stable, task-
irrelevant stimulus into the receptive field.
C. The monkey makes a saccade that brings the location 
of the recent light flash into the receptive field.
50 spikes/s
V
H
20°
200 ms
Saccade
Saccade
In receptive ﬁeld
Outside receptive ﬁeld
Presence of stimulus
Stimulus
Appearance
Disappearance
Eye position
A  New stimulus ﬂashes in receptive ﬁeld
B  Saccade brings stable stimulus into 
 
receptive ﬁeld
C  Saccade brings newly introduced 
 
stimulus into receptive ﬁeld 
Box 25–1  The Priority Map in Parietal Cortex (continued)
neuron, that cell responds briskly (Figure 25–11A). In 
contrast, a stable, task-irrelevant stimulus evokes little 
response when eye movement brings it into the neu-
ron’s receptive field (Figure 25–11B).
It is possible that the saccade that brings the sta-
ble object into the receptive field suppresses the visual 
response. This is not the case. A second experiment uses 
a similar array, except there is no stimulus at the location 
to which the saccade had brought the receptive field in 
the stable array experiment. The monkey fixates so that 
no member of the array is in the receptive field, and then 
the task-irrelevant stimulus suddenly appears at the post-
saccade location of the receptive field. Now the monkey 
makes a saccade to the center of the array, bringing the 
recently appeared stimulus into the receptive field, and 
the cell fires intensely (Figure 25–11C). When the mon-
key makes the saccade, the two arrays are identical. 
However, the stable stimulus is presumably unattended, 
The Parietal Cortex Provides Visual 
Information to the Motor System
Vision interacts with the supplementary and premo-
tor cortices to prepare the motor system for action. For 
example, when you pick up a pencil, your fingers are 
separated from your thumb by the width of the pen-
cil; when you pick up a drink, your fingers are sepa-
rated from your thumb by the width of the glass. The 
visual system helps to adjust the grip width before 
your hand arrives at the object. Similarly, when you 
insert a letter into a mail slot, your hand is aligned 
to place the letter in the slot. If the slot is tilted, your 
hand tilts to match.
Patients with lesions of the parietal cortex can-
not adjust their grip width or wrist angle using visual 
information alone, even though they can verbally 
describe the size of the object or the orientation of the 
slot. Conversely, patients with intact parietal lobes and 
deficits in the ventral stream cannot describe the size 
of an object or its orientation but can adjust their grip 
width and orient their hands as well as normal sub-
jects can. Neurons in parietal cortex are a critical source 
of information needed to manipulate or move objects. 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    593
Figure 25–12  A neuron in the lateral intraparietal area 
fires before a saccade to a significant stable object.  On 
each trial, one object in a stable array becomes significant 
to the monkey because the monkey must make a saccade 
to it. The monkey fixates a point outside the array, and a 
cue that matches an object in the array appears outside 
the neuron’s receptive field. The monkey must then make 
a saccade to the center of the array and a second saccade 
to the object that matches the cue. Two experiments are 
shown (in parts A and B). The left panel shows the neu-
ron’s response to the appearance of the cue outside the 
receptive field, the center panel shows the response after 
the first saccade brings the cued object into the receptive 
field, and the right panel shows the response just before 
the second saccade to the cued object. The cues are 
shown here in green for clarity but were black in the 
experiment. The visual scene at the time of the saccade is 
identical in both experiments.
A. The monkey is trained to make the second saccade to 
the cued object; the cell fires intensely when the first sac-
cade brings the object into the receptive field.
B. The monkey is trained to make the second saccade to 
an object outside the receptive field; the cell fires much 
less when the saccade brings the task-irrelevant stimulus 
into the receptive field.
A  Saccade brings a task-related symbol into receptive ﬁeld
B  Saccade brings a task-irrelevant symbol into receptive ﬁeld
50 spikes/s
Second 
saccade
First 
saccade
First 
saccade
Second 
saccade
Second saccade
Second saccade
Cue
First saccade
Cue
First saccade
Cue identifying target 
of second saccade
Fixation Point
Receptive ﬁeld
Cue
Cue
200 ms
50 spikes/s
whereas the recently flashed stimulus evokes attention 
and a much larger response. Stable objects can evoke 
enhanced responses when they become relevant to the 
animal’s current behavior.
A stable object can also be made behaviorally impor-
tant. In that case, the neurons increase their firing rate 
when the monkey has to attend to the stable object brought 
into the receptive field by the saccade (Figure 25–12).
The neural operations behind visually guided move-
ments involve identifying targets, specifying their 
qualities, and ultimately generating a motor program 
to accomplish the movement. Neurons in the parietal 
cortex provide the visual information necessary for 
independent movement of the fingers.
The representation of space in the parietal cor-
tex is not organized into a single map like the reti-
notopic map in primary visual cortex. Instead, it is 
divided into at least four areas (LIP, MIP, VIP, AIP) 
that analyze the visual world in ways appropri-
ate for individual motor systems. These four areas 
project visual information to the areas of premotor 
and frontal cortex that control individual voluntary 
movements (Figure 25–13).
Neurons in the medial intraparietal area describe 
the targets for reaching movements and project to the 
premotor area that controls reaching movements. The 
anterior intraparietal cortex has neurons that signal 
the size, depth, and orientation of objects that can be 
grasped. Neurons in this area respond to stimuli that 
could be the targets for a grasping movement, and 
these neurons are also active when the animal makes 
the movement (Figure 25–14). Neurons in the lateral 


===== Page 7 =====
594    Part IV / Perception
Viewing the object
Reaching for the object
Preferred 
object
Fix
Fix
Fix
Hold
Fix
Hold
50
0
Spike/s
Nonpreferred 
object
Figure 25–14  Neurons in the ante-
rior intraparietal cortex respond 
selectively to specific shapes. The 
neuron shown here is selective for 
a rectangle, whether viewing the 
object or reaching for it. The neuron 
is not responsive to the cylinder in 
either case. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Murata et al. 2000.)
Figure 25–13  Pathways involved in visual processing 
for action.  The dorsal visual pathway (blue) extends 
to the posterior parietal cortex and then to the frontal 
cortex. The ventral visual pathway (pink) is considered in 
Chapter 24. There are bidirectional projections from the 
inferior temporal cortex to the prefrontal cortex.  
(Abbreviations: AIP, anterior intraparietal cortex; FEF, 
frontal eye field; IT, inferior temporal cortex; LIP, lateral 
intraparietal cortex; MIP, medial intraparietal cortex; 
MST, medial superior temporal cortex; MT, middle tem-
poral cortex; PF, prefrontal cortex; PMd, PMv, dorsal 
and ventral premotor cortices; TEO, occipitotemporal 
cortex; VIP, ventral intraparietal cortex; V1–V4, areas of 
visual cortex.)
IT
V3
V1
V4
V2
FEF
PF
PMv
PMd
TEO
MT/
MST
AIP
VIP
MIP
LIP


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 25 / Visual Processing for Attention and Action    595
Figure 25–15  Bimodal neurons in the ventral intraparietal 
cortex of a monkey respond to both visual and tactile 
stimuli. The neuron shown here responds to tactile stimulation 
of the monkey’s head or to a visual stimulus coming toward 
the head, but not to the same stimulus moving away from the 
head. (Reproduced, with permission, from Duhamel, Colby, and 
Goldberg 1998.)
200 ms
Visual stimulus
Tactile stimulus
Stimulus applied
Object approaches
Object recedes
Spikes/s
100
0
intraparietal area specify the targets for saccades, and 
project to the frontal eye field.
Because a monkey cannot see its mouth, the ventral 
intraparietal area has bimodal neurons that respond to 
tactile stimuli on the face (Figure 25–15) and to objects 
in the visual world that are approaching the tactile 
receptive field, allowing the brain to estimate that an 
object is near the mouth. The ventral intraparietal area 
projects to the face area of premotor cortex.
Highlights
  1.  The image of the world enters the brain via the 
eye, which is constantly moving in the head. The 
visual system must compensate for changes in 
eye position to calculate spatial locations from 
retinal locations. Helmholtz postulated that the 
brain solves this problem by feeding back the 
motor signal that drives the eye to the visual sys-
tem, to compensate for the effect of the eye move-
ment. This motor feedback to the visual system is 
called corollary discharge.
  2.  Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area, which 
provides visual information to the oculomo-
tor system, show evidence of this corollary dis-
charge. Neurons that ordinarily do not respond 
to a particular stimulus in space will respond to it 
if an impending saccade will bring that stimulus 
into its receptive field.
  3.  This receptive field remapping depends on a 
pathway that goes from the intermediate layers 
of the superior colliculus to the medial dorsal 
nucleus of the thalamus to the frontal eye field. 
Medial dorsal nucleus inactivation impairs mon-
keys’ ability to identify where their eyes land 
after a saccade, suggesting the corollary dis-
charge has a perceptual as well as a motor role.
  4.  Sherrington postulated that the brain uses 
eye position to calculate the spatial location of 
objects from the position of their images on the 
retina. There is a representation of eye position 
in somatosensory cortex. Eye position modulates 
the visual responses of parietal neurons, and tar-
get position in space is simple to calculate from 
this modulation.
  5.  An unanswered question is how the brain 
chooses between the eye position and corollary 
discharge mechanisms to determine spatial posi-
tion. Because corollary discharge precedes the 
change in eye position and proprioception fol-
lows it, could the brain use both positions at dif-
ferent times?
  6.  Attention is the ability of the brain to select objects 
in the world for further analysis. Without atten-
tion, spatial perception is severely limited. For 


===== Page 9 =====
596    Part IV / Perception
example, humans have great difficulty noticing a 
change in the visual world unless their attention 
is drawn to the spatial location of a change.
  7.  The activity of neurons in the parietal cortex 
predicts a monkey’s locus of spatial attention as 
measured by their perceptual thresholds. The 
parietal cortex sums a number of different signals—
motor, visual, cognitive—to create a priority map 
of the visual field. The motor system uses this 
map to choose targets for movement. The visual 
system uses the same map to find the locus of 
visual attention.
  8.  Lesions in the parietal cortex cause a neglect of 
the contralateral visual world.
  9.  Visual information provided by the parietal cor-
tex enables the motor system to adjust hand grip 
to match the size of the object to which it reaches 
before the hand actually lands on the target. By 
contrast, patients with perceptual deficits caused 
by lesions in inferior temporal cortex adjust their 
grip perfectly well even though they cannot 
describe the nature or size of the object to which 
they reach perfectly.
10.  There are at least four different visual maps in the 
intraparietal sulcus, each of which corresponds 
to a particular motor workspace.
11.  Neurons in the anterior intraparietal area respond 
to targets for grasping, respond even when mon-
keys make grasping movements in total darkness, 
and project to the grasp region of premotor cortex.
12.  Neurons in the ventral intraparietal area respond 
to objects coming toward the mouth, have tactile 
receptive fields on the face, and project to the 
mouth area of premotor cortex.
13.  Neurons in the medial intraparietal area have a 
representation of arm position and respond to 
targets for reaching.
14.  Neurons in the lateral intraparietal area respond 
to targets for eye movements and objects of vis-
ual attention, discharge before eye movements, 
and have a representation of eye position. Activ-
ity of these neurons is modulated by the position 
of the eyes in the orbit.
15.  Neurons in the face region of area 3a in the soma-
tosensory cortex have a representation of the 
position of the eye in the orbit that arises from 
the contralateral eye.
 Michael E. Goldberg 
  Robert H. Wurtz 
Selected Reading
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2010. Attention, intention, and pri-
ority in the parietal lobe. Annu Rev Neurosci 33:1–21.
Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame 
for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1999. Space and attention in pari-
etal cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:319–349.
Henderson JM, Hollingworth A. 1999. High-level scene per-
ception. Annu Rev Psychol 50:243–271.
Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1996. The Visual Brain in Action. 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Rensink RA. 2002. Change detection. Annu Rev Psychol 
53:245–277.
Ross J, Ma-Wyatt A. 2004. Saccades actively maintain percep-
tual continuity. Nat Neurosci 7:65–69.
Sommer MA, Wurtz RH. 2008. Brain circuits for the inter-
nal monitoring of movements. Annu Rev Neurosci 
31:317–338.
Sun LD, Goldberg ME. 2016. Corollary discharge and oculo-
motor proprioception: cortical mechanisms for spatially 
accurate vision. Annu Rev Vis Sci 2:61–84.
Wurtz RH. 2008. Neuronal mechanisms of visual stability. 
Vision Res 48:2070–2089.
Yarbus AL. 1967. Eye Movements and Vision. New York: Plenum.
References
Andersen RA, Essick GK, Siegel RM. 1985. Encoding of 
spatial location by posterior parietal neurons. Science 
230:456–458.
Bisley JW, Goldberg ME. 2003. Neuronal activity in the lateral 
intraparietal area and spatial attention. Science 299:81–86.
Cavanaugh J, Berman RA, Joiner WM, Wurtz RH. 2016. 
Saccadic corollary discharge underlies stable visual 
perception. J Neurosci 36:31–42.
Cohen YE, Andersen RA. 2002. A common reference frame 
for movement plans in the posterior parietal cortex. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 3:553–562.
Deubel H, Schneider WX, Bridgeman B. 1996. Postsaccadic 
target blanking prevents saccadic suppression of image 
displacement. Vision Res 36:985–996.
Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1992. The updating 
of the representation of visual space in parietal cortex by 
intended eye movements. Science 255:90–92.
Duhamel J-R, Colby CL, Goldberg ME. 1998. Ventral intra-
parietal area of the macaque: congruent visual and 
somatic response properties. J Neurophysiol 79:126–136.
Duhamel J-R, Goldberg ME, FitzGibbon EJ, Sirigu A, 
Grafman J. 1992. Saccadic dysmetria in a patient with a 
right frontoparietal lesion: the importance of corollary dis-
charge for accurate spatial behavior. Brain 115:1387–1402.
Goodale MA, Meenan JP, Bulthoff HH, Nicolle DA, Murphy 
KJ, Racicot CI. 1994. Separate neural pathways for the 
visual analysis of object shape in perception and prehen-
sion. Curr Biol 4:604–610.
Hallett PE, Lightstone AD. 1976. Saccadic eye movements to 
flashed targets. Vision Res 16:107–114.


