===== Page 1 =====
20    Part I / Overall Perspective
vocalizations and are perceived by sight rather than 
sound, but have the same structural complexity as 
spoken languages. Sign language processing, as with 
spoken language processing, localizes to the left 
hemisphere. Damage to the left hemisphere can have 
quite specific consequences for signing just as for spo-
ken language, affecting sign comprehension (following 
damage in Wernicke’s area), grammar, or fluency (fol-
lowing damage in Broca’s area). These clinical observa-
tions are supported by functional neuroimaging. Not 
surprisingly, production and comprehension of signed 
and spoken languages do not involve identical brain 
areas, but the overlap is truly remarkable (Figure 1–8). 
There is even evidence that processing the constituent 
parts of signs (eg, handshape used) involves some of 
the same brain regions involved when making rhyme 
judgements about speech.
These observations illustrate three points. First, 
language processing occurs primarily in the left hemi-
sphere, independently of pathways that process the 
sensory and motor modalities used in language. Sec-
ond, auditory input is not necessary for the emergence 
and operation of language capabilities in the left hemi-
sphere. Third, spoken language is only one of a family 
of language skills mediated by the left hemisphere.
Figure 1–8  Deaf signing and hearing individuals share 
common language processing areas. Regions of the cortex 
involved in the recognition of a spoken or signed language, 
identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). 
Yellow highlight shows the areas of the left and right cerebral 
hemispheres (left and right columns, respectively) that were 
activated more when comprehending language than when per-
forming a perceptual task. For the deaf signers (top row), the 
highlighted regions were more active during comprehension 
of British Sign Language than during the detection of a visual 
stimulus superimposed on the same motionless signer. For the 
hearing speakers (bottom row), highlighted regions were more 
active during comprehension of audio-visual speech than dur-
ing the detection of a tone while viewing a motionless (silent) 
speaker. (Adapted, with permission, from MacSweeney et al., 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Oxford University Press.)
Deaf
signers
Hearing
speakers
Investigations of other behaviors have provided 
additional support for the idea that the brain has dis-
tinct cognitive systems. These studies demonstrate 
that complex information processing requires many 
interconnected cortical and subcortical areas, each 
concerned with processing particular aspects of sen-
sory stimuli or motor movement and not others. For 
example, perceptual awareness of an object’s loca-
tion, size, and shape relies on activity in numerous 
parietal association areas that link vision to poten-
tial actions, such as moving the eyes, orienting the 
head, reaching, and shaping the hand to grasp. The 
parietal areas do not initiate these actions but evalu-
ate sensory information as evidence bearing on these 
potentialities. They receive information from the dor-
sal visual stream—sometimes referred to as the where 
pathway, but more aptly termed a how pathway—to 
construct a state of knowing (gnosia) about the loca-
tion and other spatial properties of objects. The ven-
tral visual stream, or what pathway, is also concerned 
with possible actions, but these are associated with 
socializing and foraging. These associations establish 
gnosia about the desirability of objects, faces, foods, 
and potential mates. In this sense, the what pathway 
might be a how pathway too.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    21
Mental Processes Are the Product of 
Interactions Between Elementary Processing 
Units in the Brain
There are several reasons why the evidence for the 
localization of brain functions, which seems so obvi-
ous and compelling in retrospect, had been rejected so 
often in the past. Phrenologists introduced the idea of 
localization in an exaggerated form and without ade-
quate evidence. They imagined each region of the cer-
ebral cortex as an independent mental organ dedicated 
to a complete and distinct aspect of personality, much 
as the pancreas and the liver are independent diges-
tive organs. Flourens’s rejection of phrenology and the 
ensuing debate between proponents of the aggregate-
field view (against localization) and the cellular con-
nectionists (for localization) were responses to a theory 
that was simplistic and without adequate experimen-
tal evidence.
In the aftermath of Wernicke’s discovery of the 
modular organization of language in the brain—
interconnected nodes with distinctive functions—we 
now think that all cognitive abilities result from the 
interaction of many processing mechanisms distrib-
uted in several regions of the brain. That is, particu-
lar brain regions are not fully responsible for specific 
mental faculties but instead are elementary processing 
units that together have a role. Perception, movement, 
language, thought, and memory are all made possible 
by the interlinkage of serial and parallel processing 
in discrete brain regions—computational modules—
within these regions. As a result, damage to a single 
area need not result in the complete loss of a cogni-
tive function (or faculty) as many earlier neurologists 
believed. Even if a behavior initially disappears, it 
may partially return as undamaged parts of the brain 
reorganize their linkages. Further, when focal dam-
age adversely affects a mental function it may do so 
indirectly by disrupting the function of other princi-
pal loci (diaschisis). Indeed, observations of this nature 
led Wernicke’s student Kurt Goldstein to embrace the 
more holistic view.
Thus it is not accurate to think of a mental function 
as being mediated strictly by a chain of nerve cells and 
brain areas—each connected directly to the next—for 
in such an arrangement the entire process is disrupted 
when a single connection is damaged. A more realis-
tic metaphor is that of a process consisting of several 
parallel pathways in a network of modules that inter-
act and ultimately converge upon a common set of 
targets. The malfunction of a single pathway within 
a network may affect the information carried by that 
pathway without disrupting the entire system. The 
remaining parts of the network may be able to modify 
their performance to accommodate the breakdown of 
one pathway.
Modular processing in the brain was slow to be 
accepted because, until recently, it was difficult to dem-
onstrate which components of a mental operation were 
mediated by a particular pathway or brain region. Nor 
is it easy to define mental operations in a manner that 
leads to testable hypotheses. Nevertheless, with the 
evolving convergence of modern cognitive psychology 
and brain science in recent decades, we have begun to 
appreciate that mental functions can successfully be 
broken down into subfunctions.
To illustrate this point, consider how we learn, 
store, and recall information about objects, people, and 
events. Simple introspection suggests that we store 
each piece of our knowledge as a single representation 
that can be recalled by memory-jogging stimuli or even 
by the imagination alone. Everything you know about 
an apple, for example, seems to be stored in one com-
plete representation that is equally accessible whether 
you see a particular apple, a part of an apple, a red or 
green apple, the written word apple, or an apocryphal 
story about the discovery of gravity. Our experience, 
however, is not a faithful guide to how knowledge is 
stored in memory.
Knowledge about apples is not stored as a single 
coherent representation but rather is subdivided into 
distinct categories and stored separately. One region of 
the brain stores information about the way you would 
hold the apple, the way you would feel for softness 
(bearing on freshness), the color (bearing on preference 
or freshness), the way you might communicate the 
presence or taste of the apple to another person, as well 
as its semantic association with computers, physicists, 
worms, serpents, and biblical gardens. The concept 
“apple” entails each of these considerations and many 
more. A natural assumption is that a coherent concept 
comprising many details must exist in a single place 
in the brain; however, an equally valid assumption is 
that a unified concept like “apple” exists in the mind in 
the form of multiple links between a variety of neural 
structures, each with a particular kind of information, 
coordinated through the action of memory retrieval.
The most astonishing example of the modular 
organization of mental processes is the finding that 
our very sense of self—a self-aware being, the sum of 
what we mean when we say “I”—is achieved through 
the connection of independent circuits in our two 
cerebral hemispheres, each mediating its own sense 
of awareness. The remarkable discovery that even 
consciousness is not a unitary process was made by 
Roger Sperry, Michael Gazzaniga, and Joseph Bogen 


===== Page 3 =====
22    Part I / Overall Perspective
in the course of studying patients in whom the corpus 
callosum—the major tract connecting the two cerebral 
hemispheres—was severed as a treatment for epilepsy. 
They found that each hemisphere had a consciousness 
that functioned independently of the other.
Thus while one patient was reading a favorite 
book held in his left hand, the right hemisphere, which 
controls the left hand but plays only a minor role in 
language comprehension, found that the raw visual 
information it received from simply looking at the book 
was boring. The right hemisphere commanded the left 
hand to put the book down. Another patient would 
put on his clothes with the left hand while at the same 
time taking them off with the other. Each hemisphere 
has a mind of its own! In addition, the dominant hemi-
sphere sometimes commented on the performance of 
the nondominant hemisphere, frequently manifest-
ing a false sense of confidence regarding problems to 
which it could not know the solution, which was pro-
vided exclusively to the nondominant hemisphere.
Such findings have brought the study of con-
sciousness, once the domain of philosophy and psy-
choanalysis, into the fold of neural science. As we shall 
see in later chapters, many of the issues described in 
this chapter reemerge in neural theories of conscious-
ness. No one questions the idea that much information 
processing—perhaps the lion’s share—does not reach 
conscious awareness. When sensory information, a 
plan of action, or an idea does become conscious, 
neural science seeks to explain the mechanisms that 
mediate this transition. While there is as yet no satis-
factory explanation, some brain scientists would liken 
the process to a shift in the focus of attention, mediated 
by distinct groups of neurons, whereas others believe 
that awareness requires a qualitative change in the 
functional interaction between widely separated areas 
of the brain.
The main reason it has taken so long to understand 
which mental activities are mediated by which regions 
of the brain is that we are dealing with biology’s deep-
est riddle: the neural mechanisms that account for con-
sciousness and self-awareness. There is at present no 
satisfactory theory that explains why only some infor-
mation that reaches our eyes leads to a state of subjec-
tive awareness of an item, person, or scene. We know 
that we are consciously aware of only a small fraction 
of our mental deliberations, and those thoughts that do 
pierce conscious awareness must arise from steps car-
ried out by the brain unconsciously. As we propose in 
Chapter 56, some answers to the riddles of conscious-
ness may be closer than imagined.
Meanwhile, the current gap in our understand-
ing also poses practical, epistemological challenges 
for neural science. We cannot help but rely on our con-
scious experiences of the world, body, and ideation in 
our characterization of perception, behavior, and cog-
nition. In doing so, however, we risk mischaracterizing 
many mental processes that do not pierce conscious 
awareness. For example, we tend to characterize the 
problem of perception in terms consistent with the 
subjective experience of sensory information, whereas 
even sophisticated but nonconscious knowledge of the 
content of perception may have greater resemblance 
to a behavioral utility (affordance), in effect an answer 
to whether this is something I might choose to eat, sit 
upon, or engage further. Similarly, cognitive processes, 
such as reasoning, strategizing, and decision making, 
are likely to be carried out by the brain in ways that 
only loosely resemble the steps we infer from con-
scious deliberation.
These cautionary notes have a bright corollary. 
The insight that many cognitive functions transpire 
without conscious awareness raises the possibility that 
principles of neural science revealed in the study of 
more rudimentary behaviors can furnish insight into 
more complex cognitive processes. Neural recordings 
from the brains of animals trained to perform complex 
tasks have led to an understanding of cognitive pro-
cesses such as decision making, reasoning, planning, 
and allocating attention. These experimental models 
often extrapolate to human functions, and where they 
fall short, they inspire new hypotheses. For more often 
than not, there is inspiration if not insight to be gleaned 
from the gaps in our understanding.
To analyze how the brain gives rise to a specific 
mental process, we must determine not only which 
aspects of the process depend on which regions of the 
brain but also how the relevant information is repre-
sented, routed, and transformed. Modern neural science 
seeks to integrate such understanding across many 
scales. For example, studies at the level of both the sin-
gle nerve cell and its molecular constituents elucidate 
the mechanisms underlying electrical excitability and 
synaptic connections. Studies of cells and simple cir-
cuits lend insights into neural computations, ranging 
from basic operations, like controlling net excitation, 
to more masterful feats of computation, such as the 
derivation of meaningful information from raw sen-
sory data. Studies of the interactions between circuits 
and brain areas can explain how we coordinate widely 
separated muscle groups or express a belief in a prop-
osition. Knowledge at all these levels is knit together 
by mathematical formalizations, computer simulation, 
and psychological theory. These conceptual tools can 
now be combined with modern physiological tech-
niques and brain imaging methods, making it possible 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    23
to track mental processes as they evolve in real time 
in living animals and humans. Indeed, the excite-
ment evident in neural science today stems from the 
conviction that the biological principles that underlie 
human thought and behavior are within our grasp and 
may soon be harnessed to elucidate and improve the 
human condition.
Highlights
1.  The neural sciences seek to understand the brain 
at multiple levels of organization, ranging from 
the cell and its constituents to the operations of the 
mind.
2.  The fundamental principles of neural science bridge 
levels of time, complexity, and state—from cell to 
action and ideation, from development through 
learning to expertise and forgetting, from nor-
mal function to neurological deficits and recovery. 
As a first step, one must understand the building 
blocks—the electrical properties of the nerve cell 
and its connections to other nerve cells—and the 
organization of the nervous system from support-
ing cells to pathways.
3.  The neuron doctrine states that individual nerve 
cells (neurons) are the elementary building blocks 
and signaling elements of the nervous system.
4.  Neurons are organized into circuits with spe-
cialized functions. The simplest circuits mediate 
reflexes; more complex cognitive functions require 
more sophisticated circuits. This organizational 
principle extends the neuron doctrine to cellular 
connectionism.
5.  Even within complex circuits, critical nodes can be 
identified as areas associated with a specific func-
tion. The first clear evidence for localization of brain 
function came from the study of a specific impair-
ment of language production.
6.  The two cerebral hemispheres receive information 
from the opposite side of the body and control the 
actions of the opposite side.
7.  While the principle of localization of function in the 
brain is superior to its main historical alternatives—
aggregate-field and the theory of mass action—it 
is constantly being refined. No area of the cerebral 
cortex functions independently of other cortical and 
subcortical structures.
8.  A major refinement of localization is the principle 
of modular functional organization. The brain con-
tains many representations of information organ-
ized by both the relevance of certain features for 
particular computations and by the variety of uses 
to which such information may be put. This is a 
form of redundancy with respect to purpose or 
potential action.
9.  The future of brain science will require integration 
of ideas that cross the boundaries of traditional 
disciplines. We must open our minds to a wide 
variety of sources to guide our intuitions and strat-
egies for research, from the sublime—the nature of 
consciousness—to the seemingly mundane—what 
general anesthesia does to a calcium sensor in the 
ring of cells around the thalamus.
Eric R. Kandel 
Michael N. Shadlen
Selected Reading
Churchland PS. 1986. Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science 
of the Mind-Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cooter R. 1984. The Cultural Meaning of Popular Science: Phre-
nology and the Organization of Consent in Nineteenth-Century 
Britain. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Cowan WM. 1981. Keynote. In: FO Schmitt, FG Worden,  
G Adelman, SG Dennis (eds). The Organization of the Cerebral 
Cortex: Proceedings of a Neurosciences Research Program 
Colloquium, pp. xi–xxi. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Crick F, Koch C. 2003. A framework for consciousness. Nat 
Neurosci 6:119–126.
Dehaene S. 2009. Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution 
of a Human Invention. New York: Viking.
Ferrier D. 1890. The Croonian Lectures on Cerebral Localisation. 
London: Smith, Elder.
Geschwind N. 1974. Selected Papers on Language and the Brain. 
Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel.
Glickstein M. 2014. Neuroscience. A Historical Introduction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gregory RL (ed). 1987. The Oxford Companion to the Mind. 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Harrington A. 1987. Medicine, Mind, and the Double Brain: 
A Study in Nineteenth-Century Thought. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton Univ. Press.
Harrison RG. 1935. On the origin and development of 
the nervous system studied by the methods of experi-
mental embryology. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 118: 
155–196.
Hickok G, Small S. 2015. Neurobiology of Language. Boston: 
Elsevier.
Jackson JH. 1884. The Croonian lectures on evolution and 
dissolution of the nervous system. Br Med J 1:591–593; 
660–663; 703–707.


===== Page 5 =====
24    Part I / Overall Perspective
Kandel ER. 1976. The study of behavior: the interface between 
psychology and biology. In: Cellular Basis of Behavior: An 
Introduction to Behavioral Neurobiology, pp. 3–27. San Francisco: 
Freeman.
Ojemann GA. 1995. Investigating language during awake 
neurosurgery. In: RD Broadwell (ed). Neuroscience, Mem-
ory, and Language. Vol. 1, Decade of the Brain, pp. 117–131. 
Washington, DC: Library of Congress.
Petersen SE. 1995. Functional neuroimaging in brain areas 
involved in language. In: RD Broadwell (ed). Neurosci-
ence, Memory, and Language. Vol. 1, Decade of the Brain, pp. 
109–116. Washington DC: Library of Congress.
Shepherd GM. 1991. Foundations of the Neuron Doctrine. 
New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Sperry RW. 1968. Mental unity following surgical disconnec-
tion of the cerebral hemispheres. Harvey Lect 62:293–323.
Young RM. 1990. Mind, Brain and Adaptation in the Nineteenth 
Century. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
References
Adrian ED. 1941. Afferent discharges to the cerebral cor-
tex from peripheral sense organs. J Physiol (Lond) 
100:159–191.
Bernard C. 1878–1879. Leçons sur les Phénomènes de la vie Com-
muns aux Animaux et aux Végétaux. Vols. 1, 2. Paris: Baillière.
Boakes R. 1984. From Darwin to Behaviourism: Psychology and 
the Minds of Animals. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Broca P. 1865. Sur le siége de la faculté du langage articulé. 
Bull Soc Anthropol 6:377–393.
Brodmann K. 1909. Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Gross-
hirnrinde in ihren Prinzipien dargestellt auf Grund des Zeelen-
baues. Leipzig: Barth.
Darwin C. 1872. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and 
Animals. London: Murray.
Dejerine J. 1891. Sur un cas de cécité verbale avec agraphie 
suivi d’autopsie. Mémoires de la Société de Biologie 
3:197–201.
Descartes R. [1649] 1984. The Philosophical Writings of 
Descartes. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Finger S., Koehler PJ, Jagella C. 2004. The Monakow con-
cept of diaschisis: origins and perspectives. Arch Neurol 
61:283–288.
Flourens P. [1824] 1953. Experimental research. P Flourens 
and JMD Olmsted. In: EA Underwood (ed). Science, Medi-
cine and History, 2:290–302. London: Oxford Univ. Press.
Flourens P. 1824. Recherches Expérimentales sur les Propriétés et 
les Fonctions du Système Nerveux, dans les Animaux Vertébrés. 
Paris: Chez Crevot.
Fritsch G, Hitzig E. [1870] 1960. Electric excitability of the 
cerebrum. In: G. von Bonin (transl). Some Papers on the 
Cerebral Cortex, pp. 73–96. Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Gall FJ, Spurzheim G. 1810. Anatomie et Physiologie du Système 
Nerveux en Général, et du Cerveau en Particulier, avec des 
Observations sur la Possibilité de Reconnoître Plusieurs Dispo-
sitions Intellectuelles et Morales de l’Homme et des Animaux, 
par la Configuration de leurs Têtes. Paris: Schoell.
Galvani L. [1791] 1953. Commentary on the Effect of Electricity 
on Muscular Motion. RM Green (transl). Cambridge, MA: 
Licht.
Gazzaniga MS, LeDoux JE. 1978. The Integrated Mind. 
New York: Plenum.
Geschwind N. 1979. Specializations of the human brain. Sci 
Am 241:180–199.
Goldstein K. 1948. Language and Language Disturbances: Apha-
sic Symptom Complexes and Their Significance for Medicine 
and Theory of Language. New York: Grune & Stratton.
Golgi C. [1906] 1967. The neuron doctrine: theory and facts. 
In: Nobel Lectures: Physiology or Medicine, 1901–1921, pp. 
189–217. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Langley JN. 1906. On nerve endings and on special excitable 
substances in cells. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 78:170–194.
Lashley KS. 1929. Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence: A Quanti-
tative Study of Injuries to the Brain. Chicago: Univ. Chicago 
Press.
Lashley KS, Clark G. 1946. The cytoarchitecture of the cere-
bral cortex of Ateles: a critical examination of architectonic 
studies. J Comp Neurol 85:223–305.
Loeb J. 1918. Forced Movements, Tropisms and Animal Conduct. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
MacSweeney M, Capek CM, Campbell R, Woll B. 2008. The 
signing brain: the neurobiology of sign language. Trends 
Cogn Sci 12:432–440.
MacSweeney M, Woll B, Campbell R, et al. 2002. Neural sys-
tems underlying British Sign Language and audio-visual 
English processing in native users. Brain 125:1583–1593.
Marshall WH, Woolsey CN, Bard P. 1941. Observations on 
cortical somatic sensory mechanisms of cat and monkey.  
J Neurophysiol 4:1–24.
Martin JH. 2003. Neuroanatomy: Text and Atlas, 3rd ed. 
New York: McGraw Hill.
McCarthy RA, Warrington EK. 1988. Evidence for modality-
specific meaning systems in the brain. Nature 334:428–430.
Müller J. 1834–1840. Handbuch der Physiologie des Menschen für 
Vorlesungen. Vols. 1, 2. Coblenz: Hölscher.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human 
Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd rev. ed. 
Berlin: Springer.
Pavlov IP. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the 
Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. GV Anrep 
(transl). London: Oxford Univ. Press.
Penfield W. 1954. Mechanisms of voluntary movement. Brain 
77:1–17.
Penfield W, Rasmussen T. 1950. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: 
A Clinical Study of Localization of Function. New York: 
Macmillan.
Penfield W, Roberts L. 1959. Speech and Brain-Mechanisms. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1892] 1977. A new concept of the histology 
of the central nervous system. DA Rottenberg (transl). In: 
DA Rottenberg, FH Hochberg (eds). Neurological Classics 
in Modern Translation, pp. 7–29. New York: Hafner. (See 
also historical essay by SL Palay, preceding Ramón y 
Cajal’s paper.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 1 / The Brain and Behavior    25
Ramón y Cajal S. [1906] 1967. The structure and connex-
ions of neurons. In: Nobel Lectures: Physiology or Medicine,  
1901–1921, pp. 220–253. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1908] 1954. Neuron Theory or Reticular 
Theory? Objective Evidence of the Anatomical Unity of Nerve 
Cells. MU Purkiss, CA Fox (transl). Madrid: Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas Instituto Ramón 
y Cajal.
Ramón y Cajal S. 1937. 1852–1934. Recollections of My Life. EH 
Craigie (transl). Philadelphia: American Philosophical 
Society; reprinted 1989. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rose JE, Woolsey CN. 1948. Structure and relations of lim-
bic cortex and anterior thalamic nuclei in rabbit and cat.  
J Comp Neurol 89:279–347.
Shadlen MN, Kiani R, Hanks TD, Churchland AK. 2008. 
Neurobiology of decision making: an intentional frame-
work. In: C Engel, W Singer (eds.). Better Than Conscious? 
Decision Making, the Human Mind, and Implications for Insti-
tutions, pp. 71–102. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sherrington C. 1947. The Integrative Action of the Nervous System, 
2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Spurzheim JG. 1825. Phrenology, or the Doctrine of the Mind, 
3rd ed. London: Knight.
von Helmholtz H. [1850] 1948. On the rate of transmis-
sion of the nerve impulse. In: W Dennis (ed). Read-
ings in the History of Psychology, pp. 197–198. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Wandell BA, Rauschecker AM, Yeatman JD. 2012. Learning 
to see words. Annu Rev Psychol 63:31–53.
Wernicke C. 1908. The symptom-complex of aphasia. In: A 
Church (ed). Diseases of the Nervous System, pp. 265–324. 
New York: Appleton.
Yeatman JD, Rauschecker AM, Wandell BA. 2013. Anatomy 
of the visual word form area: adjacent cortical circuits 
and long-range white matter connections. Brain Lang 
125:146–155.


===== Page 7 =====
2
Genes and Behavior
Highlights
Glossary
A
ll behaviors are shaped by the  interplay 
of genes and the environment. The most ste-
reotypic behaviors of simple animals are influ-
enced by the environment, while the highly evolved 
behaviors of humans are constrained by innate proper-
ties specified by genes. Genes do not control behavior 
directly, but the RNAs and proteins encoded by genes 
act at different times and at many levels to affect the 
brain. Genes specify the developmental programs that 
assemble the brain and are essential to the properties 
of neurons, glia, and synapses that allow neuronal cir-
cuits to function. Genes that are stably inherited over 
generations create the machinery by which new expe-
riences can change the brain during learning.
In this chapter, we ask how genes contribute to 
behavior. We begin with an overview of the evidence 
that genes do influence behavior, and then review 
basic principles of molecular biology and genetic 
transmission. We then provide examples of the way 
that genetic influences on behavior have been docu-
mented. A deep understanding of the ways that genes 
regulate behavior has emerged from studies of worms, 
flies, and mice, animals whose genomes are accessible 
to experimental manipulation. Many persuasive links 
between genes and human behavior have emerged 
from the analysis of human brain development and 
function. Despite the formidable challenges inherent in 
studying complex traits in humans, recent progress has 
An Understanding of Molecular Genetics and Heritability Is 
Essential to the Study of Human Behavior
The Understanding of the Structure and Function of the 
Genome Is Evolving
Genes Are Arranged on Chromosomes
The Relationship Between Genotype and Phenotype Is Often 
Complex
Genes Are Conserved Through Evolution
Genetic Regulation of Behavior Can Be Studied in Animal 
Models
A Transcriptional Oscillator Regulates Circadian Rhythm 
in Flies, Mice, and Humans
Natural Variation in a Protein Kinase Regulates Activity 
in Flies and Honeybees
Neuropeptide Receptors Regulate the Social Behaviors of 
Several Species
Studies of Human Genetic Syndromes Have Provided 
Initial Insights into the Underpinnings of Social  
Behavior
Brain Disorders in Humans Result From Interactions 
Between Genes and the Environment
Rare Neurodevelopmental Syndromes Provide Insights 
Into the Biology of Social Behavior, Perception, and 
Cognition
Psychiatric Disorders Involve Multigenic Traits
Advances in Autism Spectrum Disorder Genetics 
Highlight the Role of Rare and De Novo Mutations in 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Identification of Genes for Schizophrenia Highlights the 
Interplay of Rare and Common Risk Variants
Perspectives on the Genetic Bases of Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    27
begun to reveal the genetic risk factors in neurodevel-
opmental and psychiatric syndromes such as autism, 
schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder, offering another 
important avenue to clarify the relationship between 
genes, brain, and behavior.
An Understanding of Molecular Genetics and 
Heritability Is Essential to the Study of  
Human Behavior
Many human psychiatric disorders and neurological 
diseases have a genetic component. The relatives of a 
patient are more likely than the general population to 
have the disease. The extent to which genetic factors 
account for traits in a population is called heritability. 
The strongest case for heritability is based on twin stud-
ies, first used by Francis Galton in 1883. Identical twins 
develop from a single fertilized egg that splits into two 
soon after fertilization; such monozygotic twins share 
all genes. In contrast, fraternal twins develop from two 
different fertilized eggs; these dizygotic twins, like 
normal siblings, share on average half their genetic 
information. Systematic comparisons over many years 
have shown that identical twins tend to be more simi-
lar (concordant) for neurological and psychiatric traits 
than fraternal twins, providing evidence of a heritable 
component of these traits (Figure 2–1A).
In a variation of the twin study model, the  
Minnesota Twin Study examined identical twins that 
were separated early in life and raised in different 
households. Despite sometimes great differences in 
their environment, twins shared predispositions for 
the same psychiatric disorders and even tended to 
share personality traits, like extraversion. This study 
provides considerable evidence that genetic variation 
contributes to normal human differences, not just to 
disease states.
Heritability for human diseases and behavioral 
traits is usually substantially less than 100%, demon-
strating that the environment is an important factor in 
acquiring diseases or traits. Estimates of heritability for 
many neurological, psychiatric, and behavioral traits 
from twin studies are around 50%, but heritability can 
be higher or lower for particular traits (Figure 2–1B). 
Although studies of identical twins and other kinships 
provide support for the idea that human behavior has a 
hereditary component, they do not tell us which genes 
are important, let alone how specific genes influence 
behavior. These questions are addressed by studies in 
experimental animals in which genetic and environ-
mental factors are strictly controlled and by modern 
methods of gene discovery that are now leading to 
the systematic, reliable identification of specific varia-
tions in DNA sequence and structure that contribute to 
human psychiatric and neurological phenotypes.
The Understanding of the Structure and 
Function of the Genome Is Evolving
The related fields of molecular biology and transmis-
sion genetics are central to our modern understanding 
of genes. Here we summarize some key ideas in these 
fields; a glossary at the end of the chapter defines com-
monly used terms.
Genes are made of DNA, and it is DNA that is 
passed on from one generation to the next. In most 
circumstances, exact copies of each gene are provided 
to all cells in an organism as well as to succeeding 
generations through DNA replication. The rare excep-
tions to this general rule—new (de novo) mutations 
that are introduced into the DNA of either germline or 
somatic cells and that play an important role in disease 
risk—are discussed later. DNA is made of two strands, 
each of which has a deoxyribose-phosphate backbone 
attached to a series of four subunits: the nucleotides 
adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine 
(C). The two strands are paired so that an A on one 
strand is always paired with a T on the complemen-
tary strand, and a G with a C (Figure 2–2). This com-
plementarity ensures accurate copying of DNA during 
DNA replication and drives transcription of DNA into 
lengths of RNA called transcripts. Given that nearly all 
of the genome is double-stranded, bases or base pairs 
are used interchangeably as a unit of measurement. A 
segment of the genome encompassing a thousand base 
pairs is referred to as 1 kilobase (1 kb) or 1 kilobase 
pair (1 kbp), whereas a million base pairs are referred 
to as 1 megabase (1 Mb) or 1 megabase pairs (1 Mbp). 
RNA differs from DNA in that it is single-stranded, has 
a ribose rather than a deoxyribose backbone, and uses 
the nucleoside base uridine (U) in the place of thymine.
In the human genome, approximately 20,000 genes 
encode protein products, which are generated by trans-
lation of the linear messenger RNA (mRNA) sequence 
into a linear polypeptide (protein) sequence composed 
of amino acids. A typical protein-coding gene consists 
of a coding region, which is translated into the protein, 
and noncoding regions (Figure 2–3). The coding region 
is usually arranged in small coding segments called 
exons, which are separated by noncoding stretches 
called introns. The introns are deleted from the mRNA 
before its translation into protein.


===== Page 9 =====
28    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 2–1  Familial risk of psychiatric disorders provides 
evidence of heritability.
A. Correlations between monozygotic twins for psychiatric dis-
orders are considerably greater than those between dizygotic 
twins. Monozygotic twins share nearly all genes and have a 
high (but not 100%) risk of sharing the disease state. Dizygotic 
twins share 50% of their genetic material. A score of zero rep-
resents no correlation (the average result for two random peo-
ple), whereas a score of 1.0 represents a perfect correlation. 
(Adapted from McGue and Bouchard 1998.)
B. The risk of developing schizophrenia is greater in close rela-
tives of a schizophrenic patient. Like dizygotic twins, parents 
and children, as well as brothers and sisters, share 50% of their 
genetic material. If only a single gene accounted for schizophre-
nia, the risk should be the same for parents, siblings, children, 
and dizygotic twins of patients. The variation between family 
members shows that more complex genetic and environmental 
factors are in play. (Adapted, with permission, from Gottesman II. 
1991.)
Lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia (%)
10
20
30
40
50
0
None (general
population)
Relationship to
schizophrenic individual
Genes
shared
12.5%
(third-degree
relatives)
25%
(second-degree
relatives)
50%
(ﬁrst-degree
relatives)
100%
First cousin
Uncle/aunt
Nephew/niece
Grandchild
Half sibling
Parent
Sibling
Child
Dizygotic twin
Monozygotic twin
2%
1%
2%
4%
5%
6%
6%
9%
13%
17%
48%
A
B
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Schizophrenia
Affective
illness
Panic
disorder
Autism
Autism
spectrum
Attention
deﬁcit
Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Concordance for disorder


