===== Page 1 =====
1140    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Medial ganglionic eminence
Caudal ganglionic eminence
Lateral ganglionic eminence
Cortex
Striatum
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Cortex
Striatum
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Globus pallidus
Striatum
Olfactory bulb
Cortex
Globus
pallidus
Striatum
Cortex
Striatum
Striatum
Figure 46–8  Forebrain interneurons are generated in the 
ventral telencephalon and migrate tangentially to the cer-
ebral cortex. Neurons generated in the ganglionic eminences 
migrate to and settle in many regions of the forebrain, where 
they differentiate into interneurons. Cortical interneurons 
arise from medial and caudal ganglionic eminences. Other 
cells generated in these regions migrate in other directions, 
populating the hippocampus, striatum, globus pallidus, and 
amygdala with interneurons. The lateral ganglionic eminence 
generates cells that migrate to the striatum and the olfactory 
bulb. Cells migrating to the bulb use neighboring migrating 
cells as substrates for migration, a process called chain  
migration. (Adapted, with permission, from Bandler, Mayer, 
and Fishell 2017. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd.)
Nonetheless, it is now clear that cortical neurons orig-
inate from two sources: excitatory neurons from the 
cortical ventricular zone and interneurons from the 
ganglionic eminences.
Interneurons in other forebrain structures also 
arise from the ganglionic eminences, as well as a few 
other subcortical sites such as the preoptic area. Cells 
migrating caudally from the medial and caudal emi-
nences populate the hippocampus, while cells migrat-
ing ventrolaterally from these regions populate the 
basal ganglia. In contrast, neurons generated in the 
lateral ganglionic eminence migrate rostrally and con-
tribute the periglomerular and granule interneurons 
of the olfactory bulb. In this rostral migratory stream, 
neurons use neighboring neurons as substrates for 
migration (chain migration). In the adult brain, neu-
rons that follow the rostral migratory stream originate 
instead in the subventricular zone of the striatum.
Transcription factors control the character of gan-
glionic eminence neurons. The homeodomain proteins 
Dlx1 and Dlx2 are expressed by cells in the ganglionic 
eminences. In mice lacking Dlx1 and Dlx2 activity, the 
resultant perturbation of neuronal migration leads to 
a profound reduction in the number of GABAergic 
interneurons in the cortex. Other transcription factors 
are responsible for differences among ganglionic emi-
nences. For example, Nkx2.1 is selectively expressed by 
cells in the medial ganglionic eminence. In its absence, 
interneurons generated in this region take on charac-
teristics of those normally generated in the lateral and 
caudal ganglionic eminences. Yet other transcription 
factors specify the distinct characteristics of subpopu-
lations of neurons within each ganglionic eminence.
One of the main features that these transcription 
factors specify is the migratory path that the newborn 
interneurons take. A host of soluble and cell surface 
factors produced by cells in and near the ganglionic 
eminences provide repulsive cues that lead to expul-
sion of cells from the ventricular zone, so-called moto-
genic (movement-promoting) cues that speed their 
migration and attractive cues that direct them to their 
targets. These factors include slits, semaphorins, and 
ephrins, all of which we will encounter in Chapter 47 
as molecules that guide axons to their targets.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1141
Neural Crest Cell Migration in the Peripheral 
Nervous System Does Not Rely on Scaffolding
The peripheral nervous system derives from neural 
crest stem cells, a small group of neuroepithelial cells 
at the boundary of the neural tube and epidermal ecto-
derm. Soon after their induction, neural crest cells are 
transformed from epithelial to mesenchymal cells and 
begin to detach from the neural tube. They then migrate 
to many sites throughout the body (Figure 46–9). Neu-
ral crest cell migration does not rely on scaffolding (ie, 
radial glial cells or preexisting axon tracts) and thus is 
called free migration. This form of neuronal migration 
requires significant cytoarchitectural and cell adhesive 
changes and differs from most of the migratory events 
in the central nervous system.
Neural crest migration is promoted and guided by 
several families of secreted factors. For example, bone 
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), which are critical for 
neural crest induction at an earlier stage (Chapter 45), 
are required for neural crest migration at later stages. 
Exposure of neural epithelial cells to BMPs triggers 
molecular changes that convert epithelial cells to a 
mesenchymal state, causing them to delaminate from 
the neural tube and migrate into the periphery. BMPs 
trigger changes in neural crest cells by inducing expres-
sion of transcription factors, notably the zinc finger 
proteins snail, slug, and twist, which have a conserved 
role in promoting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transi-
tions. These transcription factors direct expression of 
proteins that regulate the properties of the cytoskel-
eton as well as enzymes that degrade extracellular 
matrix proteins. These enzymes give neural crest cells 
the ability to break down the basement membrane sur-
rounding the epithelium of the neural tube, permitting 
them to embark on their migratory journey into the 
periphery.
As neural crest cells begin to delaminate, their 
expression of cell adhesion molecules changes. Altera-
tions in expression of adhesive proteins, notably cad-
herins, permit neural crest cells to loosen their adhesive 
contacts with neural tube cells and begin the delami-
nation process. Neural crest cells also begin to express 
integrins, receptors for extracellular matrix proteins 
such as laminins and collagens that are found along 
peripheral migratory paths.
The first structures encountered by migrating neu-
ral crest cells are somites, epithelial cells that later give 
rise to muscle and cartilage. Neural crest cells pass 
through the anterior half of each somite but avoid the 
posterior half (Figure 46–9A). The rostral channeling 
of migratory neural crest cells is imposed by ephrin B 
proteins, which are concentrated in the posterior half 
of each somite. Ephrins provide a repellant signal that 
interacts with EphB class tyrosine kinase receptors on 
neural crest cells to prevent their invasion. Neural crest 
cells that remain within the anterior sclerotome of the 
somite differentiate into sensory neurons of the dor-
sal root ganglia; those that migrate around the dorsal 
region of the somite approach the skin and give rise to 
melanocytes.
Differentiation of the neural crest into its various 
derivatives depends on complex interactions between 
the distinct cues that cells receive along their journey 
and intrinsic predispositions that vary along the ros-
trocaudal axis. Development of sensory neurons is 
initiated at the time the cells emigrate from the neu-
ral tube. The cells are exposed to signals from the dor-
sal neural tube and somites that induce expression of 
neurogenin, a transcription factor of the bHLH fam-
ily, which in turn promotes a sensory fate. Subsequent 
influences diversify the neurons into multiple sensory 
types, such as nociceptive and proprioceptive neurons 
(Figure 46–10). In contrast, those neural crest cells that 
follow a more medial and ventral migratory path are 
exposed to BMPs secreted from the dorsal aorta. They 
express the bHLH factor Mash1, which leads to their 
differentiation into sympathetic neurons.
Structural and Molecular Innovations Underlie 
the Expansion of the Human Cerebral Cortex
No mice or monkeys are reading this book. This is in 
large part because the human brain is different from 
that of even our closest relatives, both qualitatively 
and quantitatively. Yet most studies of mammalian 
neural development have been carried out on mice, 
whose brain contains approximately 1,000-fold fewer 
neurons than those of the human brain and 100-fold 
fewer than the best-studied nonhuman primate, the 
rhesus macaque. Recently, however, new methods are 
making it possible to elucidate some of the molecular 
and structural features that lead to the expansion of 
the human brain and particularly the human cerebral 
cortex.
Classical anatomical studies made clear that the 
primate cortex has not only a far larger size and thick-
ness than that of rodents but also more discrete areas 
and more layers (Figure 46–11A). In addition, the pack-
ing density of neurons is higher in primates than in 
mice, so the difference in neuronal number is greater 
than would be expected from size alone. One main 
contributor to the expansion in primates is a large pool 
of neuronal progenitors. Many of these progenitors are 
a second type of radial glial cell, called the outer radial 


===== Page 3 =====
1142    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Adrenal 
medulla
A  Migratory paths
B  Final positions
Melanocytes
Dorsal root
ganglion
Sympathetic 
ganglion
50  µm
Epidermis
Neural 
crest
Neural tube
Notochord
Somite
Neural
tube
Somite
Notochord
Aorta
Epidermis
Neural crest cells
Figure 46–9  Neural crest cell migration in the peripheral 
nervous system.
A. A cross section through the middle part of the trunk of a 
chick embryo shows the main pathways of neural crest cells. 
Some cells migrate along a superficial pathway, just beneath 
the ectoderm, and differentiate into pigment cells of the skin. 
Others migrate along a deeper pathway that takes them 
through the somites, where they coalesce to form dorsal root 
sensory ganglia. Still others migrate between the neural tube 
and somites, past the dorsal aorta. These cells differentiate into 
sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla. The scanning electron 
micrograph shows neural crest cells migrating away from the 
dorsal surface of the neural tube of a chick embryo. (Micrograph 
reproduced, with permission, from K. Tosney.)
B. Neural crest cells reach their final settling positions where 
they complete differentiation.
glial cell to distinguish it from the canonical or inner 
radial glia described above. Outer radial glia, unlike 
inner radial glia, lack contact with the ventricular 
surface and exhibit molecular differences from inner 
radial glia. However, they are capable of generating 
neurons and serving as a migratory guide. The massive 
increase in their number in primates, and particularly 
humans, provides a partial explanation for the increase 
in the number of neurons in the human cerebral cortex.
How can human-specific developmental fea-
tures be analyzed experimentally? New methods of 
molecular analysis are making it possible to compare 
the proteins, transcripts, and genes of humans with 
those of our close relatives, resulting in the discovery 
of intriguing specializations. However, hypotheses 
derived from these findings are difficult to test: Most 
of the developmental studies we describe in these 
chapters cannot be performed on humans, and even 
nonhuman primates are difficult subjects for devel-
opmental analysis. A possible solution is the recently 
devised “organoid” culture system.
Cells from adult skin can be reprogrammed to 
become multipotential progenitors called induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by methods that we 
will discuss in Chapter 50. When placed into culture 
under carefully controlled conditions and allowed 
to expand in three dimensions (quite unlike conven-
tional two-dimensional cultures), they proliferate and 
self-organize into structures that resemble the devel-
oping forebrain and exhibit species-specific features  


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1143
Figure 46–10  Neural crest cells differentiate into sympa-
thetic and sensory neurons.  The neuronal fates of trunk neu-
ral crest cells are controlled by transcription factor expression. 
Expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein Mash1 
directs neural crest cells along a sympathetic neuronal path-
way. Sympathetic neurons can acquire noradrenergic or cholin-
ergic transmitter phenotypes depending on the target cells they 
innervate and the level of gp130 cytokine signaling (see Figure 
46–13). Two bHLH proteins, neurogenin-1 and -2, direct neural 
crest cells along a sensory neuronal pathway. Sensory neurons 
that express the transcription factor Runx1 and the tyrosine 
kinase receptor TrkA become nociceptors; those that express 
Runx3 and TrkC become proprioceptors. (Abbreviations: Ngn-1, 
neurogenin-1; Ngn-2, neurogenin-2.)
Mash1
Phox2
Gata2/3
Mash1
Neural 
crest cells
Sensory
neuron
Ngn2
Ngn1
Sympathetic
neuron
Sympathetic
precursor
Sensory
precursor
Nociceptive
neuron
Proprioceptive
neuron
Cholinergic
sympathetic
neuron
Noradrenergic
sympathetic
neuron
Target-derived
gp130 cytokine
Runx1 and TrkA
Runx3 and TrkC
FoxS1
P
P
(Figure 46–11B). Most notably, organoids from human 
cells contain a bilayered, large subventricular zone 
with numerous outer radial glia, whereas organoids 
from mouse cells contain a smaller subventricular zone 
containing predominately conventional or inner radial 
glia. These organoids can be used to elucidate the 
development of at least some early aspects of human 
cortical development.
Additional applications abound. One is to obtain 
iPSCs from patients with brain disorders. Organoids 
derived from such patients have features that may lead 
to cortical malformations such as lissencephaly (see 
Figure 46–5). The hope is that these organoids can be 
used to elucidate disease mechanisms and eventually 
test therapies. A second application is to compare orga-
noids derived from chimpanzee and human iPSCs. 
This comparison provides a novel means of investi-
gating the most recent evolutionary innovations that 
separate us from our closest living relatives.
Intrinsic Programs and Extrinsic Factors 
Determine the Neurotransmitter Phenotypes  
of Neurons
Neurons continue to develop after they have migrated 
to their final position, and no aspect of their later dif-
ferentiation is more important than the choice of 
chemical neurotransmitter. Neurons that populate the 
brain use two major neurotransmitters: The amino 
acid l-glutamate is the major excitatory transmitter, 
whereas γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the major 
inhibitory transmitter. Some spinal cord neurons use 
another amino acid, glycine, as their inhibitory trans-
mitter. In the peripheral nervous system, sensory neu-
rons use glutamate, motor neurons use acetylcholine, 
and autonomic neurons use acetylcholine or norepi-
nephrine. Smaller numbers of neurons use other trans-
mitters, such as serotonin and dopamine. The choice of 
neurotransmitter determines which postsynaptic cells 
a neuron can talk to and what it can say.
Neurotransmitter Choice Is a Core Component 
of Transcriptional Programs of Neuronal 
Differentiation
Distinct molecular programs are used to establish 
neurotransmitter phenotype in different brain regions 
and neuronal classes. We shall illustrate the general 
strategy for assignment of amino acid neurotransmit-
ter phenotypes by focusing on neurons in the cerebral 
cortex and cerebellum.
The cerebral cortex contains glutamatergic pyram-
idal neurons that are generated within the cortical 
plate and rely on the bHLH factors neurogenin-1 and 
neurogenin-2 for their differentiation. In contrast, as 
discussed earlier in the chapter (see Figure 46–8), most 
GABAergic inhibitory interneurons migrate into the 
cortex from the ganglionic eminences; their inhibitory 
transmitter character is specified by the bHLH protein 


===== Page 5 =====
1144    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A
B
Mature 
progenitor 
zones
Cortical layering
Adult structure
Development
Satb2
Ctip2
Pax6
Macaque
Human
Mouse
SVZ
SP
VZ
IZ
CP
MZ
ISVZ
VZ
IFL
CP
OFL
OSVZ
MZ
I
IIIa
IIIb
IIIbβ
IIIc
II
IVa
IVb
Va
Vb
VIa
VIb
I
II / III
IV
V
VI
Figure 46–11  Expansion of the proliferative zones con-
tributes to cortical specialization in humans and other 
primates.
A. The size of the neuroepithelium is initially small in both 
rodents and humans, but their relative size differs dramatically 
as development proceeds, owing to increased self-renewal 
rates and larger numbers of progenitors in humans. The pri-
mate subventricular zone is greatly enlarged compared to the 
mouse and becomes subdivided into inner and outer regions, 
which contain large populations of radial glial cells, both of 
which generate neurons. In mice, nearly all radial glial cells are 
of the inner type. (Abbreviations: CP, cortical plate; IFL, inner 
fiber layer; ISVZ, inner subventricular zone; IZ, intermediate 
zone; MZ, marginal zone; OFL, outer fiberlayer; OSVZ, outer 
subventricular zone; SP, subplate; SVZ, subventricular zone; 
VZ, ventricular zone.) (Adapted, with permission, from  
Giandomenico and Lancaster 2017.)
B. Section through an organoid generated from human induced 
pluripotent stem cells. The area between the white lines is 
enlarged in the micrograph on the right. The section was stained 
with antibodies to transcription factors (Satb2, Ctip2, and Pax6) 
selectively expressed in specific layers in human cortex, demon-
strating that a layered cortical structure develops in the organoid. 
(Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from P. Arlotta.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1145
Figure 46–12  The neurotransmitter phenotype of central 
neurons is controlled by basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors.
A. GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons in the cerebral cortex 
are generated in different proliferative zones and are specified 
by different basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. 
Glutamatergic pyramidal neurons derive from the cortical 
ventricular zone, and their differentiation depends on the activi-
ties of neurogenin-1 and -2. The differentiation of GABAergic 
interneurons in the ganglionic eminences of the ventral telen-
cephalon depends on the bHLH protein Mash1. These neurons 
migrate dorsally to supply the cerebral cortex with most of its 
inhibitory interneurons.
B. GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons in the developing 
cerebellum also derive from different proliferative zones and 
are specified by different bHLH transcription factors. Gluta-
matergic granule cells migrate into the cerebellum from the 
rhombic lip, settle in the inner granular layer, and are speci-
fied by the bHLH protein Math-1. GABAergic Purkinje neurons 
migrate from the deep cerebellar proliferative zone, settle in 
the Purkinje cell layer, and are specified by the bHLH protein 
Ptf1a.
Mash1 (Figure 46–12A) as well as by the Dlx1 and Dlx2 
proteins.
Similarly, the cerebellum contains several different 
classes of inhibitory neurons (Purkinje, Golgi, basket, 
and stellate neurons) and two major classes of excitatory 
neurons (granule neurons and large cerebellar nucleus 
neurons). These inhibitory and excitatory neurons 
have different origins; GABAergic neurons derive from 
the ventricular zone, whereas glutamatergic neurons 
migrate into the cerebellum from the rhombic lip. The 
generation of GABAergic and glutamatergic neurons is 
controlled by two different bHLH transcription factors, 
Ptf1a for inhibitory and Math-1 for excitatory neurons 
Math-1 
Ptf1a
Neurogenin-1
Neurogenin-2
bHLH transcription 
factors:
Mash1
B  Cerebellum
A  Cerebral cortex
Dorsal
Ventral
Purkinje cell 
layer
Inner granule 
cell layer
Glutamatergic neurons
GABAergic neurons
(Figure 46–12B). These bHLH factors are expressed by 
neuroepithelial cells but not by mature neurons, implying 
that differentiation into glutamatergic and GABAergic 
neurons is initiated prior to neuronal generation.
Transcriptional programs also determine the trans-
mitter phenotype in the peripheral nervous system. 
For example, BMPs promote noradrenergic neuronal 
differentiation by inducing the expression of a variety 
of transcription factors that include the bHLH protein 
Mash1, the homeodomain protein Phox2, and the zinc 
finger protein Gata2. In contrast, Runx proteins are 
determinants of the glutamatergic phenotype of sen-
sory neurons (Figure 46–10).


===== Page 7 =====
1146    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 46–13  The target of sympathetic neurons deter-
mines neurotransmitter phenotype. Sympathetic neurons are 
initially specified with a noradrenergic transmitter phenotype. 
Most sympathetic neurons, including those that innervate car-
diac muscle cells, retain this transmitter phenotype, and their 
terminals are packed with the dense-core vesicles in which nor-
epinephrine is stored. But the sympathetic neurons that inner-
vate sweat gland targets are induced to switch to a cholinergic 
transmitter phenotype; their terminals become filled with the 
small clear vesicles in which acetylcholine (ACh) is stored. Sweat 
gland cells direct the switch by secreting members of the inter-
leukin cytokine family. Several members of this family, including 
leukemia inhibitory factor and ciliary neurotrophic factor, are 
potent inducers of cholinergic phenotype in sympathetic neurons 
grown in cell culture. (Abbreviation: IL6, interleukin-6.)  
(Micrographs reproduced, with permission, from S. Landis.)
Signals From Synaptic Inputs and Targets Can 
Influence the Transmitter Phenotypes of Neurons
Because neurotransmitter phenotype is a core neu-
ronal property, it was long thought that transmitter 
properties were fixed at the earliest stage of neuronal 
differentiation. This view was challenged by studies 
showing that the migratory pathway of a neural crest 
cell exposes the cell to environmental signals that have 
a critical role in determining its transmitter phenotype.
Most sympathetic neurons use norepinephrine as 
their primary transmitter. However, those that inner-
vate the exocrine sweat glands in the footpads use 
acetylcholine, and even these neurons express norepi-
nephrine when they first innervate the sweat glands 
of the skin. Only after their axons have contacted the 
sweat glands do they stop synthesizing norepineph-
rine and start producing acetylcholine.
When the sweat glands from the footpad of a new-
born rat are transplanted into a region that is normally 
innervated by noradrenergic sympathetic neurons, the 
synaptic neurons acquire cholinergic transmitter proper-
ties, indicating that cells of the sweat gland secrete factors 
that induce cholinergic properties in sympathetic neurons.
Several secreted factors trigger the switch from a 
noradrenergic to cholinergic phenotype in sympathetic 
neurons. The sweat gland secretes a cocktail of interleu-
kin-6–like cytokines, notably cardiotrophin-1, leukemia 
inhibitory factor, and ciliary neurotrophic factor. Sev-
eral aspects of neuronal metabolism that are linked to 
transmitter synthesis and release are controlled by these 
factors. The neurons stop producing the large dense-
core granules characteristic of noradrenergic neurons 
and start making the small electron-translucent vesicles 
typical of cholinergic neurons (Figure 46–13).
Norepinephrine
Gland 
cells
Noradrenergic
(dense core)
vesicles
Cholinergic
(clear) 
vesicles
Muscle 
cell
IL6-class
cytokine
ACh
Norepinephrine


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1147
More recently, evidence has accumulated that the 
transmitter phenotype of central neurons can also be 
influenced by signals including hormones and electri-
cal activity. When the spontaneous activity of embry-
onic amphibian neurons is increased, some motor 
neurons can be respecified to synthesize and use the 
inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA instead of or in 
addition to acetylcholine. Conversely, when activity 
is decreased, some inhibitory neurons switch to using 
the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate along with 
or instead of GABA. Postsynaptic partners typically 
express new receptors that correspond to the trans-
mitter being released onto them. These switches occur 
without overall respecification of the neuron and are 
best viewed as homeostatic responses aimed at keep-
ing the overall activity of the system in a narrow range.
Although such transmitter switches in central neu-
rons are likely to occur only rarely under natural con-
ditions, activity-dependent neurotransmitter plasticity 
may be a more common phenomenon in the adult nerv-
ous system. For example, changes in the light cycle 
where rodents are housed can lead to reciprocal changes 
in the numbers of neurons that use dopamine and 
somatostatin as neuromodulators in areas of the brain 
responsible for maintaining a circadian rhythm. In this 
and other cases, neurotransmitter switching has meas-
urable consequences on the behavior of the animal, sug-
gesting that this process, along with less drastic synaptic 
changes discussed in Chapter 49, are employed by the 
brain as responses to novel environments.
The Survival of a Neuron Is Regulated by 
Neurotrophic Signals From the Neuron’s Target
One of the more surprising findings in developmental 
neuroscience is that a large fraction of the neurons gener-
ated in the embryonic nervous system end up dying later 
in embryonic development. Equally surprising, we now 
know that the potential for cell death is preprogrammed 
in most animal cells, including neurons. Thus, decisions 
about life and death are aspects of a neuron’s fate.
The Neurotrophic Factor Hypothesis Was 
Confirmed by the Discovery of Nerve Growth Factor
The target of a neuron is a key source of factors essen-
tial for the neuron’s survival. The critical role of target 
cells in neuronal survival was discovered in studies of 
the dorsal root ganglia.
In the 1930s, Samuel Detwiler and Viktor Ham-
burger discovered that the number of sensory neu-
rons in embryos is increased by transplantation of an 
additional limb bud into the target field and decreased 
if the limb target is removed. At the time, these find-
ings were thought to reflect an influence of the limb 
on the proliferation and subsequent differentiation of 
sensory neuron precursors. In the 1940s, however, Rita 
Levi-Montalcini made the startling observation that 
the death of neurons is not simply a consequence of 
pathology or experimental manipulation, but rather 
occurs during the normal program of embryonic 
development. Levi-Montalcini and Hamburger went 
on to show that removal of a limb leads to the exces-
sive death of sensory neurons rather than a decrease in 
their production.
These early discoveries on the life and death of 
sensory neurons were quickly extended to neurons 
in the central nervous system. Hamburger found that 
approximately half of all motor neurons generated in 
the spinal cord die during embryonic development. 
Moreover, in experiments similar to those performed 
on sensory ganglia, Hamburger discovered that motor 
neuron death could be increased by removing a limb 
and reduced by adding an additional limb (Figure 
46–14A,B). These findings indicate that signals from 
target cells are critical for the survival of neurons 
within the central as well as peripheral nervous sys-
tem. In some cases, manipulating synaptic activity 
affects the extent of death, perhaps by modulating the 
types or amount of signals that the target cell produces 
(Figure 46–14C). We now know that the phenomenon 
of neuronal overproduction, followed by a phase of 
neuronal death, occurs in most regions of the verte-
brate nervous system.
The early discoveries of Levi-Montalcini and 
Hamburger laid the foundations for the neurotrophic 
factor hypothesis. The core of this hypothesis is that cells 
at or near the target of a neuron secrete small amounts 
of an essential nutrient or trophic factor and that the 
uptake of this factor by nerve terminals is needed 
for the survival of the neuron (Figure 46–15). This 
hypothesis was dramatically confirmed in the 1970s 
when Levi-Montalcini and Stanley Cohen purified the 
protein we now know as nerve growth factor (NGF) 
and showed that this protein is made by target cells 
and supports the survival of sensory and sympathetic 
neurons in vitro. Moreover, neutralizing antibodies 
directed against NGF were found to cause a profound 
loss of sympathetic and sensory neurons in vivo.
Neurotrophins Are the Best-Studied  
Neurotrophic Factors
The discovery of NGF prompted a search for addi-
tional neurotrophic factors. Today, we know of over a 


===== Page 9 =====
1148    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Motor
neurons
Missing limb
(10% survive)
Normal
(50% survive)
Extra limb
(75% survive)
Normal
(50% survive)
Motor neuron generation (100%)
Paralysis
(75% survive)
Motor neuron death (apoptosis)
A  Removal of a developing 
 
 limb bud
C  Neuromuscular paralysis
 
 (curare treated)
B  Transplantation of 
 
 an extra limb bud
Figure 46–14  The survival of motor 
neurons depends on signals pro-
vided by their muscle targets.  The 
role of the muscle target in motor 
neuron survival was demonstrated by 
Viktor Hamburger in a classic series of 
experiments performed on the chick 
embryo. (Adapted from Purves and 
Lichtman 1985.)
A. A limb bud was removed from a 
2.5-day-old chick embryo soon after 
the arrival of motor nerves. A section 
of the lumbar spinal cord 1 week later 
reveals few surviving motor neurons 
on the deprived side of the spinal 
cord. The number of motor neurons 
on the contralateral side with an intact 
limb is normal.
B. An extra limb bud was grafted adja-
cent to a host limb prior to the normal 
period of motor neuron death. A sec-
tion of the lumbar spinal cord 2 weeks 
later shows an increased number of 
limb motor neurons on the side with 
the extra limb.
C. Blockade of nerve-muscle activity 
with the toxin curare, which blocks 
acetylcholine receptors, rescues many 
motor neurons that would otherwise 
die. Curare may act by enhancing the 
release of trophic factors from inac-
tive muscle.
dozen secreted factors that promote neuronal survival. 
The best-studied are related to NGF and are called the 
neurotrophin family.
There are four main neurotrophins: NGF itself, 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and neuro-
trophins-3 and -4 (NT-3 and NT-4). Other classes of pro-
teins that promote neuronal survival include members 
of the transforming growth factor β family, the inter-
leukin-6–related cytokines, fibroblast growth factors, 
and even certain inductive signals we encountered 
earlier (BMPs and hedgehogs). Other neurotrophic 
factors, notably members of the glial cell line–derived 
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family, are responsible for 
the survival of different types of sensory and sympa-
thetic neurons (Figure 46–16).
Neurotrophins interact with two major classes of 
receptors, the Trk receptors and p75. Neurotrophins pro-
mote cell survival through activation of Trk receptors. 
The Trk family comprises three membrane-spanning 
tyrosine kinases named TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC, each of 
which exists as a dimer (Figure 46–17).
Much is now known about the intracellular signal-
ing pathways activated by binding of neurotrophins to 
Trks. As with other tyrosine kinase receptors, the binding 
of neurotrophins to Trk receptors leads to dimerization of 
the Trk proteins. Dimerization results in phosphorylation 
of specific tyrosine residues in the activation loop of the 
kinase domain. This phosphorylation leads to a confor-
mational change in the receptor and to phosphorylation 
of tyrosine residues that serve as docking sites for adaptor 
proteins. The adaptors then trigger production of second 
messengers that both promote the survival of neurons 
and trigger their maturation. These divergent biological 
responses involve different intracellular signaling path-
ways: neuronal differentiation largely via the mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) enzymatic pathways 
and survival largely via the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase 
pathway (Figure 46–18).


