===== Page 1 =====
364    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Histidine
(1)
CH2
CH2
Histamine
NH2 + CO2
N
HN
As described in the next section, the biogenic 
amines are loaded into synaptic and secretory vesicles 
by two transporters, VMAT1, mostly in peripheral cells, 
and VMAT2, mostly in the central nervous system. As 
the transporters are not selective for a given biogenic 
amine, a mixture of transmitters can be present. Some 
neurons co-release dopamine with norepinephrine, 
whereas secretory vesicles from the adrenal medulla 
can co-release epinephrine and norepinephrine.
Amino Acid Transmitters
In contrast to acetylcholine and the biogenic amines, 
which are not intermediates in general metabolic path-
ways and are produced only in certain neurons, the 
amino acids glutamate and glycine are not only neu-
rotransmitters but also universal cellular constituents. 
Because they can be synthesized in neurons and other 
cells, neither is an essential amino acid.
Glutamate, the neurotransmitter most frequently 
used at excitatory synapses throughout the central 
nervous system, is produced from α-ketoglutarate, an 
intermediate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle of inter-
mediary metabolism. After it is released, glutamate is 
taken up from the synaptic cleft by specific transporters 
in the membrane of both neurons and glia (see later). 
The glutamate taken up by astrocytes is converted  
to glutamine by the enzyme glutamine synthase. This 
glutamine is transported back into neurons that use 
glutamate as a transmitter, where it is hydrolyzed  
to glutamate by the enzyme glutaminase. Cytoplasmic 
glutamate is then loaded into synaptic vesicles by the 
vesicular glutamate transporter, VGLUT.
Glycine is the major transmitter used by inhibitory 
interneurons of the spinal cord. It is also a necessary 
cofactor for activation of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) glutamate receptors (Chapter 13). Glycine is 
synthesized from serine by the mitochondrial form of 
the serine hydroxymethyltransferase. The amino acid 
GABA is synthesized from glutamate in a reaction cat-
alyzed by glutamic acid decarboxylase (step 1 below):
CH2
CH2
H2N
CH
COOH
COOH
(1)
Glutamate
CH2
CH2
+ CO2
H2N
CH2
COOH
GABA
GABA is present at high concentrations through-
out the central nervous system and is detectable in 
other tissues. It is used as a transmitter by an impor-
tant class of inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord. 
In the brain, GABA is the major transmitter of a wide 
array of inhibitory neurons and interneurons. Both 
GABA and glycine are loaded into synaptic vesicles 
by the same transporter, VGAT, and thus can be co-
released from the same vesicles.
ATP and Adenosine
ATP and its degradation products (eg, adenosine) act 
as transmitters at some synapses by binding to several 
classes of G protein–coupled receptors (the P1 and P2Y 
receptors). ATP can also produce excitatory actions by 
binding to ionotropic P2X receptors. Caffeine’s stim-
ulatory effects depend on its inhibition of adenosine 
binding to the P1 receptors. Adenine and guanine and 
their sugar-containing derivatives are called purines; 
the evidence for transmission at purinergic receptors 
is especially strong for autonomic neurons that inner-
vate the vas deferens, bladder, and muscle fibers of the 
heart; for nerve plexuses on smooth muscle in the gut; 
and for some neurons in the brain. Purinergic trans-
mission is particularly important for nerves mediating 
pain (Chapter 20).
ATP released by tissue damage acts to transmit 
pain sensation through one type of ionotropic purine 
receptor present on the terminals of peripheral axons 
of dorsal root ganglion cells that act as nociceptors. 
ATP released from terminals of the central axons of 
these dorsal root ganglion cells excites another type 
of ionotropic purine receptor on neurons in the dor-
sal horn of the spinal cord. ATP and other nucleo-
tides also act at the family of P2Y G protein–coupled 
receptors to modulate various downstream signaling 
pathways.
Small-Molecule Transmitters Are Actively 
Taken Up Into Vesicles
Common amino acids act as transmitters in some neu-
rons but not in others, indicating that the presence of 
a substance in a neuron, even in substantial amounts, 
is not in itself sufficient evidence that the substance is 
used as a transmitter. For example, at the neuromus-
cular junction of the lobster (and other arthropods), 
GABA is inhibitory and glutamate is excitatory. The 
concentration of GABA is approximately 20 times 
greater in inhibitory cells than in excitatory cells, 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    365
supporting the idea that GABA is the inhibitory trans-
mitter at the lobster neuromuscular junction. In con-
trast, the concentration of the excitatory transmitter 
glutamate is similar in both excitatory and inhibitory 
cells. Glutamate therefore must be compartmentalized 
within these neurons; that is, transmitter glutamate 
must be kept separate from metabolic glutamate. In fact, 
transmitter glutamate is compartmentalized in synap-
tic vesicles.
Although the presence of a specific set of biosyn-
thetic enzymes can determine whether a small mol-
ecule can be used as a transmitter, the presence of the 
enzymes does not mean that the molecule will be used. 
Before a substance can be released as a transmitter, it 
usually must first be concentrated in synaptic vesicles. 
Transmitter concentrations within vesicles are high, on 
the order of several hundred millimolar. Neurotrans-
mitter substances are concentrated in vesicles by trans-
porters that are specific to each type of neuron and 
energized by a vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) 
that is found not only in synaptic and secretory vesi-
cles but also in all organelles in the secretory pathway, 
including endosomes and lysosomes.
Using the energy generated by the hydroly-
sis of cytoplasmic ATP, the V-ATPase creates an H+ 
electrochemical gradient by promoting the influx of 
protons into the vesicle. Transporters use this pro-
ton gradient to drive transmitter molecules into the 
vesicles against their concentration gradient through 
a proton-antiport mechanism. A number of different 
vesicular transporters in mammals are responsible 
for concentrating different transmitter molecules in 
vesicles (Figure 16–1). These proteins span the vesicle 
membrane 12 times and are distantly related to a class 
of bacterial transporters that mediate drug resistance. 
(Vesicular transporters differ structurally and mecha-
nistically from the transporters in the plasma mem-
brane, as discussed later.)
Transmitter molecules are classically modeled 
to be taken up into a vesicle by vesicular transport-
ers in exchange for the transport of two protons out 
of the vesicle. Because the maintenance of the pH 
gradient requires the hydrolysis of ATP, the uptake 
of transmitter into vesicles is energy-dependent. 
Vesicular transporters can concentrate some neu-
rotransmitters such as dopamine up to 100,000-fold 
relative to their concentration in the cytoplasm. 
Uptake of transmitters by the transporters is rapid, 
enabling vesicles to be quickly refilled after they 
release their transmitter and are retrieved by endo-
cytosis; this is important for maintaining the supply 
of releasable vesicles during periods of rapid nerve 
firing (Chapter 15).
The specificity of transporters for substrate is quite 
variable. The vesicular ACh transporter (VAChT) does 
not transport choline or other transmitters. Likewise, 
the vesicular glutamate transporters, for which there 
are three types (VGLUT1, 2, and 3) that are differen-
tially expressed in the CNS, carry negligible amounts 
of the other acidic amino acid, aspartate. However, 
VMAT2 can transport all of the biogenic amines as 
well as drugs including amphetamine and even some 
neurotoxic compounds such as N-methyl-4-phe-
nylpyridinium (MPP+). 1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tet-
rahydropyridine (MPTP), a contaminant of a synthetic 
opiate drug of abuse, is metabolized to MPP+ by the 
enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) type B. In fact, 
VMAT1 was cloned by Robert Edwards and colleagues 
based on the ability of the transporter to protect cells 
from the neurotoxic effects of MPP+; cells expressing 
VMAT were able to sequester the toxin in vesicle-like 
compartments, thereby lowering its cytoplasmic con-
centration and promoting cell survival. By expressing 
genes obtained from a cDNA library from adrenal pheo-
chromocytoma cells in a mammalian cell line sensitive to 
MPP+, Edwards was able to identify cells that expressed 
VMAT1 based on their selective survival. VMAT2 was 
subsequently identified by homology cloning, as well as 
directly by a number of other groups.
Transporters and V-ATPases are present in 
the membranes of both small synaptic vesicles 
and large dense-core vesicles. Vesicular trans-
porters are the targets of several important phar-
macological agents. Reserpine and tetrabenazine 
inhibit uptake of amine transmitters by binding 
to the vesicular monoamine transporter. The psy-
chostimulants amphetamine, methamphetamine, 
and 
3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine 
(MDMA or ecstasy) act to deplete vesicles of amine 
transmitter molecules, but also cause their efflux 
from the cytoplasm into the extracellular space via 
the plasma membrane biogenic amine transporters 
(see below). These compounds accumulate inside 
vesicles through proton-antiport–driven transport 
mediated by VMAT, which diminishes the proton 
gradient necessary for loading amine transmitters 
into vesicles.
Drugs that are sufficiently similar to the normal 
transmitter substance can act as false transmitters. These 
are packaged in vesicles and released by exocytosis as 
if they were true transmitters, but they often bind only 
weakly or not at all to the postsynaptic receptor for the 
natural transmitter, and thus their release decreases 
the efficacy of transmission. Several drugs historically 
used to treat hypertension, such as α-methyldopa and 
guanethidine, are taken up into adrenergic synapses 


===== Page 3 =====
VGAT
SN1/SN2
Gln
GS
SATs
Gln
H+
VGLUT1/-2/-3
Presynaptic 
cell
Glial 
cell
Postsynaptic 
cell
AChE
H+
DAT/
NET/SERT
GAT1
H+
CHT
A
+
Ch
ACh
ACh
ChAT
Glu
GABA
GABA
PAG
GAD
GLT
H+
D Glutamate
C  GABA
PAG
GLT/GLAST
H+
A  Monoamines 
B  Acetylcholine
Glu
Glu
Na+
Na+
Gln
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Na+
SN1/SN2
SATs
Ch
VAChT
VMAT2
H+
Gln
GS
Glu
GABA
Glu
GAT3
Monamines
Figure 16–1  Small-molecule transmitters are transported 
from the cytosol into vesicles or from the synaptic cleft to 
the cytosol by transporters. Most small-molecule neurotrans-
mitters are released by exocytosis from the nerve terminal and 
act on specific postsynaptic receptors. The signal is terminated 
and transmitter recycled by specific transporter proteins located 
at the nerve terminal or in surrounding glial cells. Transport by 
these proteins (orange circles) is driven by the electrochemical 
gradients of H+ (black arrows) or Na+ (red arrows). (Adapted, 
with permission, from Chaudhry et al. 2008. Copyright © 2008 
Springer-Verlag.)
A. Three distinct transporters mediate reuptake of monoamines 
across the plasma membrane. The dopamine transporter (DAT), 
norepinephrine transporter (NET), and serotonin transporter 
(SERT) are responsible for the reuptake (dark blue arrows) 
of their cognate transmitters. The vesicular monoamine trans-
porter (VMAT2) transports all three monoamines into synaptic 
vesicles for subsequent exocytotic release.
B. Cholinergic signaling is terminated by metabolism of acetyl-
choline (ACh) to the inactive choline and acetate by acetylcho-
linesterase (AChE), which is located in the synaptic cleft (green 
bar). Choline (Ch) is transported by the choline transporter (CHT) 
back into the nerve terminal (light blue arrow) where choline 
acetyltransferase (ChAT) subsequently catalyzes acetylation of 
choline to reconstitute ACh. The ACh is transported into the  
vesicle by the vesicular ACh transporter (VAChT).
C. At GABAergic and glycinergic nerve terminals, the GABA 
transporter (GAT1) and glycine transporter (GLYT2, not shown) 
mediate reuptake of GABA and glycine (gray arrow), respec-
tively. GABA may also be taken up by surrounding glial cells 
(eg, by GAT3). In the glial cells, GABA is first converted to gluta-
mate (Glu) by GAD. Glu is then is converted by glial glutamine 
synthetase (GS) to glutamine (Gln). Glutamine is transported 
back to the nerve terminal by the concerted action of the sys-
tem N transporter (SN1/SN2) and system A transporter (SAT) 
(brown arrows). In the nerve terminal, phosphate-activated 
glutaminase (PAG) converts glutamine to glutamate, which is 
converted to GABA by glutamate decarboxylase (GAD). VGAT 
then transports GABA into vesicles. The glial transporter GLYT1 
(not shown) also contributes to the clearance of glycine.
D. After release from excitatory neuronal terminals, the major-
ity of glutamate is taken up by surrounding glial cells (eg, by 
GLT and GLAST) for conversion to glutamine, which is subse-
quently transported back to the nerve terminals by SN1/SN2 
and a type of SAT (SATx) (brown arrows). Reuptake of gluta-
mate at glutamatergic terminals also has been demonstrated 
for a GLT isoform (purple arrows). Glutamate is transported 
into vesicles by VGLUT.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    367
(and converted into α-methyldopamine in the case of 
α-methyldopa) and replace norepinephrine in synaptic 
vesicles. When released, these drugs fail to stimulate 
postsynaptic adrenergic receptors, thereby relaxing 
vascular smooth muscle by inhibiting adrenergic tone. 
Tyramine, which is found in high quantities in dietary 
red wine and cheese, also acts as a false transmitter; 
however, it also can act as a stimulant by releasing bio-
genic amines through a mechanism akin to ampheta-
mine. Another false transmitter, 5-hydroxydopamine, 
can produce an electron-dense reaction product and 
has been used to identify synaptic vesicles that acquire 
biogenic amines.
More recently, several fluorescent false neuro-
transmitters have been designed, enabling research-
ers to use imaging methods to monitor the uptake and 
release of neurotransmitter derivatives during synap-
tic activity in rodent and fly brain (see Figure 16–5 in 
Box 16–2).
An unexpected finding is that dopamine can be 
released from dendrites as well as from axons, despite 
the lack of synaptic vesicles in dendrites. Organelles 
that express VMAT2 seem likely to be the source of 
the release, albeit with different requirements for 
intracellular Ca2+ than classical neurotransmission 
at presynaptic terminals. For technical reasons, this 
phenomenon has been studied mostly in dendrites of 
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra: dopa-
mine can be measured directly by electrochemical 
techniques, and the dendrites are well separated from 
the cell bodies. However, it is possible that dendritic 
neurotransmitter release occurs more widely through-
out the nervous system.
Many Neuroactive Peptides Serve  
as Transmitters
The enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of the low-
molecular-weight neurotransmitters, with the excep-
tion of dopamine β-hydroxylase, are found in the 
cytoplasm. These enzymes are synthesized on free 
polysomes in the cell body and probably in dendrites 
and are distributed throughout the neuron by axoplas-
mic flow. Thus, small-molecule transmitter substances 
can be formed in all parts of the neuron; most impor-
tantly, they can be synthesized at axonal presynaptic 
sites from which they are released.
In contrast, neuroactive peptides are derived 
from secretory proteins that are formed in the cell 
body. More than 50 short peptides are produced by 
neurons or neuroendocrine cells and exert physi-
ological actions (Table 16–2). Some act as hormones 
Table 16–2  Neuroactive Mammalian Peptides
Category
Peptide
Hypothalamic  
neuropeptides
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
Melanocyte-inhibiting factor
Somatostatin
β-Endorphin
Dynorphin
Galanin
Neuropeptide Y
Orexin
Oxytocin
Vasopressin
Neurohypophyseal  
neuropeptides
Oxytocin
Vasopressin
Pituitary peptides
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
β-Endorphin
α-MSH
Prolactin
Luteinizing hormone
Growth hormone
Thyrotropin
Pineal hormones
Basal ganglia
Melatonin
Substance P
Enkephalin
Dynorphin
Neuropeptide Y
Neurotensin
Cholecystokinin
Glucagon-like peptide-1
Cocaine- and amphetamine- 
  regulated transcript (CART)
Gastrointestinal  
peptides
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
Cholecystokinin
Gastrin
Substance P
Neurotensin
Methionine-enkephalin
Leucine-enkephalin
Insulin
Glucagon
Bombesin
Secretin
Somatostatin
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Motilin
Heart
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Other
Angiotensin II
Bradykinin
Calcitonin
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)
Galanin
Leptin
Sleep peptide(s)
Substance K (neurokinin A)


===== Page 5 =====
368    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Table 16–3  The Main Families of Neuroactive Peptides
Family
Peptide members
Opioids
Opiocortin, enkephalins, 
dynorphin, FMRFamide 
(Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-amide)
Neurohypophyseal 
neuropeptides
Vasopressin, oxytocin, neurophysins
Tachykinins
Substance P, physalaemin, kassinin, 
uperolein, eledoisin, bombesin, sub-
stance K
Secretins
Secretin, glucagon, vasoactive intesti-
nal peptide, gastric inhibitory peptide, 
growth hormone–releasing factor, 
peptide histidine isoleucine amide
Insulins
Insulin, insulin-like growth factors I 
and II
Somatostatins
Somatostatins, pancreatic polypeptide
Gastrins
Gastrin, cholecystokinin
on targets outside the brain (eg, angiotensin and gas-
trin) or are products of neuroendocrine secretion (eg, 
oxytocin, vasopressin, somatostatin, luteinizing hor-
mone, and thyrotropin-releasing hormone). In addi-
tion, many neuropeptides act as neurotransmitters 
when released close to a target neuron, where they 
can cause inhibition, excitation, or both.
Neuroactive peptides have been implicated in 
modulating sensory perception and affect. Some pep-
tides, including substance P and the enkephalins, are 
preferentially located in regions of the central nerv-
ous system involved in the perception of pain. Other 
neuropeptides regulate complex responses to stress; these 
peptides include γ-melanocyte-stimulating hormone, 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), adrenocor-
ticotropin (ACTH), dynorphin, and β-endorphin.
Although the diversity of neuroactive peptides 
is enormous, as a class these chemical messengers 
share a common cell biology. A striking generality is 
that neuroactive peptides are grouped in families with 
members that have similar sequences of amino acid 
residues. At least 10 have been identified; the seven 
main families are listed in Table 16–3.
Several different neuroactive peptides can be 
encoded by a single continuous messenger RNA 
(mRNA), which is translated into one large polypro-
tein precursor (Figure 16–2). Polyproteins can serve 
as a mechanism for amplification by providing more 
than one copy of the same peptide from the one pre-
cursor. For example, the precursor of glucagon con-
tains two copies of the hormone. Polyproteins also 
generate diversity by producing several distinct pep-
tides cleaved from one precursor, as in the case of the 
opioid peptides. The opioid peptides are derived from 
polyproteins encoded by three distinct genes. These 
peptides are endogenous ligands for a family of G 
protein–coupled receptors. In addition to endogenous 
agonists, the mu opioid receptor also binds drugs 
with analgesic and addictive properties, such as mor-
phine and synthetic derivatives, including heroin and 
oxycodone.
The processing of more than one functional pep-
tide from a single polyprotein is not unique to neuro-
active peptides. The mechanism was first described 
for proteins encoded by small RNA viruses. Several 
viral polypeptides are produced from the same viral 
polyprotein, and all contribute to the generation of 
new virus particles. As with the virus, where the dif-
ferent proteins obviously serve a common biologi-
cal purpose (formation of new viruses), a neuronal 
polypeptide will in many instances yield peptides 
that work together to serve a common physiological 
goal. Sometimes the biological functions appear to 
be more complex, as peptides with related or antag-
onistic activities can be generated from the same 
precursor.
A particularly striking example of this form of 
synergy is the group of peptides formed from the pre-
cursor of egg-laying hormone (ELH), a set of neuro-
peptides that govern diverse reproductive behaviors 
in the marine mollusk Aplysia. Egg-laying hormone 
can act as a hormone causing the contraction of  
oviduct muscles; it can also act as a neurotransmitter to 
alter the firing of several neurons involved in produc-
ing behaviors, as do the other peptides cut from the 
polyprotein.
The processing of neuroactive peptides takes place 
within the neuron’s intracellular membrane system 
and in vesicles. Several peptides are produced from a 
single polyprotein by limited and specific proteolytic 
cleavage, catalyzed by proteases within these internal 
membrane systems. Some of these enzymes are ser-
ine proteases, a class that also includes the pancreatic 
enzymes trypsin and chymotrypsin. As with trypsin, 
the cleavage site of the peptide bond is determined by 
basic amino acid residues (lysine and arginine) in the 
substrate protein. Although cleavage is most common 
at dibasic residues, it can also occur at single basic resi-
dues, and polyproteins sometimes are cleaved at other 
peptide bonds.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    369
Figure 16–2  Hormone and neuropeptide precursors are 
processed differentially: The opioid family of neuropep-
tides. The opioid neuropeptides are derived from larger 
precursor molecules that require multiple rounds of protease-
mediated cleavage. These precursors are processed differ-
entially to yield their specific peptide products. Transport of 
these precursors through the membrane of the endoplasmic 
reticulum is initiated by a hydrophobic signal sequence. 
Internal cleavages often occur at basic residues within the 
polypeptide. Moreover, these precursors have key cysteine 
residues and sugar moieties that play roles in their processing 
and function. Generally, the first iteration of processing begins 
with the newly synthesized polyprotein precursor (known as 
the pre-propeptide form). Cleavage of an amino-terminal sig-
nal sequence generates a smaller molecule, the propeptide. 
Three major opioid peptide precursor proteins are encoded 
by three genes: proopiomelanocortin (POMC), proenkephalin 
(PENK), and prodynorphin (PDYN) (not shown). Differential 
processing of the three resultant pre-propeptides gives rise 
to the major opioid peptides—endorphins, enkephalins, and 
dynorphins.
A. The POMC precursor is processed differently in different 
lobes of the pituitary gland, resulting in α-melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone (`-MSH) and f-MSH, corticotropin-like intermediate 
lobe peptide (CLIP), and β-lipotropin (a-LPH). β-LPH is cleaved 
to yield f-LPH and β-endorphin (a-END), which themselves yield 
β-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (a-MSH) and α-endorphin 
(`-END), respectively. The endoproteolytic cleavages within 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and β-LPH take place in the 
intermediate lobe but not the anterior lobe.
B. Similar principles are evident in the processing of the 
enkephalin precursor, which gives rise to six Met-enkephalin 
peptides and one Leu-enkephalin peptide.
C. The dynorphin precursor is cleaved into at least three 
peptides that are related to Leu-enkephalin since the amino-
terminal sequences of all three peptides contain the sequence 
of Leu-enkephalin.
B  Pre-proenkephalin A
Dynorphin A Dynorphin B
C  Pre-prodynorphin
γ-MSH
γ-LPH
β-END
α-MSH
CLIP
γ-MSH
γ-MSH
γ-LPH
β-END
α-MSH
CLIP
γ-LPH
β-END
α-MSH
CLIP
γ-LPH
β-END
β-MSH
α-END
α-MSH
CLIP
A  Pre-proopiomelanocortin
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
β-lipoprotein (β-LPH)
Pre-propeptide
Pre-propeptide
Pre-propeptide
Active peptides
Proenkephalin A
Propeptide
Active peptides
Propeptide
Active peptides
Active peptides
Active peptides
γ-lipotropin
β-endorphin
α-endorphin
Leu-enkephalin
Met-enkephalin
Met-enkephalin
Neoendorphin
Met-enkephalin
Signal peptide
Signal peptide
Signal peptide
β-melanocyte stimulating 
hormone
α-melanocyte 
stimulating 
hormone
γ-melanocyte 
stimulating 
hormone
ACTH
M M
M
M
M
M
L
M M
M
M
M
M
L
M M
M
M
M
M
L
N
DynA
DynB
N
DynA
DynB


===== Page 7 =====
370    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Other types of peptidases also catalyze the lim-
ited proteolysis required for processing neuroactive 
peptides. Among these are thiol endopeptidases (with 
catalytic mechanisms like that of pepsin), amino pepti-
dases (which remove the N-terminal amino acid of the 
peptide), and carboxy-peptidase B (an enzyme that 
removes an amino acid from the C-terminal end of the 
peptide if it is basic).
Different neurons that produce the same polypro-
tein may release different neuropeptides because of 
differences in the way the polyprotein is processed. An 
example is proopiomelanocortin (POMC), one of the 
three branches of the opioid family. POMC is found 
in neurons of the anterior and intermediate lobes of 
the pituitary, in the hypothalamus, and in several 
other regions of the brain, as well as in the placenta 
and gut. The same mRNA for POMC is found in all 
of these tissues, but different peptides are produced 
from POMC in different tissues in a regulated man-
ner. One possibility is that two neurons that process 
the same polyprotein might differently express pro-
teases with different specificities within the lumina of 
the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, or vesi-
cles. Alternatively, the two neurons might contain the 
same processing proteases, but each cell might gly-
cosylate the common polyprotein at different sites, 
thereby protecting different regions of the polypep-
tide from cleavage.
Peptides and Small-Molecule Transmitters 
Differ in Several Ways
Large dense-core vesicles are homologous to the 
secretory granules of nonneuronal cells. These vesicles 
are formed in the trans-Golgi network, where they 
are loaded with neuropeptides and other proteins 
that enable formation of the dense core. The dense-
core vesicles are then transported from the soma to 
presynaptic sites in axons. In addition to containing 
neuropeptides, these vesicles often contain small 
molecule transmitters due to their expression of 
vesicular transporters. After large dense-core vesi-
cles release their contents through exocytosis, the 
membrane is not recycled to form new large dense 
core vesicles. Rather the vesicles must be replaced by 
transport from the soma. In contrast, mature small 
synaptic vesicles are not synthesized in the soma. 
Rather, their protein components  are delivered to 
release sites by transport of large dense-core precur-
sor vesicles. To form a mature small synaptic vesi-
cle, the precursor vesicles must first fuse with the 
plasma membrane. Following endocytosis, mature 
synaptic vesicles are then produced by local process-
ing. Once their contents are released by exocytosis, 
synaptic vesicles can be rapidly recycled to maintain 
their local concentration during periods of sustained 
neural firing.
Although both types of vesicles contain many 
similar proteins, dense-core vesicles lack several pro-
teins needed for release at the active zones. The mem-
branes from dense-core vesicles are used only once; 
new dense-core vesicles must be synthesized in the 
cell body and transported to the axonal terminals by 
anterograde transport. Moreover, no uptake mecha-
nisms exist for neuropeptides. Thus, once a peptide is 
released, a new supply must arrive from the cell body. 
Although there is evidence for local protein synthesis 
in some axons, it has not been shown that this provides 
new peptides for release.
The large dense-core vesicles release their con-
tents by an exocytotic mechanism that is not special-
ized to nerve cells and does not require active zones; 
release can thus take place anywhere along the mem-
brane of the axon that has the appropriate fusion 
machinery. As in other examples of regulated secre-
tion, exocytosis of the dense-core vesicles depends 
on a general elevation of intracellular Ca2+ through 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels that are not localized to 
the site of release. As a result, this form of exocytosis 
is slow and requires high stimulation frequencies to 
raise Ca2+ to levels sufficient to trigger release. This is 
in contrast to the rapid exocytosis of synaptic vesicles 
following a single action potential, which initiates the 
large, rapid increase in Ca2+ through voltage-gated 
Ca2+ channels tightly clustered at the active zone 
(Chapter 15).
Peptides and Small-Molecule Transmitters Can 
Be Co-released
Neuroactive peptides, small-molecule transmitters, 
and other neuroactive molecules coexist in the same 
dense-core vesicles of some neurons (Chapters 7 and 15). 
In mature neurons, the combination usually consists 
of one of the small-molecule transmitters and one or 
more peptides derived from a polyprotein. For exam-
ple, ACh and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) can be 
released together and work synergistically on the same 
target cells.
Another example is calcitonin gene–related pep-
tide (CGRP), which in most spinal motor neurons is 
packaged together with ACh, the transmitter used at 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 16 / Neurotransmitters    371
the neuromuscular junction. CGRP activates adeny-
lyl cyclase, raising cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) levels and cAMP-dependent protein phospho-
rylation in the target muscles (Chapter 14). Increased 
protein phosphorylation results in an increase in the 
force of contraction. Another example is the co-release of 
glutamate and dynorphin in neurons of the hippocam-
pus, where glutamate is excitatory and dynorphin 
inhibitory. Because postsynaptic target cells have recep-
tors for both chemical messengers, all of these examples 
of co-release are also examples of cotransmission.
As already described, the dense-core vesicles that 
release peptides differ from the small clear vesicles that 
release only small-molecule transmitters. The peptide-
containing vesicles may or may not contain small-
molecule transmitter, but both types of vesicles contain 
ATP. As a result, ATP is released by exocytosis of both 
large dense-core vesicles and synaptic vesicles. Moreo-
ver, it appears that ATP may be stored and released in 
a number of distinct ways: (1) ATP is co-stored and co-
released with transmitters, (2) ATP release is simultane-
ous but independent of transmitter release, and (3) ATP 
is released alone. Co-release of ATP (which after release 
can be degraded to adenosine) may be an important 
illustration that coexistence and co-release do not nec-
essarily signify cotransmission. ATP, like many other 
substances, can be released from neurons but still not 
be involved in signaling if there are no receptors nearby.
As mentioned earlier, one criterion for judging 
whether a particular substance is used as a transmitter 
is that the substance is present in high concentrations 
in a neuron. Identification of transmitters in specific 
neurons has been important in understanding synap-
tic transmission, and a variety of histochemical meth-
ods are used to detect chemical messengers in neurons 
(Box 16–2).
The 
glutamate 
synaptic 
vesicle 
transporters 
VGLUT2 and VGLUT3 are expressed in neurons that 
release other classes of neurotransmitter, particu-
larly cholinergic, serotonergic, and catecholaminergic 
neurons. An interesting example of co-release of two 
small-molecule transmitters is that of glutamate and 
dopamine by neurons projecting to the ventral striatum, 
cortex, and elsewhere. This co-release may have impor-
tant implications for modulation of motivated behaviors 
and for establishing the patterns of axonal projections. 
In some cases, glutamate is released together with dopa-
mine in response to different patterns of dopaminergic 
neuron firing. While there is a controversy regarding 
whether the same synaptic vesicles can accumulate 
both neurotransmitters, in isolated synaptic vesicles, 
glutamate uptake enhances vesicular monoamine stor-
age by increasing the pH gradient that drives vesicular 
monoamine transport, providing a presynaptic mecha-
nism to regulate quantal size.
Removal of Transmitter From the Synaptic 
Cleft Terminates Synaptic Transmission
Timely removal of transmitters from the synaptic cleft 
is critical to synaptic transmission. If transmitter mol-
ecules released in one synaptic action were allowed 
to remain in the cleft after release, this would impede 
the normal spatial and temporal dynamics of signal-
ing, initially boosting the signal but preventing new 
signals from getting through. The synapse would ulti-
mately become refractory, mainly because of receptor 
desensitization resulting from continued exposure to 
transmitter.
Transmitter substances are removed from the cleft 
by three mechanisms: diffusion, enzymatic degrada-
tion, and reuptake. Diffusion removes some fraction 
of all chemical messengers, but in brain regions with 
very high innervation and thus a high requirement 
for neurotransmitter release, diffusion can play a rela-
tively small role in tapering signaling. In contrast, in 
regions of low innervation, diffusion is a major means 
by which signaling is decreased.
At cholinergic synapses, the dominant means of 
clearing ACh is enzymatic degradation of the transmit-
ter by acetylcholinesterase. At the neuromuscular junc-
tion, the active zone of the presynaptic nerve terminal 
is situated just above the junctional folds of the muscle 
membrane. The ACh receptors are located at the sur-
face of the muscle facing the release sites and do not 
extend deep into the folds (see Figure 12–1), whereas 
acetylcholinesterase is anchored to the basement mem-
brane within the folds. This anatomical arrangement of 
transmitter, receptor, and degradative enzyme serves 
two functions.
First, on release, ACh reacts with its receptor; after 
dissociation from the receptor, the ACh diffuses into 
the cleft and is hydrolyzed to choline and acetate by 
acetylcholinesterase. As a result, the transmitter mol-
ecules are used only once. Thus, one function of the 
esterase is to punctuate the synaptic message. Sec-
ond, the choline that otherwise might be lost by dif-
fusion away from the synaptic cleft is recaptured. 
Once hydrolyzed by the esterase, the choline lingers 
in the reservoir provided by the junctional folds and 
is taken back up into cholinergic nerve endings by a 
high-affinity choline transporter. (Unlike the biogenic 
amines, there is no uptake mechanism for ACh itself 
at the plasma membrane.) In addition to acetylcho-
linesterase, ACh is also degraded by another esterase, 


===== Page 9 =====
372    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
B
200 µm
4  GAD65–GFP
5  GABA
I
I
II–III
II–III
IV
IV
1  GAD65–GFP
2  GAD65
3  Overlay
6  Overlay
Cortical 
layer
A
2  GAD
1  GAT-1
Figure 16–3  Techniques for visualizing chemical 
messengers.
A. A light-microscope section of the hippocampus of a rat. 
1. In situ hybridization using a probe for the mRNA encod-
ing GAT-1, a GABA transporter. The probe was end-labeled 
with α-35S-dATP and visualized by clusters of silver grains 
in the overlying autoradiographic photographic emulsion. 
2. In situ hybridization of the mRNA for glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD), the specific biosynthetic enzyme 
for GABA, was carried out with an oligonucleotide probe 
linked to the enzyme alkaline phosphatase. The GAD 
probe was visualized by accumulation of colored alkaline 
phosphatase reaction product in the cytoplasm. Neurons 
expressing both GAT-1 and GAD transcripts were labeled 
by silver grains and the phosphatase reaction, respec-
tively, and are indicated by circles enclosing cells bodies 
that contain both labels. (Used with permission of Sarah 
Augood.)
B. Images of neocortex from a GAD65-GFP transgenic 
mouse in which green fluorescent protein (GFP) is 
expressed under the control of the GAD65 promotor. GFP 
is co-localized with GAD65 (1–3) and GABA (4–6) (both 
detected by indirect immunofluorescence) in neurons in 
the different layers. Most of the GFP-positive neurons 
are immunopositive for GAD65 and GABA (arrows show 
selected examples). Scale bar = 100 μm. (Adapted, with 
permission, from López-Bendito et al. 2004. Copyright © 
2004 Oxford University Press.)
Powerful histochemical techniques are available for 
detecting both small-molecule transmitter substances 
and neuroactive peptides in histological sections of 
nervous tissue.
Catecholamines and serotonin, when reacted with 
formaldehyde vapor, form fluorescent derivatives. In an 
early example of transmitter histochemistry, the Swedish 
neuroanatomists Bengt Falck and Nils Hillarp found 
that the reaction can be used to locate transmitters with 
fluorescence microscopy under properly controlled 
conditions.
Because individual vesicles are too small to be 
resolved by the light microscope, the exact position of 
the vesicles containing the transmitter was inferred by 
comparing the fluorescence under the light microscope 
with the position of vesicles under the electron micro-
scope. A number of fluorescent false transmitters, par-
ticularly those that mimic catecholamines, are substrates 
for plasma membrane and/or vesicular transporters, 
enabling their use to label vesicles and assess their turn-
over in living tissue. In addition, a variety of genetically 
expressed neurotransmitter reporters based on green 
fluorescent protein can be used to detect extracellular 
levels of neurotransmitters.
Histochemical analysis can be extended to the ultra-
structure of neurons under special conditions. Fixation 
of nervous tissue in the presence of potassium perman-
ganate, chromate, or silver salts, or the dopamine analog 
Box 16–2  Detection of Chemical Messengers and Their Processing Enzymes Within Neurons


