===== Page 1 =====
1220    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Normal vision
Binocular
region
Monocular
region
LGN
One eye closed during 
normal critical period
A
B
Right 
eye
Optic chiasm
Ipsi
Contra
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Ipsi
Contra
Cells (%)
Cells (%)
LGN
Figure 49–8  A critical period for ocular dominance plasticity is 
evident in mice. (Adapted, with permission, from Hensch 2005.)
A. The visual cortex in mice contains a small region that receives 
thalamic (lateral geniculate nucleus [LGN]) inputs from both 
eyes. In this binocular region, most neurons are predominantly 
responsive to contralateral eye input, fewer respond to binocular 
inputs, and very few respond to ipsilateral eye input only.
B. When the contralateral eye has been closed during the 
normal critical period and then reopened, inputs from that eye 
are underrepresented, and many more neurons respond to 
binocular or ipsilateral eye input. Eye closure before or after the 
time of the normal critical period does not elicit the same shift 
in responsiveness.
First, excitatory synapses within the primary visual 
cortex may weaken because of the decreased input 
from the closed eye, perhaps through long-term 
depression (LTD) (Chapter 53). Second, excitatory syn-
apses carrying input from the open eye may become 
stronger. Third, the strength of inhibitory synapses 
may be altered, leading to a net decrease in the level of 
excitation of cortical neurons by inputs from the closed 
eye or a net increase in excitation from the open eye. 
Fourth, neuromodulation within the cortex may tune 
the circuit in more subtle ways, altering the balance 
between excitation and inhibition.
Careful analysis of neurons in mouse cortex has 
provided insight into roles played by some of these 
mechanisms. During the first few days after clos-
ing one eye, responses to input from the closed eye 
are greatly weakened, with no major effect on inputs 
from the open eye. The weakening results from a pro-
cess like LTD or a closely related phenomenon called 
spike timing–dependent plasticity (STDP). Then, over 
the following few days, responses to inputs from the 
open eye become stronger. The increase results from 
a combination of synaptic changes called long-term 
potentiation and homeostatic plasticity. Homeostatic 
plasticity is a circuit mechanism that endeavors to 
maintain a steady level of input to neurons. In this 
case, loss of excitatory drive from the closed eye leads 
to a compensatory increase in excitatory drive from the 
open eye.
Further studies demonstrated that inhibitory 
interneurons have an important role in the timing of the 
critical period. Maturation of inhibitory input onto vis-
ual cortical neurons coincides with the beginning of the 
critical period. Moreover, manipulations that lead to ear-
lier development of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) signal-
ing result in advancing the critical period (Figure 49–9). 
Conversely, delaying GABA signaling delays the period 
in which monocular deprivation enhances the prefer-
ence for ipsilateral eye input (Figure 49–9). Together 
these results and others suggest that a sufficient level 
of inhibitory input plays a critical role in “gating” the 
opening of the critical period, whereas excitatory mech-
anisms may play a more prominent role in enacting the 
alterations that occur during the critical period.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1221
Figure 49–9  The timing of the critical period for ocular 
dominance plasticity in mice is sensitive to the level 
of GABAergic neurotransmission. Altering the status of 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) synthesis and signaling shifts 
the period in which monocular deprivation can change the 
response properties of neurons in the visual cortex. Enhancing 
GABA signaling (through administration of benzodiazepines) 
shifts the critical period for monocular deprivation to an earlier 
developmental time. In contrast, delaying GABA signaling (by 
reducing GABA synthesis genetically and then administering 
benzodiazepines at a later time) shifts the critical period for 
monocular deprivation to a later developmental time. (Adapted 
from Hensch et al. 1998.)
Control
Deprivation before normal critical period
Deprivation after normal critical period
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Cells (%)
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Contralateral
Ipsilateral
Enhanced GABA
Control
Cells (%)
Plasticity
Delayed GABA
Normal
Age
Binocular
vision
Critical period for plasticity after monocular deprivation
GABA function 
enhanced
GABA function 
delayed
Synaptic Structures Are Altered During the  
Critical Period
Many studies have sought structural changes that cor-
relate with the altered responsiveness of the visual cor-
tex to input from the closed and open eyes. Particular 
attention has been paid to dendritic spines as potential 
sites of plasticity.
Spines are small protrusions from the dendrites of 
many cortical neurons on which excitatory synapses 
form. They are dynamic structures, and their appear-
ance and loss are thought to reflect the formation and 
elimination of synapses. Spine motility is especially 
marked during early postnatal development, and 
increases in spine dynamics and number have been 
associated with changes in behavior.
Striking alterations in the motility and number of 
dendritic spines on neurons in the mouse visual cortex 
are observed following closure of one eye. Two days after 
eye closure in young mice, the motility and turnover of 
dendritic spines on neurons in the visual cortex increases, 
suggesting that synaptic connections are beginning to 
rearrange (Figure 49–10). A few days later, the number 
of spines begins to change; the number of spines on the 
apical dendrites of pyramidal neurons decreases initially, 
but after longer periods of deprivation increases again.
These alterations in spine motility and number can 
be correlated with three known features of the criti-
cal period. First, rather than occurring in layer IV, the 
changes occur primarily in superficial and deep layers 
of the cortex, where binocular cells lie. Second, they 
occur only in the portion of the visual cortex that nor-
mally receives binocular input. Third, they fail to occur 
following eye closure in adult mice (Figure 49–10).
Together, these results support a linkage of spine 
dynamics with critical period plasticity. According to 
one model, spine motility may result from the imbal-
ance of inputs to binocular neurons from the open and 
closed eyes, and it may reflect the first stages in synap-
tic rearrangement. In turn, the loss of spines, and pre-
sumably of synapses, corresponds in time and space to 
the loss of input from the closed eye and may provide 
a structural basis for the permanence of this loss. The 
later growth of new spines occurs as or after respon-
siveness to the open eye increases and may underlie 
the adaptive rearrangement that permits the cortex to 
make the best use of the input available to it.
Thalamic Inputs Are Remodeled During  
the Critical Period
How are local changes in spines related to the large-
scale structural changes in ocular dominance columns 


===== Page 3 =====
1222    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Shortly after closure
Before eye closure
Long after closure
Closure during 
the critical period
Closure after 
the critical period
Responsive to 
contralateral inputs
Responsive to 
ipsilateral inputs
Previous spine 
position
Figure 49–10  The motility of dendritic 
spines in the mouse visual cortex changes 
after one eye is closed.  The dendrites of 
pyramidal neurons in the visual cortex have 
many spines, the density of which remains 
comparatively constant under normal condi-
tions. Closure of one eye (contralateral in 
this example) during the critical period for 
binocular development enhances the motility 
of dendritic spines and, over time, results in 
an increase in the proportion of spines that 
receive synaptic input from the open eye.  
Similar changes in spine motility are not 
observed if the eye is closed after the critical 
period. (Adapted from Oray, Majewska,  
and Sur 2004.)
shown in Figure 49–4? When developing axons from 
the lateral geniculate nucleus first reach the cortex, the 
terminal endings of several neurons overlap exten-
sively. Each fiber extends a few branches over an area 
of the visual cortex that spans several future ocular 
dominance columns. As the cortex matures, axons 
retract some branches, expand others, and even form 
new branches (Figure 49–11A).
With time, each geniculate neuron becomes con-
nected almost exclusively to a group of neighboring 
cortical neurons within a single column. The arbors 
become segregated into columns through the prun-
ing or retraction of certain axons and the sprouting of  
others. This dual process of axon retraction and sprout-
ing occurs widely throughout the nervous system 
during development.
What happens after one eye is closed? Axons 
from a closed eye are at a disadvantage, and a greater 
than normal proportion retract. At the same time, 
axons from the open eye sprout new terminals at sites 
vacated by fibers that would otherwise convey input 
from the closed eye (Figure 49–11B). If an animal is 
deprived of the use of one eye early during the criti-
cal period of axonal segregation, the normal processes 
of axon retraction and outgrowth are perturbed. In 
contrast, if an animal is deprived of the use of one eye 
after the ocular dominance columns are almost fully 
segregated, axons conveying input from the open eye 
actually sprout collaterals in regions of the cortex that 
they had vacated earlier (see Figure 49–5).
Initially, it was believed that rearrangements of 
thalamocortical axons in monocularly deprived ani-
mals caused the changes in cortical responsiveness 
to the open and closed eyes. We now know, through 
electrophysiological recording and imaging of spines, 
that physiological changes and synaptic alterations 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1223
Figure 49–11  The branching of thalamocortical fibers in the 
visual cortex of kittens changes after the closure of an eye.  
(Adapted, with permission, from Antonini and Stryker 1993. 
Copyright © 1993 AAAS.)
A. During normal postnatal development, the axons of  
lateral geniculate nucleus cells branch widely in the visual  
cortex. The branching eventually becomes confined to a  
small region.
B. After one eye is closed, the terminal arbors of neurons in the 
pathway from that eye are dramatically smaller compared to 
those of the open eye.
A  Normal development
B  Development after eye closure
Mature
Closed eye
Open eye
Young
precede the large-scale axonal rearrangements. So 
rather than causing the physiological changes, axonal 
remodeling may contribute to making these changes 
enduring and irreversible. The question then becomes: 
How do alterations in synaptic structure and function 
within the cortex lead to alterations in the input?
One idea is that synaptic activity regulates the 
secretion of neurotrophic factors by cortical neurons. 
Such factors may then regulate survival of some neu-
rons at the expense of others (Chapter 46) or promote 
the expansion of some axonal arbors at the expense of 
others. One such factor, brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) is synthesized and secreted by cortical 
neurons, and administering excess BDNF or interfer-
ing with its receptor trkB modifies the formation of 
ocular dominance columns. Nevertheless, interpreting 
the actions of BDNF is not straightforward. BDNF and 
trkB signaling affect the cortex in many ways, includ-
ing enhancing the growth of thalamocortical axons. 
BDNF can also speed the maturation of inhibitory cir-
cuits, which, as noted above, can influence plasticity. 
It remains unclear whether BDNF is a specific catalyst 
of the competition that preferentially promotes expan-
sion of some arbors.
Synaptic Stabilization Contributes to Closing  
the Critical Period
A hallmark of critical periods is that the interval in 
which experience affects the development of neural 
circuits is limited. What brings this period of height-
ened plasticity to a close?
Since synapses and circuits are labile during criti-
cal periods, investigators have sought developmental 
changes in cortex that could lead to stabilization. One 
parameter is the state of myelination of axons, which 
occurs around the time the critical period closes. For-
mation of myelin creates physical barriers to sprouting 
and axonal growth. Moreover, as discussed in detail in 
Chapter 50, myelin contains factors such as Nogo and 
myelin-associated glycoprotein that actively inhibit 
growth of axons. In mutant mice lacking Nogo or one 
of its receptors, NogoR, the critical period remains 
open into adulthood, suggesting that the appearance 
of these receptors normally contributes to closing the 
critical period (Figure 49–12).
Another possible agent of closure is the perineu-
ronal net, a web of glycosaminoglycans that wraps 
certain classes of inhibitory neurons. These nets form 
around the time that the critical period closes. Infusion 
of the enzyme chondroitinase, which digests perineu-
ronal nets, maintains plasticity. Thus, critical periods 
may close once molecular barriers to synaptic growth 
and rearrangement come into play.
Additional agents of closure may be intrinsic to 
the neurons. In Chapter 50, we will see that neuronal 
growth programs decrease with age, and in Chapter 51, 
we will describe epigenetic mechanisms that “lock 
in” experience-dependent patterns of gene expression 
established in early postnatal life.


===== Page 5 =====
1224    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Normal
critical period
Extended critical period
(Nogo / NogoR mutants)
Wild type
Nogo or NogoR mutant
24 days
45 days
Plasticity
Binocular 
zone 
normal
Ipsi
Contra
Ipsi
Contra
Monocular 
deprivation 
during the
critical period
(24 days)
Monocular 
deprivation 
after the
critical period
(45 days)
Figure 49–12  (Left) The critical period for monocular dep-
rivation is extended in mice lacking Nogo signaling.  The 
drawings show arborization patterns of thalamocortical axons 
carrying signals from contralateral and ipsilateral eyes to the 
binocular zone in visual cortex. Monocular deprivation dur-
ing the critical period results in a shift in ocular preference in 
neurons in the binocular zone in both wild-type mice and mice 
mutant for Nogo or the Nogo receptor (NogoR). After the nor-
mal critical period (at 45 days), the shift in ocular preference 
continues in mice with mutant Nogo-A or the Nogo receptor 
but not in wild-type mice. The plot shows that elimination of 
Nogo signaling prevents closure of the critical period. (Adapted 
from McGee et al. 2005.)
Why should there be an end to critical periods? 
Would it not be advantageous for the brain to maintain 
its ability to remodel into adulthood? Perhaps not—the 
ability of our brain to adapt to variations in sensory 
input, to gradual physical growth (eg, increases in the 
distance between the eyes affecting binocular corre-
spondence), and to various congenital disorders is a 
valuable asset. At an extreme, if one eye is lost, it is 
advantageous to devote all available cortical real estate 
to the remaining eye. However, one would not want 
wholesale reorganization, possibly accompanied by 
loss of skills and memories, if vision through one eye 
were lost temporarily in adulthood due to disease or 
injury. So, enhancing plasticity during a critical period 
may represent an adaptive compromise between flex-
ibility and stability.
Experience-Independent Spontaneous Neural 
Activity Leads to Early Circuit Refinement
As noted above, the segregation of visual cortex into 
ocular dominance columns in cats and monkeys begins 
before the onset of visual experience. What drives this 
early phase of segregation? One possibility is that 
axons from the ipsilateral and contralateral eyes bear 
different molecular labels that lead to their association. 
A similar mechanism occurs in the formation of the 
olfactory projection (Chapter 48). However, no such 
molecule or mechanism has yet been discovered in the 
visual projection. Instead segregation appears to rely 
on spontaneous activity, which not only occurs prior 
to sensory input but also exhibits striking patterning. 
This mechanism was initially discovered in studies of 
the lateral geniculate nucleus, whose neurons provide 
visual input to the visual cortex.
The arbors of retinal ganglion cells from the two 
eyes are segregated into alternating layers in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus, much as the projections from this 
nucleus are segregated in alternating ocular dominance 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1225
Figure 49–13  The terminals of retinal ganglion cells in the 
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) become segregated during 
normal development. At early stages of development, the ter-
minals of axons from each eye intermingle, but at later stages, 
they segregate into separate layers of the nucleus. In some 
species, axons from one eye even segregate into functionally 
specialized sublayers (on and off layers in ferrets). (Adapted, 
with permission, from Sanes and Yamagata 1999.)
Diffuse projection
LGN
Right eye
Left eye
Right eye
Left eye
Off
On
Off
On
Segregation into 
eye-speciﬁc laminae
Segregation into 
functional sublaminae
columns in the visual cortex (Figure 49–13). In both 
structures, individual axons at first form terminals 
in multiple domains (layers in the geniculate nucleus, 
columns in the cortex). Later, the terminals become 
segregated by a process of refinement. The refine-
ment involves both growth of terminal arbors in the 
“appropriate” layer and elimination of terminals from 
the inappropriate layer (Chapter 48).
As in the cortex, application of tetrodotoxin to 
the optic nerves disrupts the segregation of the inputs 
from each eye, indicating that activity is essential for 
segregation. In contrast to cortex, however, segrega-
tion of inputs is complete before the onset of visual 
experience—prior to birth in monkeys and postnatally 
but prior to eye opening in mice. Thus, vision cannot 
drive the neural activity essential for segregation.
It turns out that the axons of retinal ganglion neu-
rons are spontaneously active in utero, well before the 
eyes open. Neighboring ganglion cells fire in synchro-
nous bursts that last a few seconds, followed by silent 
periods that may last for minutes. Sampling the activ-
ity of retinal ganglion neurons across the entire retina 
revealed that these bursts propagate across much of 
the retina in a wave-like manner (Figure 49–14). This 
pattern of ganglion cell activity appears to be coordi-
nated by excitatory inputs from amacrine cells in the 
overlying layer of the retina (Chapter 22).
The spontaneous, synchronous firing of a select 
group of ganglion neurons excites a local group of 
neurons in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Such syn-
chronized activity appears to strengthen these syn-
apses at the expense of other nearby synapses, perhaps 
by a Hebbian mechanism similar to that posited for 
experience-dependent refinement. This does not mean 
that visually evoked activity has no role in sculpting 
the retinogeniculate pathway. At a later stage, other 
aspects of refinement, such as spatial rearrangement 
of synapses along the axon, are regulated by visual 
experience.
The discovery that spontaneous activity can lead 
to circuit refinement provides a likely explanation for 
the initial segregation of inputs to the visual cortex. 
More generally, the parsing of activity-dependent cir-
cuit refinement into two phases, the first dependent on 
spontaneous activity and the second on sensory input, 
now appears to be a general theme in the development 
of brain circuits that begin refinement before they have 
the chance to respond to environmental stimulation.
Activity-Dependent Refinement of Connections 
Is a General Feature of Brain Circuitry
We have seen that neural activity is critical for segregat-
ing axons from the two retinas into distinct layers in 
the lateral geniculate nucleus and then into distinct col-
umns in the visual cortex. Is this developmental role of 
activity a special case, or does activity also affect matu-
ration elsewhere in the visual system, and even in other 
parts of the brain? Studies of many systems show that 
activity-dependent control of refinement is a general 
property of neural circuits in the mammalian brain.
Many Aspects of Visual System Development  
Are Activity-Dependent
One well-studied example of activity-dependent 
development in the visual system is the sharpening 


===== Page 7 =====
1226    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 49–14  Correlated waves of neural activity in the 
developing retina.
A. Microscopic visualization of the activity of retinal ganglion 
neurons in a flat-mounted preparation of mammalian retina. 
Spontaneous waves of neural activity are visualized by moni-
toring Ca2+ transients (yellow domain) after loading of cells 
with dyes that change their fluorescent emission spectrum in 
response to changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration.
B. These still images from a movie sequence show the propa-
gation of one Ca2+ activity focus (yellow domain) across the 
retina. Images were taken 1 second apart. Many cells within 
the activity focus are activated synchronously. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Blankenship et al. 2009. Copyright © 
2009 Elsevier Inc.)
C. Retinal activity waves recorded over time are superim-
posed in this image. Discrete waves are indicated in different 
colors; the origin of a wave is indicated by a darker hue. These 
waves originate in different retinal foci and spread in distinct, 
unpredictable directions. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Meister et al. 1991. Copyright © 1991 AAAS.)
Retina
whole 
mount
A  Imaging retinal activity 
Time (s) 
Ca2+ 
wave 
Quiescent
region
C  Superimposed retinal waves
B  Dynamic Ca2+ waves
0
+ 2 
+ 3 
+ 4 
+ 5 
+ 8 
of the topographic distribution of retinal ganglion cell 
axons onto their central targets, a topic we introduced 
in Chapter 47. In vertebrates, molecular cues such as 
ephrins guide axons from the retina to appropriate 
sites in the optic tectum (called the superior colliculus 
in mammals—see Figure 47–11), but they are not suf-
ficient to form the refined visual map.
Histological and physiological studies have 
found that the map formed initially in the superior 
colliculus/optic tectum is coarse and that individual 
retinal ganglion cell axons have large, overlapping 
arbors. These axonal arbors are later pruned to their 
mature size, resulting in a more restricted and precise 
field of termination. If retinal activity is inhibited, only 
the initial coarse map forms.
Is it the pattern of activity or activity itself that is 
important in visual map formation? Put another way, is 
activity simply a precondition for refinement, or does 
it have an organizing role, determining exactly which 
axons win or lose the competition? Many experiments 
show that the latter idea is closer to the truth.
In one study, the accuracy of the retinotectal map 
was assessed in fish raised in a tank illuminated only 
by brief flashes from a strobe light. A control group 
was raised in a normal laboratory environment. The 
total light intensity presented to the fish was similar 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1227
Figure 49–15  The barn owl uses interaural 
time differences to localize its prey. Sound 
waves generated by movements of a mouse are 
received by the owl’s left and right ears. As the 
prey emits noise, the difference in the time of 
arrival of auditory stimuli at the two ears—the 
interaural time difference (ITD)—is used to cal-
culate the precise position of the prey target. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Knudsen 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
under both conditions, but the resulting pattern was 
very different. In control fish, the images fell haphaz-
ardly on various parts of the retina as the fish swam 
around their tanks. This input produces local synchro-
nous activity of the sort generated by the waves of 
spontaneous activity described above—neighboring 
ganglion cells tend to fire together, but there is little 
correlation with the firing patterns of distant ganglion 
cells. In these fish, the map becomes precise. In con-
trast, stroboscopic illumination synchronously acti-
vates nearly all of the ganglion cells, and in these fish, 
the retinotectal map remains coarse.
Presumably, the tectum determines which retinal 
axons are near neighbors by judging which ones fire 
in synchrony, much as activity patterns in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus or visual cortex determine which 
axons carry signals from the same eye. This informa-
tion is then used to refine the topographic map, through 
mechanisms similar to those in the cortex. When all of 
the axons fire in synchrony, the tectum cannot deter-
mine which axons are neighbors; refinement fails, and 
the map remains coarse.
Sensory Modalities Are Coordinated During a 
Critical Period
Our experience of the world is shaped by synthesizing 
sensory input from multiple modalities. For example, 
our mental image of where an object is with respect to 
our body is the same whether we localize it by touch, 
sound, or sight. For each modality, information is 
mapped in an orderly way within relevant brain areas, 
much like the retinotopic maps in the optic tectum and 
visual cortex. Multimodal localization requires that 
these maps, which are formed independently during 
development, be brought into register. This aspect of 
refinement occurs during critical periods.
Studies on barn owls have provided insight into 
how auditory and visual maps are coordinated dur-
ing a critical period. During the day, owls use vision to 
localize their prey—mice or other small rodents—but 
at night, they rely on auditory cues, and at dusk, both 
sensory channels are used. The localization of sound 
must be precise if owls are to succeed in finding prey, 
and it is intuitively obvious that the visual and audi-
tory cues for the same location need to be consistent.
Auditory localization in owls, as in people, results 
from the presence of neurons that vary in their sensi-
tivity to sounds sensed by the two ears. For example, 
sounds arising from a source to the left arrive slightly 
sooner at the left ear than at the right ear and are 
slightly louder in the left ear. These discrepancies help 
us determine the point in horizontal space from which 
a sound arises (Chapter 28). Computation of the tem-
poral difference in the arrival of sounds at the two ears 
is particularly crucial. The difference is only a few tens 
of microseconds, as expected from calculations based 
upon the speed of sound and the width of the head. 
Remarkably, the auditory system is sensitive to these 
extremely short interaural time differences (ITDs) and 
can calculate prey position from them (Figure 49–15). 
Moreover, many auditory neurons in the optic tectum 
Auditory stimulus
Sound level (dB)
L ear
R ear
ITD
R
L


===== Page 9 =====
1228    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 49–16  (Right) Reorganization of sensory maps in the 
optic tectum of owls after systematic displacement of the 
retinal image.  The retinal image in adolescent owls can be 
displaced by prism goggles, which shift images from 5° to 30°. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 
2002 Springer Nature.)
A. Before application of the prisms, the visual and auditory neu-
ral maps coincide.
B. The prism goggles displace the retinal image by 23°. Conse-
quently, the neural and auditory maps are out of alignment.
C. The two brain maps are once again congruent 42 days after 
prism application because the auditory map has shifted to realign 
with the visual map.
D. Soon after the prisms are removed, the visual map reverts to 
its original position, but the auditory map remains in its shifted 
position.
with receptive fields centered on a particular location 
are also tuned to ITDs that correspond to sounds emit-
ted from that same point in space. The registration is 
imprecise at early stages but becomes progressively 
more precise during early adolescence as a conse-
quence of the animal’s experience.
Crucial insight into how this registration occurs 
came from experiments in which prisms were mounted 
over the eyes of young owls. The prisms shifted the 
retinal image horizontally so that the visual map in 
the tectum reflected a world systematically displaced 
from its “actual” orientation. This change abruptly 
disrupted the correspondence between visual and 
auditory receptive fields. Over the next several weeks, 
however, the ITD to which tectal neurons responded 
optimally, ie, their auditory receptive field, changed 
until the visual and auditory maps came back into reg-
ister (Figure 49–16). Thus, the visual map instructs the 
auditory map.
Further experiments showed that this reorganiza-
tion resulted from rewiring of connections between 
two deeper auditory nuclei (Figure 49–17). When 
prism goggles were placed on young owls, changes 
in ITD tuning were fully adaptive in that the animals 
compensated completely for the effects of the prisms. 
In contrast, goggles placed on mature owls (older than 
7 months of age) had little effect. Thus, reorganization 
of this auditory projection occurs optimally during a 
critical juvenile period.
Different Functions and Brain Regions Have 
Different Critical Periods of Development
Not all brain circuits are stabilized at the same time. 
Even within the visual cortex, the critical periods for 
organization of inputs differ among layers in both mice 
10
–10
+10
10
30
L
R
10
–10
+10
10
30
L
R
Auditory stimuli
Visual stimuli 
mutations
Head orientation 
in response to:
–5
10
–10
+10
10
20
30
L
R
10
–5
+5
10
30
L
R
A  Before prisms
B  Soon after visual 
 
ﬁeld is displaced 
 
23° rightward 
C  42 days after 
 
displacement 
D  Soon after removal
 
of prisms 


