===== Page 1 =====
692    Part IV / Perception
V1R
C  Receptor and G protein distribution  
V2R
V2R
V1R
Gαi2 
expressed
Gαo 
expressed
V1R
A
B  Receptor distribution
A  Receptor structure
V2R
NH2
NH2
HOOC
HOOC
Vomeronasal 
organ
Figure 29–9  (Right) Candidate pheromone receptors in the 
vomeronasal organ.
A. The V1R and V2R families of receptors are expressed in the 
vomeronasal organ. In the mouse, each family has more than 
100 members, which vary in protein sequence. Members of 
both families have the seven transmembrane domains of G 
protein–coupled receptors, but V2R receptors also have a large 
extracellular domain at the N-terminal end that may be the site 
of ligand binding.
B. Sections through the vomeronasal organ show individual 
V1R and V2R probes hybridized to subsets of neurons in two 
distinct zones. (Reproduced, with permission, from Dulac and 
Axel 1995; Matsunami and Buck 1997.)
C. The two zones express high levels of different G proteins, 
Gααi2 and Gααo.
behaviors, they are useful for understanding the rela-
tionship between the neural representation of odor 
and behavior.
Certain features of chemosensory systems are 
highly conserved in evolution. First, all metazoan ani-
mals can detect a variety of organic molecules using 
specialized chemosensory neurons with cilia or micro-
villi that contact the external environment. Second, the 
initial events of odor detection are mediated by fami-
lies of transmembrane receptors with specific expres-
sion patterns in peripheral sensory neurons. Other 
features of the olfactory system differ between species, 
reflecting selection pressures and evolutionary histo-
ries of the animals.
The primary sensory organs of insects are the 
antennae and appendages known as maxillary palps 
near the mouth (Figure 29–10A). Whereas mammals 
have millions of olfactory neurons, insects have a much 
smaller number. There are approximately 2,600 olfac-
tory neurons in the fruit fly Drosophila and approxi-
mately 60,000 in the honeybee.
The insect odorant receptors were discovered by 
finding multigene receptor families in the Drosophila 
genome, and these genes have now been examined in 
other insect genomes as well. Remarkably, they have 
little similarity to mammalian odorant receptors save 
for the presence of many transmembrane domains. 
Indeed, insect receptors appear to have an independ-
ent evolutionary origin from mammalian receptors 
and may not even be G protein–coupled receptors—
an extreme example of the fast evolutionary change 
observed across all olfactory receptor systems. In 
Drosophila, the main odorant receptor family has only 
60 genes, rather than the hundreds characteristic of 
vertebrates. The malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae 
and the honeybee have similar numbers (85–95 genes), 
whereas leaf-cutter ants have more than 350 odorant 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    693
Figure 29–10  Olfactory pathways from the 
antenna to the brain in Drosophila.
A. The axons of olfactory neurons with cell bod-
ies and dendrites in the antenna and maxillary 
palp project axons to the antennal lobe. Projec-
tion neurons in the antennal lobe then project to 
two regions of the fly brain, the mushroom body 
and lateral protocerebrum. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Takaki Komiyama and Liqun Luo.)
B. The neurons that express one type of olfac-
tory receptor gene, detected by RNA in situ 
hybridization, are scattered in the maxillary palp 
(1) or antenna (2, 3).
C. All neurons that express the olfactory recep-
tor gene OR47 converge on a glomerulus in the 
antennal lobe. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Vosshall et al. 1999; Vosshall, Wong, and 
Axel 2000.)
D. Each odorant elicits a physiological response 
from a subset of glomeruli in the antennal lobe. 
Two-photon calcium imaging was used to detect 
odor-evoked signals. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Wang et al. 2003. Copyright © 2003 
Elsevier.)
Mushroom
body 
Lateral
protocerebrum
Maxillary 
palp
1  DOR 71 
2  DOR 87 
3  DOR 67 
B2, B3 
C,D 
Arista
Antenna
A  Olfactory pathways
B  Organization of receptor expression
C 
D 
OR 47
B1 
Antennal 
lobe
Benzaldenhyde
Isoamyl acetate
receptor genes, suggesting a wide variation in receptor 
number in insects.
Despite molecular differences in receptors, the 
anatomical organization of the fly’s olfactory system 
is quite similar to that of vertebrates. Each olfactory 
neuron expresses one or sometimes two functional 
odorant receptor genes. The neurons expressing a 
particular gene are loosely localized to a region of the 
antenna but interspersed with neurons expressing other 
genes (Figure 29–10B). This scattered distribution is 


===== Page 3 =====
694    Part IV / Perception
not the case at the next level of organization, the anten-
nal lobe. Axons from sensory neurons that express one 
type of receptor converge on two invariant glomeruli 
in the antennal lobe, one each on the left and right 
sides of the animal (Figure 29–10C). This organization 
is strikingly similar to that of the first sensory relay in 
the vertebrate olfactory bulb and is also found in the 
moth, honeybee, and other insects.
Because there are only a few dozen receptor genes 
in Drosophila, it is possible to characterize the entire rep-
ertory of odorant-receptor interactions, a goal that is not 
yet attainable in mammals. Sophisticated genetic meth-
ods can be used to label and record from a Drosophila 
neuron expressing a single known odorant receptor 
gene. By repeating this experiment with many receptors 
and odors, the receptive fields of the odorant receptors 
have been defined and shown to be quite diverse.
In insects, individual odorant receptors can detect 
large numbers of odorants, including odorants with 
very different chemical structures. This broad recogni-
tion of odorants by “generalist” receptors is necessary 
if only a small number of receptors is available to detect 
all biologically significant odorants. A single insect 
receptor protein that detects many odors can be stimu-
lated by some odors and inhibited by others, often with 
distinct temporal patterns. A subset of insect odorant 
receptors that convey information about pheromones 
or other unusual odors like carbon dioxide are more 
selective. Thus, the coding potential of each olfactory 
neuron can be broad or narrow and arises from a com-
bination of stimulatory and inhibitory signals deliv-
ered to its receptors.
Information from the olfactory neurons is relayed 
to the antennal lobe where sensory neurons express-
ing the same odorant receptor converge onto a small 
number of projection neurons in one glomerulus 
(Figure 29–10A). Because Drosophila glomeruli are 
stereotyped in position and have one type of odor-
ant receptor input, the transformation of information 
across the synapse can be described. Convergence of 
many olfactory sensory axons onto a few projection 
neurons leads to a great increase in the signal-to-noise 
ratio of olfactory signals, so projection neurons are 
much more sensitive to odor than individual olfactory 
neurons. Within the antennal lobe, excitatory interneu-
rons distribute signals to projection neurons at distal 
locations, and inhibitory interneurons feed back onto 
the olfactory sensory neurons to dampen their input. 
Thus, while activity of an individual olfactory neu-
ron is conveyed to one glomerulus. its activity is also 
distributed across the entire antennal lobe, as it is pro-
cessed by excitatory and inhibitory local interneurons 
that connect many glomeruli.
The projection neurons from the antennal lobe 
extend to higher brain centers called mushroom bod-
ies and lateral protocerebrum (Figure 29–10A). These 
structures may represent insect equivalents of the 
olfactory cortex. The mushroom bodies are sites of 
olfactory associative learning and multimodal associa-
tive learning; the lateral protocerebrum is important 
for innate olfactory responses. At this stage, projection 
neurons form complex connections with a large num-
ber of downstream neurons. Neurons in higher brain 
centers in Drosophila have the potential to integrate 
information from many receptors.
Olfactory Cues Elicit Stereotyped Behaviors and 
Physiological Responses in the Nematode
The nematode roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans has 
one of the simplest nervous systems in the animal 
kingdom, with only 302 neurons in the entire ani-
mal. Of these, 32 are ciliated chemosensory neurons. 
Because C. elegans has strong behavioral responses 
to a wide variety of chemicals, it has been a useful 
experimental animal for relating olfactory signals to 
behavior. Each chemosensory neuron detects a spe-
cific set of chemicals, and activation of the neuron is 
required for the behavioral responses to those sub-
stances. The neuron for a particular response, such as 
attraction to a specific odor, occurs in the same posi-
tion in all individuals.
The molecular mechanisms of olfaction in C. elegans 
were elucidated through genetic screens for mutant 
worms lacking the ability to detect odors (anosmia). 
The G protein–coupled receptor for the volatile odor-
ant diacetyl emerged from these screens (Figure 29–11). 
This receptor is one of approximately 1,700 predicted 
G protein–coupled chemoreceptor genes in C. elegans, 
the largest number of chemoreceptors among known 
genomes. Other kinds of chemosensory receptors are 
also present; for example, C. elegans senses external 
oxygen levels indirectly by detecting soluble guanylate 
cyclases that bind directly to oxygen. With so many 
chemoreceptors, nematodes are able to recognize a 
large variety of odors with great sensitivity. Some che-
mosensory neurons use G proteins to regulate cyclic 
guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cGMP) and a cGMP-
gated channel, a signal transduction pathway like that 
of vertebrate photoreceptors. Other chemosensory 
neurons signal through a transient receptor potential 
vanilloid (TRPV) channel, like vertebrate nociceptive 
neurons.
The “one neuron, one receptor” principle observed 
in vertebrates and insects does not operate in nema-
todes because the number of neurons is much smaller 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    695
Figure 29–11  The receptor for diacetyl in the Caenorhabdi-
tis elegans worm.
A. A lateral view of the worm’s anterior end shows the cell 
body and processes of the AWA chemosensory neuron. A 
dendrite terminates in cilia that are exposed to environmental 
chemicals. The neuron detects the volatile chemical diacetyl; 
animals with a mutation in the odr-10 gene are unable to sense 
diacetyl.
B. The odr-10 gene is active only in the AWA neurons. The 
micrograph here shows the gene product marked with fusion 
to a fluorescent reporter protein; the arrow indicates the neu-
ron’s axon. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sarafi-Reinach 
and Sengupta 2000.)
Cilia
A
B
Cell body of
AWA neuron
Diacetyl
Dendrite
Axon
than the number of receptors. Each chemoreceptor gene 
is typically expressed in only one pair of chemosensory 
neurons, but each neuron expresses many receptor 
genes. The small size of the C. elegans nervous system 
limits olfactory computations. For example, a single 
neuron responds to many odors, but odors can be dis-
tinguished efficiently only if they are sensed by differ-
ent primary sensory neurons.
The relationship between odor detection and 
behavior has been explored in C. elegans through 
genetic manipulations. For example, diacetyl is nor-
mally attractive to worms, but when the diacetyl 
receptor is experimentally expressed in an olfactory 
neuron that normally senses repellents, the animals are 
instead repelled by diacetyl. This observation indicates 
that specific sensory neurons encode the hardwired 
behavioral responses of attraction or repulsion and 
that a “labeled line” connects specific odors to specific 
behaviors. Similar ideas have emerged from genetic 
manipulations of taste systems in mice and flies, where 
sweet and bitter preference pathways are encoded by 
different sets of sensory cells.
Olfactory cues are linked to physiological 
responses as well as behavioral responses in nema-
todes. Food and pheromone cues that regulate devel-
opment are detected by specific sensory neurons through 
G protein–coupled receptors. With low pheromone 
levels and plentiful food, animals rapidly develop to 
adulthood, whereas with high pheromone levels and 
scarce food, animals arrest in a long-lived larval stage 
called dauer larvae (Figure 29–12). Activation of these 
sensory neurons ultimately regulates the activity of 
an insulin signaling pathway that controls physiology 
and growth as well as the life span of the nematode. 
It is an open question whether the chemosensory sys-
tems and physiological systems of other animals are as 
entangled as they are in nematodes.
Strategies for Olfaction Have Evolved Rapidly
Why have independent families of odorant receptors 
evolved in mammals, nematodes, and insects? And 
why have the families changed so rapidly compared 
to genes involved in other important biological pro-
cesses? The answer lies in a fundamental difference 
between olfaction and other senses such as vision, 
touch, and hearing.
Most senses are designed to detect physical enti-
ties with reliable physical properties: photons, pres-
sure, or sound waves. By contrast, olfactory systems 
are designed to detect organic molecules that are infi-
nitely variable and do not fit into a simple continuum 
of properties. Moreover, the organic molecules that 
are detected are produced by other living organisms, 
which evolve far more rapidly than the world of light, 
pressure, and sound.
An ancient olfactory system was present in the 
common ancestor of all animals that exist today. That 
ancestor lived in the ocean, where it gave rise to dif-
ferent lineages for mammals, insects, and nematodes. 
Those three phyla of animals came onto land hundreds 
of millions of years after the phyla diverged. Each phy-
lum independently modified its olfactory system to 
detect airborne odors, leading to diversification of the 
receptors.
A consideration of the natural history of dipteran 
and hymenopteran insects, which have evolved in the 
last 200 million years, helps explain the rapid diversi-
fication of the odorant receptors. These insects include 
honeybees that pollinate flowers, fruit flies that feed 
on rotting fruit, flesh flies that arrive within minutes of 
death, and mosquitoes that prey on living animals. The 
odorants important for the survival of these insects are 
radically different, and receptor genes tuned to those 
odorants have evolved accordingly.


===== Page 5 =====
696    Part IV / Perception
Figure 29–12  Chemosensory cues 
regulate the development of C. ele-
gans. When exposed to different chem-
osensory cues, two larvae of the same 
age follow different development paths. A 
dauer larva, which forms under stressful 
conditions of low food and high population 
density, develops into a small slender adult 
(left). It is a nonfeeding, nonreproducing, 
stress-resistant form of the worm. In con-
trast, a larva in a rich environment favoring 
reproductive growth develops into a normal 
adult (right). (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Manuel Zimmer.)
100 µm
The Gustatory System Controls the  
Sense of Taste
Taste Has Five Submodalities That Reflect Essential 
Dietary Requirements
The gustatory system is a specialized chemosensory 
system dedicated to evaluating potential food sources. 
It is the only sensory system that detects sugars and 
harmful compounds present in foods, and it serves as 
a main driver of feeding decisions. Unlike the olfac-
tory system, which distinguishes millions of odors, the 
gustatory system recognizes just a few taste categories.
Humans and other mammals can distinguish 
five basic taste qualities: sweet, bitter, salty, sour, and 
umami, a Japanese word meaning delicious and asso-
ciated with the “savory” taste of amino acids. This lim-
ited palate detects all essential dietary requirements of 
animals: A sweet taste invites consumption of energy-
rich foods; bitter taste warns against the ingestion of 
toxic, noxious chemicals; salty taste promotes a diet 
that maintains proper electrolyte balance; sour taste 
signals acidic, unripened, or fermented foods; and 
umami indicates protein-rich foods.
Consistent with the nutritional importance of 
carbohydrates and proteins, both sweet and umami 
tastants elicit innately pleasurable sensations in 
humans and are attractants for animals in general. In 
contrast, bitter and sour tastants elicit innately aver-
sive responses in humans and animals.
Taste is often thought to be synonymous with 
flavor. However, taste refers strictly to the five quali-
ties encoded in the gustatory system, whereas flavor, 
with its rich and varied qualities, stems from the mul-
tisensory integration of inputs from the gustatory, 
olfactory, and somatosensory systems (eg, texture and 
temperature).
Tastant Detection Occurs in Taste Buds
Tastants are detected by taste receptor cells clustered 
in taste buds. Although the majority of taste buds in 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    697
Figure 29–13  Taste buds are clustered in papillae on the 
tongue.
A. The three types of papillae—circumvallate, foliate, and  
fungiform—differ in morphology and location on the tongue  
and are differentially innervated by the chorda tympani and 
glossopharyngeal nerves.
B. Each taste bud contains 50 to 150 elongated taste  
receptor cells, as well as supporting cells and a small 
population of basal stem cells. The taste cell extends 
microvilli into the taste pore, allowing it to detect tastants 
dissolved in saliva. At its basal end, the taste cell contacts 
gustatory sensory neurons that transmit stimulus signals to 
the brain. The scanning electron micrograph shows a taste 
bud in a foliate papilla in a rabbit. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Royer and Kinnamon 1991. Copyright © 1991 
Wiley-Liss, Inc.)
humans are located on the tongue surface, some can 
also be found on the palate, pharynx, epiglottis, and 
upper third of the esophagus.
Taste buds on the tongue occur in structures called 
papillae, of which there are three types based on mor-
phology and location. Fungiform papillae, located on the 
anterior two-thirds of the tongue, are peg-like struc-
tures that are topped with taste buds. Both the foliate 
papillae, situated on the posterior edge of the tongue, 
and the circumvallate papillae, of which there are only a 
few in the posterior area of the tongue, are structures 
surrounded by grooves lined with taste buds (Figure 
29–13A). In humans, each fungiform papilla contains 
one to five taste buds, whereas each foliate and circum-
vallate papilla may contain hundreds to thousands of 
taste buds, respectively.
The taste bud is a garlic-shaped structure embed-
ded in the epithelium. A small opening at the epi-
thelial surface, the taste pore, is the point of contact 
with tastants (Figure 29–13B). Each taste bud contains 
approximately 100 taste receptor cells (taste cells), 
elongated cells that stretch from the taste pore to the 
basal area of the bud. The taste bud also contains other 
Saliva
Taste 
cell
Basal 
stem
cell
To sensory 
ganglion
Gustatory 
afferent 
nerve
Chorda tympani
nerve (VII)
Serous
gland
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (IX)
Circumvallate
Foliate
B
Taste
bud
Taste 
pore
A
Fungiform
elongated cells that are thought to serve a supporting 
function, as well as a small number of round cells at 
the base, which are thought to serve as stem cells. Each 
taste cell extends microvilli into the taste pore, allow-
ing the cell to contact chemicals dissolved in saliva at 
the epithelial surface.
At its basal end, the taste cell contacts the afferent 
fibers of gustatory sensory neurons, whose cell bodies 
reside in specific sensory ganglia (see Figure 29–17). 
Although taste cells are nonneural, their contacts with 
the gustatory sensory neurons have the morphologi-
cal characteristics of chemical synapses, including 
clustered presynaptic vesicles. Taste cells also resem-
ble neurons in that they are electrically excitable; they 
have voltage-gated Na+, K+, and Ca2+ channels and are 
capable of generating action potentials. Taste cells are 
very short-lived (days to weeks) and are continually 
replaced from the stem cell population. This turnover 
requires that newborn taste cells differentiate to detect 
one of the five taste qualities and connect to the ter-
minals of appropriate gustatory sensory neurons, such 
that a sweet taste cell connects to sweet sensory neu-
rons and a bitter taste cell to bitter sensory neurons.


===== Page 7 =====
698    Part IV / Perception
Figure 29–14  Sensory transduction in taste cells. Different 
taste qualities involve different detection mechanisms in the api-
cal microvilli of taste cells (see Figure 29–13B). Salty and sour 
tastants directly activate ion channels, whereas tastants perceived 
as bitter, sweet, or umami activate G protein–coupled receptors. 
Bitter tastants are detected by T2R receptors, whereas sweet 
tastants are detected by a combination of T1R2 and T1R3, and 
umami tastants by a combination of T1R1 and T1R3.
Each Taste Modality Is Detected by Distinct Sensory 
Receptors and Cells
The five taste qualities are detected by sensory recep-
tors in the microvilli of different taste cells. There 
are two general types of receptors: Bitter, sweet, and 
umami tastants interact with G protein–coupled recep-
tors, whereas salty and sour tastants interact directly 
with specific ion channels (Figure 29–14). These inter-
actions depolarize the taste cell, leading to the genera-
tion of action potentials in the afferent gustatory fibers.
Sweet Taste Receptor
Compounds that humans perceive as sweet include 
sugars, artificial sweeteners such as saccharin and 
aspartame, a few proteins such as monellin and thau-
matin, and several d-amino acids. All of these sweet-
tasting compounds are detected by a heteromeric 
receptor composed of two members of the T1R taste 
receptor family, T1R2 and T1R3 (Figure 29–15). The 
Umami (T1R1 + T1R3)
Bitter (T2Rs)
Sweet (T1R2 + T1R3)
H+
Sour (Otop1)  
Na+
Salty (ENaC)
T1R receptors are a small family of three related G 
protein–coupled receptors that participate in sweet 
and umami detection.
Receptors of the TIR family have a large N-terminal 
extracellular domain (Figure 29–14) that serves as the 
main ligand-binding domain, similar to the V2R recep-
tor of vomeronasal neurons. This domain recognizes 
many different sugars with low-affinity binding in the 
millimolar range. This ensures that only high sugar 
concentrations of nutritive value are detected. Chang-
ing a single amino acid in this domain in mice can alter 
an animal’s sensitivity to sweet compounds. Indeed, 
T1R3 was initially discovered by examining genes at 
the mouse saccharin preference (Sac) locus, a chro-
mosomal region that governs sensitivity to saccharin, 
sucrose, and other sweet compounds.
In mice, taste cells with T1R2 receptors are found 
mostly in palate, foliate, and circumvallate papillae; 
almost invariably, those cells also possess T1R3 recep-
tors (Figure 29–16A). Gene knockout experiments in 
mice indicate that the T1R2/T1R3 complex mediates 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 29 / Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses    699
Figure 29–15  Tastants recognized by T1R and T2R recep-
tors. A calcium-sensitive dye was used to test whether T1R 
and T2R receptors expressed in a tissue culture cell line could 
detect tastants.
A. Cells expressing both rat T1R2 and rat T1R3 responded to a 
number of sweet compounds. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Nelson et al. 2001.)
B. Cells expressing mouse T1R1 and mouse T1R3 responded 
to numerous l-amino acids (umami taste). Responses were 
potentiated by inosine monophosphate (IMP). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Nelson et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 
Springer Nature.)
C. Cells expressing different T2R receptors responded selec-
tively to different bitter compounds. Cells expressing mouse 
T2R5 responded most vigorously to cycloheximide (CYX), 
whereas cells expressing mouse T2R8 responded preferentially 
to denatonium (DEN) and 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil (PROP). (ATR, 
atropine; CON, control; PTC, phenyl thiocarbamide; SOA, 
sucrose octaacetate; STR, strychnine.) (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Chandrashekar et al. 2000.)
Cys
Ala
Gin
Ser
Met
Asn
Gly
Thr
Arg
Val
Asp
Glu
Lys
Pro
Leu
Phe
His
lle
D-Ala
L-AP4
A  T1R2 + T1R3 recognizes sweet tastants
B  T1R1 + T1R3 recognizes umami tastants
Control
Amino acids
Amino acids + IMP
Response
C  T2R receptors recognize bitter tastants   
CON
CYX
ATR
DEN
PTC
PROP
STR
SOA
T2R-8
T2R-5
GA-1
GA-2
Sucrose
Fructose
AceK
Dulcin
Saccharin
N-me-sac
Glucose
Maltose
Lactose
Galactose
Palatinose
Thaumatin
Cyclamate
Aspartame
Response
Response
Response
the detection of all sweet compounds except for high 
concentrations of sugars, which may also be detected 
by T1R3 alone.
Umami Taste Receptor
Umami is the name given to the savory taste of mon-
osodium glutamate, an amino acid widely used as a 
flavor enhancer. It is believed that the pleasurable 
sensation associated with umami taste encourages the 
ingestion of proteins and is thus evolutionarily impor-
tant for nutrition.
The receptor for umami taste is a complex of two 
T1R receptor subunits: T1R1, specific to the umami 
receptor, and T1R3, present in both sugar and umami 
receptors (Figure 29–14). In mice, the T1R1/T1R3 


===== Page 9 =====
700    Part IV / Perception
Figure 29–16  (Right) Expression of T1R and T2R receptors 
on the tongue. Sections of mouse or rat tongue were hybrid-
ized to probes that label T1R or T2R mRNAs to detect their 
sites of expression in taste cells.
A. The T1R3 receptor is expressed in taste cells of all three 
types of papillae. However, T1R1 is found mostly in fungiform 
papillae, whereas T1R2 is located predominantly in circumval-
late (and foliate) papillae. Overlap between sites of expression 
appears as yellow cells in the micrographs at the top. The T1R1-
T1R3 umami receptor is more frequently found in fungiform 
papillae, whereas the T1R2-T1R3 sweet receptor is more fre-
quently found in circumvallate and foliate papillae. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Nelson et al. 2001.)
B. A taste cell that detects bitter tastants can express several 
variants of T2R receptors. Here, probes for T2R3 and T2R7 
labeled the same taste cells in circumvallate papillae. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Adler et al. 2000.)
C. The T1R and T2R receptors are expressed in different taste 
cells. Taste cells labeled by a T1R3 probe or mixed T1R probes 
(green) did not overlap with cells labeled by a mixture of T2R 
probes (red). (Reproduced, with permission, from Nelson et al. 
2001.)
Circumvallate                                    
A
B
C
Fungiform
Circumvallate
Circumvallate
Foliate
T1R1
T2R7
T2R3
T1R2
T1R3
T1R1 T1R2 T1R3 T2R
T1R3 T2R
T1R3
complex can interact with all l-amino acids (Figure 
29–15B), but in humans it is preferentially activated 
by glutamate. Purine nucleotides, such as inosine 
5′-monophosphate (IMP), are often added to mono-
sodium glutamate to enhance its pleasurable umami 
taste. Interestingly, in vitro studies demonstrated that 
IMP potentiates the responsiveness of T1R1/T1R3 to 
l-amino acids, acting as a strong positive allosteric 
modulator of the receptor (Figure 29–15B).
Taste cells with both T1R1 and T1R3 are concen-
trated in fungiform papillae (Figure 29–16A). Studies 
in genetically engineered mice in which individual 
T1R genes have been deleted indicate that the T1R1/
T1R3 complex is solely responsible for umami taste, 
whereas T1R2/T1R3 is solely responsible for sweet 
taste. As expected, a genetic knockout of T1R1 selec-
tively abolishes umami taste, a knockout of T1R2 spe-
cifically abolishes sweet taste, while a knockout of 
T1R3 eliminates both sweet and umami taste (exactly 
as predicted, given that it is a common subunit of both 
the umami and sweet taste receptors).
Sweet and umami receptors differ significantly 
among different species. Most interestingly, different 
T1R subunits have been lost in some species, likely 
reflecting their evolutionary niche and diet. For exam-
ple, the giant panda, which feeds almost exclusively 
on a bamboo diet, lacks a functional umami receptor. 
On the other hand, domestic cats, tigers, and cheetahs 
do not have a functional sweet receptor, whereas vam-
pire bats that feed on a blood diet have mutations that 
have eliminated both sweet and umami functional 
receptors.
Bitter Taste Receptor
Bitter taste is thought to have evolved as an aversive 
signal of toxic molecules. Bitter taste sensation is elic-
ited by a variety of compounds, including caffeine, 
nicotine, alkaloids, and denatonium, the most bitter-
tasting chemical known (this compound is sometimes 
added to toxic products that are odorless and tasteless 
to prevent their ingestion).
Bitter tastants are detected by a family of 
approximately 30 G protein–coupled receptors called 


