===== Page 1 =====
1028    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–12  The hypothalamus controls the pituitary 
gland both directly and indirectly through neuroendocrine 
neurons. Neurons in the magnocellular neuroendocrine sys-
tem (blue) send their axons directly to the posterior pituitary 
(neurohypophysis) where they release the peptides vasopres-
sin and oxytocin into the general circulation. Neurons in the 
parvocellular neuroendocrine system (yellow) send their axons 
to the hypophysial portal system in the median eminence and 
pituitary stalk. Portal veins transport hypothalamic hormones 
(peptides and dopamine) to the anterior pituitary (adenohy-
pophysis) where they increase the release of hormones from 
five classic types of endocrine cells (Figure 41–11). The output 
of neuroendocrine neurons is regulated in large part by inputs 
from other regions of the brain. (Adapted from Reichlin 1978, 
and Gay 1972.)
Hypothalamus
Pituitary stalk
Inferior hypophysial
artery
Superior hypophysial
artery
Long portal
vessels
Short portal vessels
Median eminence
Adenohypophysis
(Anterior pituitary)
Neurohypophysis
(Posterior pituitary)
Endocrine Cells in the Anterior Pituitary Secrete 
Hormones in Response to Specific Factors Released 
by Hypothalamic Neurons
In the 1950s, Geoffrey Harris proposed that the ante-
rior pituitary, or adenohypophysis, is regulated indi-
rectly by the hypothalamus. He showed that the 
hypophysial portal veins, which carry blood from the 
hypothalamic median eminence to the anterior pitui-
tary, transport factors released from hypothalamic 
neurons that control anterior pituitary hormone 
secretion (Figure 41–12). In the 1970s, Andrew 
Schally, Roger Guillemin, and Wylie Vale determined 
the structure of a group of hypothalamic peptide hor-
mones that control pituitary hormone secretion from 
the five classic endocrine cell types in the anterior 
pituitary. These hormones, which are released into 
the median eminence by hypothalamic neurons, fall 
into two classes: releasing hormones and release-
inhibiting hormones. Only one anterior pituitary hor-
mone, prolactin, is under predominantly inhibitory 
control (mediated by dopamine).
The parvocellular neuroendocrine motor zone of 
the hypothalamus is centered along the wall of the 
third ventricle (Figure 41–2A) and contains neu-
rons that project to and release their hormones into 
the median eminence. The parvocellular neurons 
releasing gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) are 
atypical in that they are scattered in a continuum 
extending from the medial septum through to the 
mediobasal hypothalamus. They are controlled by 
upstream neurons that release kisspeptin. The remain-
ing parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons lie within 
the paraventricular and arcuate nuclei and the short 
periventricular region between them (Figures 41–2 
and 41–11).
Distinct pools of neurons in and around the para-
ventricular nucleus release corticotropin-releasing hor-
mone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), or 
somatostatin (or growth hormone release-inhibiting 
hormone) (Figure 41–11). The CRH neurons control 
the release of anterior pituitary adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH), which in turn controls the release 
of cortisol (glucocorticoids) from the adrenal cortex. 
Thus, this pool of CRH neurons is the “final com-
mon pathway” for all centrally mediated glucocorti-
coid stress hormonal responses. The arcuate nucleus 
contains two pools of parvocellular neuroendocrine 
neurons. One group releases growth hormone–releasing  
hormone (GHRH) and the other dopamine, which 
inhibits prolactin secretion. Some of the dopaminergic 
neurons are distributed dorsally as far as the paraven-
tricular nucleus.
The axons of all these parvocellular neuroendo-
crine neurons travel in the hypothalamo-hypophysial 
tract and end in the specialized proximal end of the 
pituitary stalk, the median eminence (Figure 41–12). 
There, in a region of capillary loops in the external 
zone of the median eminence, the axon terminals 
release the various hypophysiotropic factors. While 
the median eminence is within the brain, it is con-
sidered outside the blood–brain barrier. This is due 
to the fenestrated nature of the median eminence 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1029
Table 41–3  Hypothalamic Substances That Release or 
Inhibit the Release of Anterior Pituitary Hormones
Hypothalamic substance
Anterior pituitary hormone
Releasing:
 
Thyrotropin-releasing  
hormone (TRH)
Thyrotropin (TSH), prolactin 
(PRL)
Corticotropin-releasing  
hormone (CRH)
Adrenocorticotropin 
(ACTH), β-lipotropin
Gonadotropin-releasing  
hormone (GnRH)
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 
follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH)
Growth hormone–releasing 
hormone (GHRH or GRH)
Growth hormone (GH)
Inhibiting:
 
Prolactin release-inhibiting 
hormone (PIH), dopamine
Prolactin
Growth hormone release-
inhibiting hormone (GIH or 
GHRIH; somatostatin)
Growth hormone, 
thyrotropin
capillaries, which allow diffusion of the hypophysi-
otropic factors into the portal circulation. The median 
eminence capillary loops are the proximal end of the 
hypophysial portal system of veins that carry the fac-
tors to the anterior pituitary, where they act on cog-
nate receptors on the five types of endocrine cells 
(Figure 41–12 and Table 41–3).
Dedicated Hypothalamic Systems Control 
Specific Homeostatic Parameters
Body Temperature Is Controlled by Neurons in the 
Median Preoptic Nucleus
Body Temperature Reflects the Balance Between Heat 
Production and Loss
The body generates heat through all of its exothermic 
biochemical reactions and ion fluxes. These processes 
can be greatly increased above a baseline level, the rest-
ing metabolic rate, by exercise and shivering (both of 
which increase skeletal muscle heat production), by the 
digestion and assimilation of food (the so-called thermic 
effect of food), and by sympathetic stimulation of ther-
mogenic activity in brown adipose tissue (Box 41–1).
The body loses heat by radiation, convection, con-
duction (if immersed in cool water), and endothermic 
evaporation of either sweat from the skin or moisture 
from the respiratory tract (a process augmented in 
some species by panting). The defensive reaction to 
cold, in addition to producing heat, involves sympa-
thetically mediated cutaneous vasoconstriction and 
piloerection (goose bumps). By sending less blood to 
the skin, vasoconstriction conserves core temperature. 
Piloerection helps insulate the skin by creating a layer 
of motionless air near the skin’s surface. Conversely, 
defenses against overheating include inhibition of 
sympathetic pathways that activate cutaneous vasodi-
lation and brown adipose tissue. Voluntary behavioral 
responses like taking a swim or putting on a sweater 
play a particularly important role in thermoregulation. 
Brown adipose tissue is a remarkably specialized heat-
producing tissue that is especially abundant in newborns 
and small mammals, but is also found in adult humans. 
It has a rich blood supply for delivery of fuel and oxy-
gen and for removal of heat and is densely innervated 
by postganglionic sympathetic nerves. Brown adipo-
cytes, the producers of heat, are found in concentrated 
deposits in and around the core and also as isolated cells 
within larger white adipose tissue depots.
Sympathetic stimulation of β-adrenergic receptors 
activates uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1), a mitochon-
drial proton transport protein that is unique to brown 
adipocytes. When activated, UCP1 “leaks” protons across 
the mitochondrial inner membrane into the mitochon-
drial matrix, down the proton electrochemical gradient. 
This uncouples mitochondrial respiration from adenosine 
triphosphate (ADP) availability, greatly increasing fuel oxi-
dation and, importantly, the production of heat.
Exercise and shivering, on the other hand, increase 
heat production by using adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
to perform work. The resulting increase in ADP activates 
proton transport into mitochondria via ATP synthase, 
which then increases coupled mitochondrial respiration, 
fuel oxidation, and ultimately the production of heat.
Box 41–1  Brown Adipose Tissue, Bioenergetics, and Sympathetically Driven Thermogenesis


===== Page 3 =====
1030    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
They usually begin before the onset of physiologic 
responses. Like thirst/drinking and hunger/eating, 
activities generated in response to cold or hot chal-
lenges are motivated behaviors.
Body Temperature Is Detected at Multiple Sites
Core temperature is held relatively constant. At the 
shell, on the other hand, temperature fluctuates exten-
sively because the shell is adjacent to the external envi-
ronment, it has a high surface-to-mass ratio (in the 
case of limbs favoring heat loss over heat production), 
and thermal challenges dramatically affect its supply 
of warm blood (decreased when heat needs to be con-
served; increased when heat needs to be lost).
Most primary afferents that detect temperature 
have their cell bodies in the spinal dorsal root ganglia. 
Neurons that detect noxious temperatures are part of 
the pain pathway (Chapter 20). Their function is to 
limit local tissue damage by promoting withdrawal as 
opposed to regulating body temperature. Neurons that 
respond to innocuous temperatures are often called 
thermoreceptors. Some thermoreceptor neurons have 
their endings in the skin, just below the epidermis, and 
these respond to shell temperature. They are predomi-
nantly, but not entirely, cold-responsive. Other thermo-
receptor neurons have their endings in and around the 
large organs and respond to core temperature. They 
are also largely, but not entirely, cold-responsive. The  
fibers for the deep-tissue thermoreceptor neurons 
travel in the splanchnic nerves and, like the thermore-
ceptor neurons in the shell, have their cell bodies in the 
dorsal root ganglia. In addition, some also travel in the 
vagal afferent nerve. Finally, there are warm-sensing 
neurons in the hypothalamic medial preoptic area.
The molecular sensors utilized by thermorecep-
tor neurons for detecting changes in temperature are a 
subset of excitatory transient receptor potential (TRP) 
channels. Different TRP channels respond to different 
ranges of temperatures (Chapter 20). Recent studies 
have implicated specific TRP channel types in various 
forms of sensing innocuous temperature in the three 
sites mentioned above: TRMP8 channels mediate cold-
sensing by shell thermoreceptor neurons, and TRPM2 
channels mediate warm-sensing both by somatosen-
sory thermoreceptor neurons and by neurons in the 
hypothalamic preoptic area.
Multiple Thermoreceptor/Thermoeffector Loops  
Control Temperature
Involuntary thermal regulation is controlled by a 
multisensor, multieffector thermoregulatory system. 
Thermal information from the shell and the viscera 
ascends via primary afferents whose cell bodies are in 
the dorsal root ganglia. They project to second-order 
neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. These 
neurons project via the spinothalamic tract to the lat-
eral parabrachial nucleus where neurons relay cold-
sensing and warm-sensing information to neurons in 
the hypothalamic MnPO. Activation of the cold-sensing 
or warm-sensing afferent pathways induces appro-
priate physiological responses aimed at increasing or 
decreasing body temperature.
The neurons in the MnPO that indirectly respond 
to cold and warmth send efferent signals via relays 
through the medial preoptic area, dorsomedial hypo-
thalamus, and raphe pallidus in the ventral medulla, 
and from there on to the sympathetic preganglionic 
neurons in the intermediolateral nucleus of the spi-
nal cord. These latter neurons excite postganglionic 
sympathetic neurons that project to blood vessels, 
sweat glands, and arrector muscles of hair follicles 
to control cutaneous blood flow, sweating, and pilo-
erection, respectively, as well as to brown adipose 
tissue to control thermogenesis. In addition, cold 
causes shivering when gamma motor neurons in 
the ventral horn of the spinal cord are activated by 
excitatory neurons in the raphe pallidus (Chapter 32). 
The resultant contraction of intrafusal muscle fibers 
within muscle spindles activates IA afferents from the 
spindles to alpha motor neurons. This proprioceptive 
feedback increases activity of alpha motor neurons, as 
well as their propensity to undergo rhythmic bursts 
of activity, causing increased muscle tone and frank 
shivering.
The neural pathways controlling voluntary ther-
moregulatory behaviors involve the same thermo-
receptor pathways. Stimulation of warm-sensitive 
neurons in and around the MnPO evokes dramatic 
cold-seeking behavior, decreases heat production, and 
increases heat loss. The conscious perception of body 
temperature relies upon the same first-order thermo-
receptor neurons, but the afferent pathway diverges 
to activate second-order neurons in the dorsal horn, 
which project directly or indirectly to neurons in the 
ventromedial nucleus of the thalamus. These thalamic 
neurons project to the insular cortex.
From the above discussion, it is clear that there is 
neither a set point for body temperature nor a “thermo-
stat” that maintains it at 37°C. Instead, as mentioned 
earlier, an apparent set point for body temperature 
emerges as a settling point controlled by multiple sensory-
motor feedback loops containing thermoreceptors and 
thermoeffectors. It is a major achievement of evolution 
that this multicomponent afferent/efferent system is 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1031
so effective in keeping the temperature of the body 
core remarkably constant.
Dysregulation of Circuits Controlling Temperature  
Causes Fever
In the past, when the set point view of thermoregu-
lation was dominant, fever was thought to be caused 
by raising the body temperature set point—a view 
that still persists in major medical textbooks. Based on 
the advances described above, fever is now thought 
to arise through modulation of the afferent/efferent 
loops, particularly as they traverse the hypothalamic 
preoptic area. Prostaglandin E2, generated by the 
action of inflammatory cytokines on endothelial cells 
in the preoptic area, inhibits warm-activated GABAer-
gic neurons in the MnPO, thus disinhibiting the effec-
tor pathways that promote cutaneous vasoconstriction, 
brown adipose tissue thermogenesis, and shivering. 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as aspirin, 
ibuprofen, and acetaminophen, reduce fever by inhibit-
ing hypothalamic generation of prostaglandin E2.
Water Balance and the Related Thirst Drive Are 
Controlled by Neurons in the Vascular Organ of the 
Lamina Terminalis, Median Preoptic Nucleus, and 
Subfornical Organ
Changes in Blood Osmolarity Cause Cells to Shrink  
or Swell
Driven by osmosis, water moves freely across cell 
membranes. This has a number of important conse-
quences. First, because of its large size, the intracellular 
compartment contains two-thirds of the body’s water. 
Second, if blood osmolarity changes from its normal 
value (~290 mOsm/kg)—because water is gained by 
drinking or lost by renal excretion and by sweating, 
or because solutes have been added by eating (or by 
drinking, eg, sea water—1000 mOsm/kg)—water will 
move and the osmolarity of all compartments will 
equilibrate, including the intracellular one.
Because the intracellular content of osmotically 
active molecules is relatively fixed over the short term, 
increases in blood osmolarity cause cells to shrink, and 
conversely, decreases cause cells to swell. This is par-
ticularly dangerous for the brain because it is encased 
by the rigid skull. With extreme hyperosmolarity (too 
little water), the brain shrinks, pulling away from the 
skull and tearing blood vessels. With hypo-osmolarity 
(too much water), the brain swells, causing cerebral 
edema, seizures, and coma. To prevent such incidents, 
the brain acts to maintain normal osmolarity. It does 
this by detecting changes in osmolarity and then regu-
lating the motivation to drink (thirst) and the kidney’s 
capacity to excrete water.
Osmolarity Is Affected When Water Is Lost or Gained and 
When Food Is Ingested
Water is gained by drinking and, to a small degree, by 
the oxidation of fuel (fuel + O2 → CO2 + H2O). It is lost 
in a number of ways—by breathing (dry air in, humid-
ified air out), via the gastrointestinal tract (especially 
when diarrhea is present), by sweating, and by urina-
tion. Eating also increases blood osmolarity by moving 
water from the blood to the gut to aid digestion and 
by adding solutes to the bloodstream as food is broken 
down and absorbed.
Because of these effects, there are significant inter-
actions between neural systems that control hunger 
and thirst. For example, eating is such a significant 
osmotic challenge that dehydration and its associated 
hyperosmolarity strongly suppress hunger (dehydra-
tion-induced anorexia). Conversely, the act of eating 
itself, even in an individual with normal water content, 
rapidly stimulates thirst so as to mitigate the antici-
pated, eating-induced increase in osmolarity.
Vasopressin Released From the Posterior Pituitary Regulates 
Renal Water Excretion
The ability of the kidney to excrete water is tightly con-
trolled by vasopressin. When it is absent, humans can 
excrete up to approximately 900 mL/h of urine, and 
when it is at maximal levels, humans excrete as little as 
approximately 15 mL/h. Vasopressin decreases water 
excretion by increasing its reabsorption from urine by 
the kidney.
Osmolarity Is Detected by Osmoreceptor Neurons
The brain maintains water balance by monitoring sen-
sory input from osmoreceptors—sensory neurons that 
respond to osmolarity—which reflects the body’s state 
of hydration. Osmoreceptor neurons are found in the 
periphery and on neurons in and around the hypo-
thalamus. The central osmoreceptors monitor systemic 
osmolarity, while the peripheral osmoreceptors monitor 
osmolarity in and around the gut and related structures.
Peripheral Osmoreceptors Allow Changes in Systemic 
Osmolarity to Be Anticipated
Sensory information about peripheral osmolarity ena-
bles the brain to make preemptive changes in thirst 


===== Page 5 =====
1032    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 41–13  Neural and endocrine components combine 
to regulate fluid balance.  The circuitry is shown in a sagittal 
section through the rat brain. Information from baroreceptors in 
the circulatory system and from sensory receptors in the mouth, 
throat, and viscera is conveyed to the nucleus of the solitary tract 
and neighboring structures in the caudal brain stem through the 
glossopharyngeal (IX) and vagal (X) nerves. The hormone angio-
tensin II (ANG II) provides the brain with an additional signal con-
cerning low blood volume. Circulating angiotensin II is sensed by 
receptors in the subfornical organ (SFO); SFO neurons project 
to the median preoptic area (MnPO), paraventricular nucleus 
of the hypothalamus (PVH), supraoptic nucleus (SON), and the 
vascular organ of the lamina terminalis (OVLT). The osmolality 
of the blood is sensed by receptors in and near the OVLT that 
project to the MnPO, PVH, and SON. Neurosecretory cells in 
the PVH and SON nuclei trigger release of vasopressin from the 
posterior pituitary, thus decreasing water excretion by the kidney. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Swanson 2000.)
and vasopressin secretion that anticipate and miti-
gate future shifts in systemic osmolarity, such as the 
decrease that occurs with drinking or the increase that 
occurs with eating. Such regulation serves to prevent 
overshooting normal osmolarity, which would other-
wise occur when previously ingested water, which has 
not yet affected systemic osmolarity, is slowly absorbed 
from the gut. Indeed, when a dehydrated, hyperosmo-
lar individual ingests water, thirst and vasopressin 
secretion rapidly decrease, well before systemic osmo-
larity falls. The identity of peripheral osmoreceptors is 
unknown.
Central Osmoreceptors and the Afferent/Efferent Circuits 
Control Water Balance
Three nuclei in the lamina terminalis, which forms the 
anterior wall of the third ventricle, play a key role in 
detecting and in responding to disturbances in systemic 
osmolarity (Figure 41–13). From ventral to dorsal, they 
are the OVLT, the MnPO, and the SFO. The OVLT and 
SFO are circumventricular organs, and like the previ-
ously discussed median eminence, they lie outside the 
blood–brain barrier. Because of this, neurons in these 
SON
PVH
OVLT
SFO
Posterior
pituitary
+
–
+
Sensory signals 
from mouth, 
throat, and viscera
Hypothalamus
Blood
Osmolality
Blood volume
(ANG II)
MnPO
Vasopressin
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Cranial nerves
IX, X
two nuclei can rapidly detect changes in blood osmo-
larity as well as blood-borne circulating factors that are 
unable to cross the blood–brain barrier (an important 
example being angiotensin II).
Consistent with this arrangement, osmoreceptor 
neurons in the OVLT and SFO make extensive connec-
tions to neurons in the MnPO. While MnPO neurons 
themselves do not directly sense osmolarity, they are 
indirectly responsive to osmolarity via relays from the 
OVLT and SFO. While all neurons in the OVLT and 
SFO appear to be dedicated to the regulation of water 
balance, some neurons in the MnPO are involved in 
regulation of body temperature (as noted earlier), car-
diovascular function, and sleep. Regulation of water 
balance or body temperature is carried out by subsets 
of modality-specific neurons in the MnPO.
Neurons from all three lamina terminalis nuclei 
send dense excitatory projections to secretory vaso-
pressin neurons in the paraventricular hypothalamic 
nucleus (PVH) and supraoptic nucleus. As described 
below, these three lamina terminalis nuclei are also 
able to cause thirst.
Central osmoreceptors, and probably also periph-
eral osmoreceptors, detect changes in osmolarity by 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1033
responding to changes in cell volume. Shrinking or 
swelling, which increases or decreases, respectively, 
their cation permeability, causes increases or decreases 
in firing rate.
Decreased intravascular volume—for example, 
that due to acute blood loss—also potently stimulates 
thirst and vasopressin secretion. Low blood volume is 
detected by the kidney, which increases its secretion 
of renin. Renin is a protease that converts circulating 
angiotensinogen to angiotensin I (ANG I). ANG I is then 
further cleaved by angiotensin-converting enzyme in 
the lung, generating angiotensin II (ANG II). ANG II 
excites SFO neurons that directly, and also via a relay 
in the MnPO, drive vasopressin neurons and presump-
tive thirst neurons.
Thirst Is Controlled by Neurons in the OVLT, MnPO,  
and SFO
As with vasopressin secretion, all three lamina ter-
minalis structures participate in generating the moti-
vational state of thirst, the desire to seek and ingest 
water. Lesion of all three structures completely blocks 
dehydration- and ANG II–induced thirst, as well as 
secretion of vasopressin. Electrical stimulation of these 
structures, on the other hand, elicits drinking. Activa-
tion of excitatory glutamatergic neurons in the SFO 
and MnPO induces intense drinking in an otherwise 
water-satiated mouse within seconds.
Thus, excitatory neurons in the SFO and MnPO, 
and likely also in the OVLT, have a remarkable capac-
ity to induce thirst. Importantly, the behavior induced 
is specific—only water drinking occurs. Notably, the 
excitatory SFO neurons driving this behavior are the 
same subset of SFO neurons that are activated by 
dehydration and that express ANG II receptors. The 
downstream pathway by which these neurons stimu-
late thirst is presently unknown.
The activity of both the thirst neurons in the SFO 
and vasopressin neurons in the SON and PVH decreases 
or increases rapidly in response to sensory cues, such as 
drinking or eating, respectively, that anticipate future 
homeostatic disturbances. This rapid regulation occurs 
independent of any changes in systemic osmolarity 
and is therefore independent of feedback; hence, it is 
an example of feedforward control. The likely function 
of this feedforward regulation is to anticipate distur-
bances, institute preemptive corrective actions, and thus 
greatly reduce or eliminate their impact.
In summary, years of research have led to a clear 
model. Dehydration (water deficiency) increases the 
activity of neurons in the SFO and OVLT, and in the 
MnPO via relays from the SFO and OVLT, and this 
increase in activity enhances thirst and vasopressin 
secretion. As we shall see, a similar general system, 
but with different neural structures, controls caloric 
deficiency–based regulation of hunger and energy 
metabolism.
Energy Balance and the Related Hunger Drive Are 
Controlled by Neurons in the Arcuate Nucleus
As with temperature and water balance, energy bal-
ance is regulated by feedback signals from the body 
that modulate activity of key hypothalamic neurons, 
which then initiate adaptive changes in both physiol-
ogy and behavior. Regulation of energy balance dif-
fers, however, in important ways.
First, the feedback signals monitored are numerous 
and, in many cases, only very indirectly related to the 
key parameter, energy balance. Examples of this feed-
back include neural and hormonal signals from the gut, 
leptin from adipocytes, insulin from pancreatic beta 
cells, and metabolite levels in the blood. This is in strik-
ing contrast to the single, directly sensed signals moni-
tored for thermoregulation and water balance. Second, 
energy can be stored as fat. The amount of energy that 
can be accumulated is remarkably high, so high that 
the energy needs of a starving person can be met for 
more than a month. Heat and water, in contrast, are not 
stored. Thus, organisms have an “energy buffer” that 
allows survival during prolonged deficiency.
Third, since storage has benefits, regulation of 
energy balance, as opposed to temperature and water 
balance, is asymmetric in that low energy stores are 
defended against very aggressively, while high stores 
are defended against only very weakly—hence the 
high prevalence of obesity in societies with calorically 
dense, palatable food. Fourth, energy storage can be a 
liability—when excessive, it promotes diseases such as 
obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. Finally, in 
circuits regulating energy balance, neuropeptides play 
a remarkably important role.
Fat Is Stored When Intake of Energy Exceeds Expenditure
Consistent with the first law of thermodynamics, the 
calories that are stored as fat equal the number of calo-
ries ingested minus calories expended. While there is 
only one way to gain energy—by eating—there are 
many ways to expend energy.
Most energy is expended by biochemical reac-
tions that are required for basic life functions. As these 
processes are constantly in operation, such “obliga-
tory energy expenditure” is fixed and not regulated. 
Two other types of energy expenditure, however, 


===== Page 7 =====
1034    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
are dramatically different; one is voluntary physical 
activity, while the other is involuntary, resulting from 
sympathetic stimulation of brown adipose tissue and 
shivering. Sympathetically controlled energy expendi-
ture, often referred to as adaptive thermogenesis, is 
controlled by the brain. Its function is to respond to 
perturbations in temperature and in energy stores.
The Intake and Expenditure of Energy Are Usually Matched
For most individuals, body fat stores are relatively con-
stant over time. Thus, calories ingested roughly equal 
calories expended. A simple calculation demonstrates 
this point. An average middle-aged person expends 
3,392 kcal per day (kcal corresponds to the common 
term “calorie”). Over the course of a year, this typical 
person gains 350 g of fat (which equates to 9 kcal of 
fat per day). Thus, on average, 9 kcal extra must have 
been consumed per day to account for this gain. This 
is the amount of energy found in 4% of a typical candy 
bar or expended by walking about 150 meters. Thus, 
the mismatch between intake and expenditure (9 kcal) 
is tiny—only 0.27% of total energy expenditure.
Such close matching is the result of powerful 
homeostatic mechanisms that use feedback from the 
body to regulate intake and expenditure. As is true 
for regulation of temperature and osmolarity, the 
constancy of body weight, and the close matching 
between intake and expenditure, is unrelated to any 
specific “set point.” Instead, this remarkable control is 
the emergent settling point of multiple afferent/efferent 
feedback loops.
Obesity Is Caused by Genes and Recent Lifestyle Changes
Dysregulation of the above-mentioned afferent/efferent 
feedback loops results in obesity. While some cases of 
obesity are due to known mutations in genes required 
for homeostatic regulation, most are of undetermined 
cause. Of these, many are likely due to multiple muta-
tions, many of which are uncharacterized. Because the 
incidence of obesity in Western societies has increased 
greatly in recent years, too fast to be due to new muta-
tions, changes in diet and physical activity must also 
play an important role. Homeostatic systems that 
evolved to achieve energy balance in hunter-gatherers 
are likely overwhelmed by abundant, palatable, calori-
cally dense food.
But even in our modern obesogenic environment, 
there are still large variations in fat stores: Only 41% 
to 70% of interindividual variation in fat stores can 
be attributed to genetic factors. Thus, genetic predis-
position and environment together cause obesity. Of 
interest, many of the predisposing genetic loci identi-
fied to date involve genes that affect brain function.
Multiple Afferent Signals Control Appetite
The major afferent signals affecting energy balance can 
be divided into two major categories. (1) Short-term 
signals from cells that line the gastrointestinal tract 
report the status of food in the gut. All but one of these 
signals increase with eating and function to terminate 
meals; the exception is ghrelin, which increases with 
fasting and stimulates hunger. (2) Longer-term sig-
nals report the status of energy reserves (ie, fat stores). 
These include the pancreatic hormone insulin and the 
adipocyte hormone leptin, both of which are released 
in proportion to fat stores. Their levels, especially that 
of leptin, inform the brain whether fat stores are ade-
quate (Figure 41–14A).
Signals From the Gut Trigger Meal Termination.  During 
eating, as food enters the stomach and intestine, physi-
cal distention increases firing of stretch-sensitive vagal 
afferents. In addition, chemodetection of food by intes-
tinal endocrine cells stimulates secretion of hormones 
such as cholecystokinin (CCK), glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1), and peptide YY (PYY). These responses have 
three primary functions.
First, they cause contraction of the pyloric sphinc-
ter, a valve between the stomach and intestine. This 
limits further passage of food, preventing the small 
intestine from being overloaded. Second, the intestinal 
hormones stimulate secretion of bile and enzymes into 
the intestinal lumen to aid digestion. Third, the vagal 
afferents and the intestinal hormones decrease subse-
quent food intake, bringing about meal termination 
(satiation). The intestinal hormones accomplish this 
primarily by stimulating local vagal afferent terminals, 
which in turn excite neurons in the caudal region of 
the NTS.
Two of these hormones, GLP-1 and PYY, may also 
directly stimulate neurons in the brain. The activated 
neurons in the NTS project directly, or via a relay in 
the lateral parabrachial nucleus, to neurons in the 
forebrain, including the amygdala and hypothala-
mus. Neurons in the lateral parabrachial nucleus that 
express calcitonin gene-related polypeptide (CGRP) 
are one such important relay involved in satiation. 
These circuits then bring about meal termination.
When food is absorbed, the increase in blood 
glucose stimulates β-cells to release insulin and the 
hormone amylin. Amylin then excites neurons in the 
area postrema (a circumventricular organ outside 
the blood–brain barrier, located just above the NTS). 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 41 / The Hypothalamus: Autonomic, Hormonal, and Behavioral Control of Survival     1035
Circulating amylin increases within minutes following 
a meal, decreasing subsequent food intake.
Ghrelin is released by endocrine cells in the stom-
ach. Unlike the factors described above, its secretion 
is high before eating and falls during the meal. It may 
play a role in meal initiation. Indeed, ghrelin is the 
only known systemic factor that increases hunger and 
thus eating. It excites neurons in a number of sites, 
including agouti-related peptide neurons in the arcu-
ate nucleus (see below). The physiological significance 
of ghrelin is unclear because deletion of its gene does 
not appear to affect hunger.
Blood Glucose and Insulin Affect Appetite.  Glucose is 
sensed by neurons in the periphery, hindbrain, and 
hypothalamus. Although glucose sensing does not 
appear to play a role in the day-to-day regulation of 
energy balance, the detection of and response to danger-
ously low blood glucose levels (glucopenia) is an impor-
tant function of the brain. Two adaptive responses are 
initiated: (1) intense glucoprivic hunger, due at least 
in part to indirect activation of agouti-related peptide 
neurons, and (2) secretion of glucagon, epinephrine, 
and corticosteroids, which stimulate hepatic glucose 
production. The hormonal responses are caused by 
increases in sympathetic outflow as well as activation 
of the CRH pathway associated with stress (Chapter 
61). Amino acids also can be sensed and, consequently, 
regulate energy balance and dietary choice—the latter 
to ensure ingestion of sufficient quantity and quality 
of protein.
Insulin, on the other hand, is thought to signal an 
increase in fat stores. Insulin’s primary function is to 
control blood glucose, the stimulus for its secretion. 
Insulin lowers blood glucose by driving it into mus-
cle and fat cells and by decreasing its production by 
the liver. As fat stores increase, its ability to do this 
is decreased (a phenomenon called insulin resist-
ance). Thus, higher fat stores increase basal and meal-
stimulated insulin secretion in an effort to overcome 
resistance and normalize glucose. The fat store–mediated 
increase in insulin levels inhibits neurons in the hypo-
thalamus, especially the arcuate nucleus, which is 
thought to decrease hunger.
The Fat Cell Hormone Leptin Signals the Brain About Fat 
Stores and Affects Hunger and Energy Expenditure.  In 
1949, scientists at the Jackson Laboratory in Maine 
noted the appearance of “some very plump young 
mice.” This obesity was due to a genetic mutation, 
which they named obese (ob). Sixteen years later, they 
identified another obesity mutation, diabetes (db). The 
extreme obesity of ob/ob and db/db mice results from 
intense hyperphagia and reduced brown fat thermo-
genesis. Based on a series of parabiosis experiments, 
Douglas Coleman proposed that ob/ob mice lack a 
circulating satiety factor and that db/db mice lack its 
receptor.
In a tour-de-force positional cloning effort led by 
Jeffrey Friedman and Rudolph Leibel, the ob gene was 
localized on a small region on chromosome 6. Fried-
man and his lab then homed in on and identified the 
ob gene. Renamed the leptin gene, it encodes leptin, a 
167-amino acid protein secreted by adipocytes in pro-
portion to the size of fat stores. Treating ob/ob mice with 
leptin cures their obesity. The db gene was identified a 
few years later, and as predicted by Coleman, it turned 
out to encode leptin’s receptor and was found to be 
expressed by neurons in the hypothalamus. It is an 
interleukin-6–type class I cytokine receptor that pro-
duces its antiobesity effects by activating the JAK2/
STAT3 signaling pathway.
Much has been learned subsequently about leptin. 
First, humans with a genetic deficiency of leptin or its 
receptor, like the mutant mice, are massively obese; 
hence, leptin’s function is highly conserved, and such 
mutations are extremely rare. Second, humans with 
common forms of obesity have very high circulating 
levels of leptin, a by-product of their increased fat stores. 
This finding initially led to the view, later questioned, 
that “garden variety” obesity is caused by resistance 
to leptin action. Third, starvation, which reduces fat 
stores, drastically decreases leptin levels. This reduc-
tion is of interest because fasting causes many adaptive 
responses that are also seen in mice and humans that 
lack leptin: hunger, low energy expenditure, decreased 
fertility, and other altered neuroendocrine responses. 
Indeed, restoration of normal leptin levels in fasted 
individuals reverses or ameliorates many of fasting’s 
effects. Thus, leptin’s primary function is to signal, 
when its levels are low, that fat stores are inadequate.
These low leptin levels then bring about key adap-
tive responses such as increased hunger, decreased 
sympathetically mediated thermogenesis (to conserve 
limited fuel stores), decreased fertility (to prevent 
pregnancy when its demands cannot be met), and oth-
ers. According to this view, leptin’s dynamic range for 
signaling extends from the very low levels seen with 
fasting, signaling that fat stores are too low, to the lev-
els found in well-fed, nonobese individuals, signaling 
that fat stores are sufficient. Levels above this may 
produce some effect to restrain obesity, but this effect, 
if present, is remarkably weak. Thus, the defense of 
energy balance is asymmetric—strong against low 
stores, weak against high stores. A corollary of this is 
that obese individuals do not have leptin resistance; 


===== Page 9 =====
1036    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Liver
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Long-term signals
Pancreas
Fat
mass
Short-term signals
A  Maintenance of energy balance
B
Blood
Blood
Hypothalamus
B
Vagus
nerve
Cervical spine
SNS afferents
GLP-1
PYY
CCK
Ghrelin
Insulin
Leptin
Satiety
Hunger
AgRP
POMC
VGLUT2
Arcuate
nucleus
Hypothalamus
MC4R
GABA
AgRP
Glutamate
–
+
NPY
αMSH
Hunger
promoting
Satiety 
promoting
PVH satiety neuron
Lateral parabrachial nucleus


