===== Page 1 =====
1332    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 53–14  Threat learning produces correlated behavio-
ral and electrophysiological changes.
A. An animal ordinarily ignores a neutral tone. The tone produces 
a small synaptic response in the amygdala recorded by an extra-
cellular field electrode. This field excitatory postsynaptic potential 
(field EPSP) is generated by the small voltage drop between the 
recording electrode in the amygdala and a second electrode on 
the exterior of the brain as excitatory synaptic current enters the 
dendrites of a large population of amygdala neurons.
B. When the tone is presented immediately before a foot 
shock, the animal learns to associate the tone with the shock. 
As a result, the tone alone will elicit what the shock previously 
elicited: It causes the mouse to freeze, an instinctive defense 
response. After threat conditioning, the electrophysiological 
response in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala to the tone is 
greater than the response prior to conditioning. (Abbreviations: 
CS, conditioned stimulus; US, unconditioned stimulus.)  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Rogan et al. 2005.)
convergence of the tone (conditioned stimulus) and 
the shock (unconditioned stimulus) onto single neu-
rons in the lateral amygdala (Figure 53–14).
It is generally thought that behavioral learning 
depends on synaptic plasticity. In an effort to under-
stand how such plasticity might occur during learning 
in the lateral amygdala, researchers have studied long-
term potentiation (LTP), a cellular model of plasticity. 
We initially discussed LTP in connection with excita-
tory synapse function in Chapter 13 and will examine 
it in detail in Chapter 54 in connection with explicit 
memory and the hippocampus. In brain slices that 
include the lateral amygdala, LTP can be induced by 
high-frequency tetanic stimulation of either the direct 
or indirect sensory pathways, which produces a long-
lasting increase in the excitatory postsynaptic response 
to these inputs. This change results from a form of 
homosynaptic plasticity (Figure 53–15).
Long-term potentiation in the lateral nucleus of 
the amygdala is triggered by Ca2+ influx into the post-
synaptic neurons in response to strong synaptic activ-
ity. The Ca2+ entry is mediated by the opening of both 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate recep-
tors and L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels in the post-
synaptic cell. Because NMDA receptors are normally 
blocked by extracellular Mg2+, they require a large 
Behavioral testing 
Training
Fear response to tone
Shock
Tone
Tone
Electrophysiological testing 
(lateral nucleus of the amygdala)
Before 
conditioning
Tone
Field EPSP
Tone
After 
conditioning
Neutral response
Tone 
alone
Tone (CS)
paired with
shock (US)
A
B
20 µV
20 ms
synaptic input to generate enough postsynaptic depo-
larization to relieve this blockade (Chapter 13). L-type 
channels also require a strong depolarization to open. 
Thus, LTP is only generated in response to coincident 
synaptic activity. Calcium influx triggers a biochemical 
cascade that enhances synaptic transmission through 
both the insertion of additional α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-type glu-
tamate receptors in the postsynaptic membrane and 
an increase in transmitter release from the presynaptic 
terminals. As in Aplysia, monoamine neurotransmitters, 
such as norepinephrine and dopamine, released during 
tetanic stimulation provide a heterosynaptic modula-
tory signal that contributes to the induction of LTP.
Studies in awake behaving rodents indicate that 
similar mechanisms contribute to the acquisition of 
Pavlovian threat conditioning. This form of learning 
requires postsynaptic NMDA receptors and voltage-
gated calcium channels in the lateral amygdala, and 
it is enhanced by norepinephrine released in lateral 
amygdala from the locus ceruleus.
In addition, the size of the LTP elicited by elec-
trical stimulation in slices of the amygdala from ani-
mals previously trained is less than that found in 
slices from untrained animals. Because there is an 
upper limit to the amount by which synapses can be 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1333
Figure 53–15  Long-term potentiation at synapses in 
the amygdala may mediate threat conditioning.
A. A coronal brain slice from a mouse shows the posi-
tion of the amygdala. The enlargement shows three 
key input nuclei of the amygdala—lateral (LA), baso-
lateral (BL), and basomedial (BM)—which together 
form the basolateral complex. These nuclei project to 
the central nucleus, which projects to the hypothala-
mus and brain stem. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Maren 1999. Copyright © 1999 Elsevier.)
B. High-frequency tetanic stimulation of the direct 
or indirect pathway from the thalamus to the lateral 
nucleus initiates long-term potentiation (LTP). The 
drawing shows the position of the extracellular volt-
age recording electrode in the lateral nucleus, and 
the positions of two stimulating electrodes used to 
activate either the direct pathway or indirect pathway. 
The plot shows the amplitude of the extracellular field 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in response 
to stimulation of the indirect cortical pathway during 
the time course of the experiment. When a pathway is 
stimulated at a low frequency (once every 30 seconds), 
the field EPSP is stable. However, when five trains of 
high-frequency tetanic stimulation are applied  
(asterisks), the response is enhanced for a period of 
hours. The facilitation depends on protein kinase A 
(PKA) and is compromised when the PKA inhibitor 
KT5720 is applied (the bar). Field EPSPs before and 
after induction of LTP are also shown. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Huang and Kandel 1998; Huang,  
Martin, and Kandel 2000.)
B  LTP in the amygdala
A  Basolateral complex of the amygdala
Lateral
nucleus
Central
nucleus
LA
BL
BM
5 ms
After induction
of LTP
Before
induction
of LTP
Field
EPSPs
0.5 mV
Control
KT5270
Time (min)
Field EPSP amplitude
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
*****
40
60
80
100
140
120
160
180
Thalamus
Stimulate 
indirect pathway 
Stimulate 
direct pathway 
Indirect
Direct
Recording
Auditory  
cortex
PKA 
active 
PKA
inhibited
Amygdala
potentiated, this result is taken as evidence that threat 
conditioning recruits LTP, which precludes further 
LTP in response to electrical stimulation. Thus, artifi-
cially induced LTP and behaviorally induced LTP are 
closely related.
Two types of genetic experiments also strongly 
support the idea that an LTP-like phenomenon con-
tributes to the cellular mechanism for storing the 
memory of a learned threat. First, genetic disruption 
of the GluN2B (NR2B) subunit of the NMDA receptor 
interferes both with threat conditioning and the induc-
tion of LTP in pathways that transmit the conditioned 
stimulus signal to the lateral amygdala. Moreover, this 
mutation affects only learned threats; it does not affect 
responses to unconditioned threats or routine synap-
tic transmission. Conversely, overexpression of the 
GluN2B subunit facilitates learning. Similarly, disrup-
tion of CREB signaling, a step downstream from Ca2+ 
influx, interferes with conditioning, whereas enhance-
ment of CREB activity facilitates learning.


===== Page 3 =====
1334    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Does the LTP important for threat learning involve 
insertion of new AMPA receptors, as observed in brain 
slices? To address this question, researchers infected 
pyramidal neurons in the lateral nucleus with a geneti-
cally engineered virus that did not damage the neurons 
but caused them to express AMPA receptors tagged 
with a fluorescent label. Threat conditioning led to an 
increase in insertion of the tagged AMPA receptors 
into the cell membrane, similar to what is seen dur-
ing experimentally induced LTP in brain slices. When 
a different virus was used to express a C-terminal por-
tion of the AMPA receptor that competes with and 
prevents the insertion of endogenous AMPA receptors, 
memory for learned threat was substantially reduced, 
even though the virus infected only 10% to 20% of the 
neurons in the lateral nucleus. This surprising result 
suggests that LTP needs to be induced at nearly all acti-
vated synapses to effectively support threat learning.
One of the virtues of the Pavlovian paradigm is 
its amenability to experimental study due to the fact 
that specific stimuli are transmitted to the amygdala 
by known pathways. This has allowed experimenters 
to directly activate conditioned stimulus or uncondi-
tioned stimulus pathways, bypassing the normal sen-
sory input. Such studies have provided convincing 
evidence implicating these pathways to the amygdala 
in threat learning.
Based on these findings, researchers explored 
whether threat learning could be induced when they 
paired an auditory conditioned stimulus (tone) with 
direct depolarization of lateral amygdala neurons, 
instead of using an external, pain-eliciting uncondi-
tioned shock stimulus to produce the depolarization 
via the unconditioned stimulus pathway to the lateral 
amygdala. To accomplish this, they used an optoge-
netic approach (Chapter 5). They injected a virus into 
the amygdala to express channelrhodopsin-2, a light-
activated excitatory cation channel, in lateral amygdala 
neurons. Following pairing of the auditory stimulus 
with a light pulse that depolarized lateral amygdala 
cells, presentation of the tone alone elicited condi-
tioned freezing. The amount of freezing was greater 
when norepinephrine was present, which is further 
evidence that modulatory pathways also have a role 
in synaptic facilitation in this circuit. Thus, an aversive 
shock itself is not necessary to induce threat learning. 
Rather, it is the association of a stimulus with activa-
tion of the lateral amygdala that is key.
Other studies demonstrated the possibility of arti-
ficially manipulating the amygdala to impair as well 
as to instantiate, threat memory. They first trained ani-
mals to associate a foot shock with optogenetic stimu-
lation of auditory inputs to the amygdala. They then 
delivered a pattern of optogenetic stimulation that 
generated long-term depression (LTD) of the auditory 
input to the amygdala, a form of synaptic plasticity 
in which weak, repetitive stimulation decreases the 
strength of synaptic transmission. Induction of LTD 
was able to inactivate the memory of the shock. Then, 
using a pattern of optical stimulation that produced 
LTP of the same auditory input, they found that the 
memory of the shock could be reinstated. The find-
ings that inactivation and reactivation of a memory 
could be engineered using LTD and LTP strengthened 
the possible causal link between synaptic strength and 
behavioral memory storage.
The persistence of the synaptic changes underly-
ing the memory for a threat depend on gene expres-
sion and protein synthesis in the amygdala, much like 
long-term memory in Aplysia and Drosophila. Thus, 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase and MAPK activate 
the transcription factor CREB to initiate gene expres-
sion. The importance of CREB is underscored by the 
finding that different neurons in the lateral amygdala 
have varying levels of CREB expression prior to threat 
conditioning. Neurons that express a larger than aver-
age amount of CREB are selectively recruited during 
learning. Conversely, if neurons with a large resting 
level of CREB are selectively ablated after learning, 
memory is impaired.
While most of the work on the neural mechanisms 
of threat conditioning has involved the lateral nucleus 
of the amygdala, in recent years, evidence has accumu-
lated that plasticity in the central nucleus is also impor-
tant. The central nucleus receives direct and indirect 
inputs from the lateral nucleus and forms synaptic con-
nections with neurons in the periaqueductal gray region 
in the midbrain, which projects to the brain stem to con-
trol a number of defensive reactions, including freez-
ing behavior. Within a lateral cell group of the central 
nucleus, inhibitory cells called PKC delta neurons con-
trol the activity of the output neurons in the medial cell 
group that project to the periaqueductal gray.
Memory for threat conditioning in humans also 
involves the amygdala. Thus, in humans, damage to 
the amygdala impairs the implicit memory of threat 
conditioning but not the explicit memory of having 
been conditioned. Functional imaging studies have 
found that the amygdala is activated by threats even 
when the person is not aware of the presence of the 
threat because the stimulus was subliminal. Although 
human studies are limited in their ability to reveal neu-
robiological details, they demonstrate the relevance of 
the animal work for human psychopathology.
In summary, Pavlovian threat conditioning has 
emerged as one of the most useful experimental 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1335
Figure 53–16  Training expands 
representation of inputs from the 
fingers in the cortex.
A. A monkey was trained for  
1 hour per day to perform a task 
that required repeated use of the 
tips of fingers 2, 3, and occasionally 
4. After training, the portion of area 
3b of the somatosensory cortex rep-
resenting the tips of the stimulated 
fingers (dark color) is substantially 
greater than normal (measured 3 
months prior to training). (Adapted, 
with permission, from Jenkins et al. 
1990.)
B. 1. A human subject trained to do 
a rapid sequence of finger move-
ments will improve in accuracy and 
speed after 3 weeks of daily training 
(10–20 minutes each day). Func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging 
scans of the primary motor cortex 
(based on local blood oxygenation 
level–dependent signals) after  
training show that the region acti-
vated in trained subjects (orange 
region) is larger than the region 
activated in untrained (controls). The 
control subjects received no train-
ing and performed unlearned finger 
movements using the same hand as 
control subjects. The change in corti-
cal representation in trained  
subjects persisted for several 
months. (Reproduced, with  
permission, from Karni et al. 1998. 
Copyright © 1998 National Academy 
of Sciences.)
2. The size of the cortical represen-
tation of the fifth finger of the left 
hand is greater in string players than 
in nonmusicians. The graph plots 
the dipole strength obtained from 
magnetoencephalography, a meas-
ure of neural activity. The increase is 
most pronounced in musicians that 
began musical training before age 13. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from 
Elbert et al. 1995. Copyright © 1995 
AAAS.)
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
After training
Cortical 
representation 
of ﬁngers
Before training
1 mm
Control
Trained
B  Human training
0
5
10
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Age when musical training began (yr)
Dipole strength (nA • m)
15
20
A  Monkey training
Area 3b
1  Acquisition of a motor skill in adulthood
2  Cortical plasticity in childhood
Controls
String players


===== Page 5 =====
1336    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
models for studying associative learning and memory 
in the mammalian brain. In part, this is due to the fact 
that the behavioral paradigm has been applied suc-
cessfully across diverse species, from flies to humans, 
and thus builds upon the earlier progress that inverte-
brate models have made.
Learning-Induced Changes in the Structure  
of the Brain Contribute to the Biological Basis 
of Individuality
To what extent do the anatomical alterations in syn-
apses required for long-term memory storage alter the 
large-scale functional architecture of the mature brain? 
The answer is well illustrated by the fact that the maps 
of the body surface in the primary somatic sensory cor-
tex differ among individuals in a manner that reflects 
their use of specific sensory pathways. This remark-
able finding results from the expansion or retraction 
of the connections of sensory pathways in the cortex 
according to the specific experience of the individual 
(Chapter 49).
The reorganization of afferent inputs as a result of 
behavior is also evident at lower levels in the brain, 
specifically at the level of the dorsal column nuclei, 
which contain the first synapses of the somatic sensory 
system. Therefore, organizational changes probably 
occur throughout the somatic afferent pathway.
The process by which experience alters the maps 
of somatosensory inputs in the cortex is illustrated in 
an experiment in which adult monkeys were trained to 
use their middle three fingers at the expense of other 
fingers to obtain food. After several thousand trials of 
this behavior, the area of cortex devoted to the middle 
fingers expanded greatly (Figure 53–16A). Thus, prac-
tice may expand synaptic connections by strengthen-
ing the effectiveness of existing connections.
The normal development of somatosensory input 
to cortical neurons may depend on the level of activ-
ity in neighboring afferent axons. In one experiment 
using monkeys, the skin surfaces of two adjacent fin-
gers were surgically connected so that the connected 
fingers were always used together, thus ensuring that 
their afferent somatosensory axons were normally 
coactivated. As a result, the normally sharp disconti-
nuity between the zones in the somatosensory cortex 
that receive inputs from these digits was abolished. 
Thus, normal development of the boundaries of rep-
resentation of adjacent fingers in the cortex may be 
guided not only genetically but also through experi-
ence. Fine tuning of cortical connections may depend 
on associative mechanisms such as LTP, similar to the 
role of cooperative activity in shaping the develop-
ment of ocular dominance columns in the visual sys-
tem (Chapter 49).
This plasticity is evident in humans as well. People 
trained to perform a task with their fingers show an 
expansion in the fMRI signal in the primary motor 
cortex during performance of the task (Figure 53–16B). 
Thomas Elbert explored the hand representation in 
the motor cortex of string instrument players. These 
musicians use their left hand for fingering the strings, 
manipulating the fingers in a highly individuated way. 
By contrast, the right hand, used for bowing, is used 
almost like a fist. The representation of the right hand 
in the cortex of string instrument players is the same as 
that of nonmusicians. But the representation of the left 
hand is greater than in nonmusicians and substantially 
more prominent in players who started to play their 
instrument prior to age 13 years (Figure 53–16B).
Because each of us is brought up in a somewhat 
different environment, experiencing different com-
binations of stimuli and developing motor skills in 
different ways, each individual’s brain is uniquely 
modified. This distinctive modification of brain archi-
tecture, along with a unique genetic makeup, consti-
tutes a biological basis for individuality.
Highlights
1.	 Many aspects of personality are guided by implicit 
memory. A great deal of what we experience—
what we perceive, think, fantasize—is not directly 
controlled by conscious thought.
2.	 In mammals, both innate and learned defensive 
responses involve the amygdala. The amygdala-
based defense system quickly learns about new 
dangers. It can associate a new neutral (con-
ditioned) stimulus with a known threatening 
(unconditioned) stimulus on a single paired expo-
sure, and this learned association is often retained 
throughout life.
3.	 During Pavlovian conditioning, the strength of 
synaptic transmission is modified in the lateral 
amygdala by pairing the conditioned and uncon-
ditioned stimuli. As a result, electrophysiological 
responses of neurons in the lateral amygdala are 
enhanced and behavioral learning occurs.
4.	 Many of the molecular mechanisms underlying 
threat conditioning in invertebrates also contrib-
ute to conditioning in mammals.
5.	 Damage to the human amygdala impairs implicit 
threat conditioning but does not affect the explicit 
memory of having been conditioned.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1337
6.	 Habits are routines that are acquired gradually 
by repetition and are the result of a distinct form 
of implicit learning. As with all forms of implicit 
learning, habits are expressed in action alone, 
without conscious control, and independent of 
verbal reports.
7.	 As these arguments make clear, the empiri-
cal study of unconscious psychic processes was 
severely limited for many years by the lack of suit-
able experimental methods. Today, however, biol-
ogy has a wide range of empirical methods that 
are providing cellular and molecular insights that 
are expanding our understanding of a wide range 
of mental activities.
 Eric R. Kandel 
  Joseph LeDoux 
Selected Reading
Alberini CM, Kandel ER. 2016. The regulation of transcrip-
tion in memory consolidation. In: ER Kandel, Y Dudai, 
MR Mayford (eds). Learning and Memory, pp. 157–174. 
New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Bailey CH, Kandel ER, Harris KM. 2015. Structural compo-
nents of synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation. 
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7:a021758.
Busto GU, Cervantes-Sandoval I, Davis RL. 2010. Olfactory 
learning in Drosophila. Physiology (Bethesda) 25:338–346.
Duvarci S, Pare D. 2014. Amygdala microcircuits controlling 
learned fear. Neuron 82:966–980.
Fanselow MS, Zelikowsky M, Perusini J, Barrera VR, 
Hersman S. 2014. Isomorphisms between psychological 
processes and neural mechanisms: from stimulus elements 
to genetic markers of activity. Neurobiol Learn Mem 
108:5–13.
Hawkins RD, Kandel ER, Bailey CH. 2006. Molecular 
mechanisms of memory storage in Aplysia. Biol Bull 210: 
174–191.
LeDoux JE. 2014. Coming to terms with fear. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 111:2871–2878.
LeDoux J. 2015. Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and 
Treat Fear and Anxiety. New York: Viking.
LeDoux JE. 2019. The Deep History of Ourselves: The Four-
Billion Year History of How We Got Conscious Brains.  
New York: Viking.
Nader K. 2016. Reconsolidation and the dynamic nature 
of memory. In: ER Kandel, Y Dudai, MR Mayford (eds). 
Learning and Memory, pp. 245–260. New York: Cold Spring 
Harbor Laboratory Press.
Phelps EA. 2006. Emotion and cognition: insights from 
studies of the human amygdala. Annu Rev Psychol 57: 
27–53.
Tubon CT Jr, Yin JCP. 2008. CREB responsive transcription 
and memory formation. In: SM Dudek (ed). Transcrip-
tional Regulation by Neuronal Activity, Part III, pp. 377–397. 
New York: Springer.
References
Bailey CH, Chen MC. 1983. Morphological basis of long-
term habituation and sensitization in Aplysia. Science 
220:91–93.
Bailey CH, Kandel ER, Si K. 2004. The persistence of long-term 
memory: a molecular approach to self-sustaining changes 
in learning-induced synaptic growth. Neuron 44:49–57.
Bear MF, Connors BW, Paradiso MA. 2001. Neuroscience: 
Exploring the Brain, 2nd ed. Chicago: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins.
Casadio A, Martin KC, Giustetto M, et al. 1999. A transient, 
neuron-wide form of CREB-mediated long-term facilita-
tion can be stabilized at specific synapses by local protein 
synthesis. Cell 99:221–237.
Castellucci VF, Carew TJ, Kandel ER. 1978. Cellular analysis 
of long-term habituation of the gill-withdrawal reflex in 
Aplysia californica. Science 202:1306–1308.
Castellucci VF, Kandel ER. 1974. A quantal analysis of the 
synaptic depression underlying habituation of the gill-
withdrawal reflex in Aplysia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
71:5004–5008.
Claridge-Chang A, Roorda RD, Vrontou E, et al. 2009. Writ-
ing memories with light-addressable reinforcement cir-
cuitry. Cell 139:405–415.
Ehrlich DE, Josselyn SA. 2016. Plasticity-related genes in 
brain development and amygdala-dependent learning. 
Genes Brain Behav 15:125–143.
Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2001. From Conditioning to Conscious 
Recollection: Memory Systems of the Brain. Oxford: Oxford 
Univ. Press.
Elbert T, Pantev C, Wienbruch C, Rockstroh B, Taub E. 1995. 
Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the left 
hand in string players. Science 270:305–307.
Glanzman DL, Kandel ER, Schacher S. 1990. Target-dependent 
structural changes accompanying long-term synaptic 
facilitation in Aplysia neurons. Science 249:799–802.
Greco JA, Liberzon I. 2016. Neuroimaging of fear-associated 
learning. Neuropsychopharmacology 41:320–334.
Gründemann J, Lüthi A. 2015. Ensemble coding in amygdala 
circuits for associative learning. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
35:200–206.
Guan Z, Giustetto M, Lomvardas S, et al. 2002. Integration 
of long-term–memory-related synaptic plasticity involves 
bidirectional regulation of gene expression and chromatin 
structure. Cell 111:483–493.
Hawkins RD, Abrams TW, Carew TJ, Kandel ER. 1983. A 
cellular mechanism of classical conditioning in Aplysia: 
activity-dependent amplification of presynaptic facilita-
tion. Science 219:400–405.


===== Page 7 =====
1338    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Hegde AN, Inokuchi K, Pei W, et al. 1997. Ubiquitin C-terminal 
hydrolase is an immediate-early gene essential for long-
term facilitation in Aplysia. Cell 89:115–126.
Herry C, Johansen JP. 2014. Encoding of fear learning and 
memory in distributed neuronal circuits. Nat Neurosci 
17:1644–1654.
Huang YY, Kandel ER. 1998. Postsynaptic induction and 
PKA-dependent expression of LTP in the lateral amyg-
dala. Neuron 21:169–178.
Huang YY, Martin KC, Kandel ER. 2000. Both protein kinase 
A and mitogen-activated protein kinase are required in the 
amygdala for the macromolecular synthesis-dependent late 
phase of long-term potentiation. J Neurosci 20:6317–6325.
Janak PH, Tye KM. 2015. From circuits to behaviour in the 
amygdala. Nature 517:284–292.
Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM, Ochs MT, Allard T, Guic-Robles 
E. 1990. Functional reorganization of primary somatosen-
sory cortex in adult owl monkeys after behaviorally con-
trolled tactile stimulation. J Neurophysiol 63:82–104.
Johansen JP, Diaz-Mataix L, Hamanaka H, et al. 2014. Heb-
bian and neuromodulatory mechanisms interact to trigger 
associative memory formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111:E5584–E5592.
Kandel ER. 2001. The molecular biology of memory stor-
age: a dialogue between genes and synapses. Science 
294:1030–1038.
Kandel ER. 2006. In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New 
Science of Mind. New York: Norton.
Karni A, Meyer G, Rey-Hipolito C, et al. 1998. The acquisi-
tion of skilled motor performance: fast and slow experi-
ence-driven changes in primary motor cortex. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 95:861–868.
Keleman K, Krüttner S, Alenius M, Dickson BJ. 2007. Func-
tion of the Drosophila CPEB protein Orb2 in long-term 
courtship memory. Nat Neurosci 10:1587–1593.
Klein M, Kandel ER. 1980. Mechanism of calcium current 
modulation underlying presynaptic facilitation and 
behavioral sensitization in Aplysia. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 77:6912–6916.
Krabbe S, Gründemann J, Lüthi A. 2018. Amygdala inhibi-
tory circuits regulate associative fear conditioning. Biol 
Psychiatry 83:800–809.
Mahan AL, Ressler KJ. 2011. Fear conditioning, synaptic 
plasticity and the amygdala: implications for posttrau-
matic stress disorder. Trends Neurosci 35:24–35.
Maren S. 2017. Synapse-specific encoding of fear memory in 
the amygdala. Neuron 95:988–990.
Maren S. 1999. Long-term potentiation in the amygdala: a 
mechanism for emotional learning and memory. Trends 
Neurosci 22:561–567.
Martin KC, Casadio A, Zhu H, et al. 1997. Synapse-specific, long-
term facilitation of Aplysia sensory to motor synapses: a 
function for local protein synthesis in memory storage. 
Cell 91:927–938.
Nabavi S, Fox R, Proulx CD, Lin JY, Tsien RY, Malinow R. 
2014. Engineering a memory with LTD and LTP. Nature 
511:348–352.
Pape HC, Pare D. 2010. Plastic synaptic networks of the 
amygdala for the acquisition, expression, and extinction 
of conditioned fear. Physiol Rev 90:419–463.
Pavlov IP. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the 
Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. GV Anrep 
(transl). Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Pinsker H, Kupferman I, Castelucci V, Kandel ER. 1970. 
Habituation and dishabituation of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex in Aplysia. Science 167:1740–1742.
Rajasethupathy P, Antonov I, Sheridan R, et al. 2012. A role 
for neuronal piRNAs in the epigenetic control of memory-
related synaptic plasticity. Cell 149:693–707.
Rogan MT, Leon KS, Perez DL, Kandel ER. 2005. Distinct 
neural signatures for safety and danger in the amygdala 
and striatum of the mouse. Neuron 46:309–320.
Sears RM, Fink AE, Wigestrand MB, Farb CR, de Lecea L, 
LeDoux JE. 2013. Orexin/hypocretin system modulates 
amygdala-dependent treat learning trough the locus coer-
uleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:20260–20265.
Sears RM, Schiff HC, LeDoux JE. 2014. Molecular mecha-
nisms of threat learning in the lateral nucleus of the amyg-
dala. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 122:263–304.
Si K, Giustetto M, Etkin A, et al. 2003. A neuronal isoform 
of CPEB regulates local protein synthesis and stabilizes 
synapse-specific long-term facilitation in Aplysia. Cell 
115:893–904.
Si K, Lindquist S, Kandel ER. 2003. A neuronal isoform of the 
Aplysia CPEB has prion-like properties. Cell 115:879–891.
Spencer AW, Thompson RF, Nielson DR Jr. 1966. Response 
decrement of the flexion reflex in the acute spinal cat and 
transient restoration by strong stimuli. J Neurophysiol 
29:240–252.
Squire LR, Kandel ER. 2008. Memory: From Mind to Molecules, 
2nd ed. Greenwood Village: Roberts.
Yin JCP, Wallach JS, Del Vecchio M, et al. 1994. Induction of 
a dominant negative CREB transgene specifically blocks 
long-term memory in Drosophila. Cell 79:49–58.


===== Page 8 =====
54
The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis  
of Explicit Memory Storage
E
xplicit memory—the conscious recall of infor-
mation about people, places, objects, and events—
is what people commonly think of as memory. 
Sometimes called declarative memory, it binds our mental 
life together by allowing us to recall at will what we ate 
for breakfast, where we ate it, and with whom. It allows 
us to join what we did today with what we did yester-
day or the week or month before that.
Two structures in the mammalian brain are par-
ticularly critical for encoding and storing explicit 
memory: the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus 
(Chapter 52). The prefrontal cortex mediates work-
ing memory, which can be actively maintained for 
only very short periods and is then rapidly forgotten, 
such as a password that is remembered only until it is 
entered. Information in working memory can be stored 
elsewhere in the brain as long-term memory for peri-
ods ranging from days to weeks to years, and through-
out a lifetime. Although long-term storage of explicit 
memory requires the hippocampus, the ultimate stor-
age site for most declarative memory is thought to be 
the cerebral cortex.
In this chapter, we focus on the cellular, molecu-
lar, and network mechanisms of the hippocampus that 
underlie the long-term storage of explicit memory. 
Because the hippocampus receives its major input 
from a region of the cerebral cortex called the entorhi-
nal cortex, an area that processes many forms of sen-
sory input, we also consider how information from the 
entorhinal cortex is transformed by the hippocampus. 
In particular, we examine how neural activity in the 
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus contributes to 
Explicit Memory in Mammals Involves Synaptic Plasticity in 
the Hippocampus
Long-Term Potentiation at Distinct Hippocampal 
Pathways Is Essential for Explicit Memory Storage
Different Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms Contribute 
to the Forms of Expression of Long-Term Potentiation
Long-Term Potentiation Has Early and Late Phases
Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity Provides a More 
Natural Mechanism for Altering Synaptic Strength
Long-Term Potentiation in the Hippocampus Has 
Properties That Make It Useful as A Mechanism for 
Memory Storage
Spatial Memory Depends on Long-Term Potentiation
Explicit Memory Storage Also Depends on Long-Term 
Depression of Synaptic Transmission
Memory Is Stored in Cell Assemblies
Different Aspects of Explicit Memory Are Processed in 
Different Subregions of the Hippocampus
The Dentate Gyrus Is Important for Pattern Separation
The CA3 Region Is Important for Pattern Completion
The CA2 Region Encodes Social Memory
A Spatial Map of the External World Is Formed in the 
Hippocampus
Entorhinal Cortex Neurons Provide a Distinct 
Representation of Space
Place Cells Are Part of the Substrate for Spatial Memory
Disorders of Autobiographical Memory Result From 
Functional Perturbations in the Hippocampus
Highlights


===== Page 9 =====
1340    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
spatial memory by encoding a representation of an 
animal’s location in its environment.
Explicit Memory in Mammals Involves 
Synaptic Plasticity in the Hippocampus
Unlike working memory, which is thought to be main-
tained by ongoing neural activity in the prefrontal cor-
tex (Chapter 52), the long-term storage of information 
is thought to depend on long-lasting changes in the 
strength of connections among specific ensembles of 
neurons (neural assemblies) in the hippocampus that 
encode particular elements of memory.
The idea that memory storage involves long-lasting 
structural changes in the brain, first referred to as an 
“engram” by the German biologist Richard Semon in 
the early 20th century, dates back to the French philoso-
pher Rene Descartes. In an attempt to locate an engram, 
the American psychologist Karl Lashley examined the 
effects of lesions in different regions of the neocortex 
on the ability of a rat to learn to navigate a maze. Since 
the performance in the maze seemed to be directly pro-
portional to the size of the lesion, rather than its precise 
location, Lashley concluded that any memory trace 
must be distributed throughout the brain. Although it 
is now generally accepted that storage of an explicit 
memory is distributed throughout the neocortex, it is 
also clear that the process of storing memory requires 
the hippocampus, as demonstrated by the pioneering 
studies of Brenda Milner on patient H.M. (Chapter 52)  
and subsequent studies in animals with targeted 
lesions of the hippocampus. Thus, understanding how 
the brain stores explicit memory depends on an under-
standing of how the cortico-hippocampal circuit 
processes and stores information.
The nature of the basic mechanisms for memory 
storage was and remains the subject of much specu-
lation and debate among psychologists and neurosci-
entists. One influential theory was proposed by the 
Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb, who suggested 
in 1949 that memory-encoding neural assemblies may 
be generated when synaptic connections are strength-
ened based on experience. According to Hebb’s rule: 
“When an axon of cell A . . . excites cell B and repeat-
edly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth 
process or metabolic change takes place in one or both 
cells so that A’s efficiency as one of the cells firing B 
is increased.” The key element of Hebb’s rule is the 
requirement for coincidence of pre- and postsynaptic 
firing, and so the rule has sometimes been rephrased 
as “Cells that fire together, wire together.” A similar  
Hebbian coincidence principle is thought to be involved 
in fine-tuning synaptic connections during the late stages 
of development (Chapter 49). Hebb’s ideas were later 
refined by the theoretical neuroscientist David Marr, 
based on a consideration of the hippocampal circuit.
The hippocampus comprises a loop of connections 
that process multimodal sensory and spatial informa-
tion from the superficial layers of the nearby entorhi-
nal cortex. This information passes through multiple 
synapses before arriving at the hippocampal CA1 
region, the major output area of the hippocampus. The 
critical importance of CA1 neurons in learning and 
memory is seen in the profound memory loss exhib-
ited by patients with lesions in this region alone, an 
observation supported by numerous animal studies. 
Information from the entorhinal cortex reaches CA1 
neurons along two excitatory pathways, one direct and 
one indirect.
In the indirect pathway, the axons of neurons in 
layer II of the entorhinal cortex project through the  
perforant pathway to excite the granule cells of the den-
tate gyrus (an area considered part of the hippocampus). 
Next, the axons of the granule cells project in the mossy 
fiber pathway to excite the pyramidal cells in the CA3 
region of the hippocampus. Finally, axons of the CA3 
neurons project through the Schaffer collateral pathway to 
make excitatory synapses on more proximal regions of 
the dendrites of the CA1 pyramidal cells (Figure 54–1). 
(Because of its three successive excitatory synaptic con-
nections, the indirect pathway is often referred to as the 
trisynaptic pathway). Finally, CA1 pyramidal cells pro-
ject back to the deep layers of entorhinal cortex and for-
ward to the subiculum, another medial temporal lobe 
structure that connects the hippocampus with a wide 
diversity of brain regions.
In parallel with the indirect pathway, the entorhi-
nal cortex also projects directly to CA3 and CA1 hip-
pocampal regions. In the direct pathway to CA1, 
neurons in layer III of the entorhinal cortex send their 
axons through the perforant pathway to form excita-
tory synapses on the very distal regions of the api-
cal dendrites of CA1 neurons (such projections are 
also called the temporoammonic pathway). Interactions 
between direct and indirect inputs at each stage of the 
hippocampal circuit are likely important for memory 
storage or recall, although the precise nature of these 
interactions remains to be determined.
In addition to the above pathways that link differ-
ent stages of the hippocampal circuit, CA3 pyramidal 
neurons also make strong excitatory connections with 
one another. This self-excitation through recurrent col-
laterals is thought to contribute to associative aspects 
of memory storage and recall. Under pathological con-
ditions, such self-excitation can lead to seizures.


