===== Page 1 =====
828    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–6  Some neurons in the parietal cortex of the 
monkey have receptive fields that dynamically expand 
once a tool is grasped. (Adapted from Maravita and Iriki, 2004.
Copyright © 2003 Published by Elsevier Ltd.)
A. The orange area on the hand (left) indicates the somatosen-
sory receptive field for a neuron. The purple area (middle) 
indicates the neuron’s visual receptive field (vRF) region around 
the hand. The vRF is anchored to the hand and changes spatial 
location whenever the monkey moves its arm. The vRF expands 
when the monkey grasps a rake after it has learned how to use 
the rake to reach for objects in the workspace (right).
B. A single neuron that has a shoulder-centered bimodal 
somatosensory (orange) and visual (purple) receptive field is 
illustrated. The vRF for this neuron (middle) is larger than the 
one shown in part A, possibly reflecting the potential work-
space related to whole-arm function. The vRF also expands 
to incorporate the extended workspace permitted by use of a 
rake (right ).
A
B
Somatosensory
receptive ﬁeld
Somatosensory
receptive ﬁeld
Visual receptive ﬁeld before tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld before tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld after tool use
Visual receptive ﬁeld after tool use
state estimation will depend on the origin of its pre-
movement activity. If it is mainly generated within the 
parietal cortex itself, this will strongly implicate the 
parietal cortex in the planning of intended movements. 
In contrast, if it is primarily driven by an efference 
copy relayed from precentral motor areas, this would 
strongly implicate the parietal circuits in state estima-
tion, including predicting how the arm should move in 
response to the motor command.
Premotor Cortex Supports Motor Selection  
and Planning
As outlined at the beginning of this chapter, a decision 
to act in a particular way in a given situation is shaped 
by many factors, including sensory information about 
objects, events, and opportunities for action from the 
environment, body position and motion, internal moti-
vational states, prior experiences, reward preferences, 
and learned arbitrary rules and strategies linking 
sensory inputs to motor actions. There can be many 
reasons why you want to drink some coffee, and that 
desire can be fulfilled by actions ranging from simply 
reaching out to your full coffee cup to making coffee at 
home or going to a café.
Frontal premotor cortical regions just rostral to M1 
play an important role in early movement planning or 
task-selection processes. Many neurons in those areas, 
such as the PMd neurons shown in Figure 34–4, gen-
erate activity during instructed-delay tasks that reflect 
the motor intentions of the monkey and even the fac-
tors that influenced those action choices. The different 
premotor cortical regions are presumed to make dif-
ferent but overlapping contributions to motor selec-
tion and planning. For instance, the lateral premotor 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    829
cortex, including PMd and PMv, have traditionally 
been implicated in actions initiated and guided by 
external sensory inputs. In contrast, medial premotor 
areas, including SMA, pre-SMA, and CMA, have been 
implicated in the control of self-initiated movements 
as well as the suppression of actions. However, the dis-
tinction between their respective contributions is not 
absolute.
Medial Premotor Cortex Is Involved in the 
Contextual Control of Voluntary Actions
Clinton Woolsey’s pioneering electrical stimulation 
studies showed that, in addition to the motor map in 
M1, the medial wall of the frontal cortex contains an 
array of neurons that also regulate body movements. 
This medial motor map, now called the supplemen-
tary motor area (SMA), includes the entire contralat-
eral body but is coarser than the detailed map in 
M1, as described later. Strong stimulus currents are 
required to evoke movements, which are often com-
plex actions such as postural adjustments or stepping 
and climbing and can involve both sides of the body. 
Today, there is agreement that this region contains 
two areas that have distinct cytoarchitectonic charac-
teristics, axonal connections, and functional proper-
ties: a more caudal SMA proper and a more rostral 
presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA), which 
we will collectively call the supplementary motor  
cortex (SMC).
The SMC has been implicated in many aspects of 
voluntary behavior, although its contribution remains 
controversial. Several lines of evidence support a role 
in self-initiated behavior. In humans, electrical stimula-
tion of SMC below the threshold for movement initia-
tion can evoke an introspective sense of an urge to move 
that does not arise during M1 stimulation. Lesions of 
SMC produce problems initiating desired movements 
or suppressing undesirable movements (Box 34–2). 
Moreover, recordings of slow cortical potentials at the 
surface of the skull during the execution of self-paced 
movements show that the initial potential arises in the 
frontal cortex as much as 0.8 to 1.0 second before the 
onset of movement. This signal, named the readiness 
Lesions of the supplementary motor area (SMA) and 
presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) and the pre-
frontal areas connected with them produce deficits in 
the initiation and suppression of movements. Initiation 
deficits manifest themselves as loss of self-initiated arm 
movements, even though the patient can move when 
adequately prompted. This deficit can involve move-
ment of parts of the body (akinesia) contralateral to the 
region and speech (mutism).
Deficits in movement suppression, in contrast, 
include the inability to suppress behaviors that are 
socially inappropriate. These include compulsive grasping 
of an object when the hand touches it (forced grasping), 
irrepressible reaching and searching movements aimed 
at an object that has been presented visually (groping 
movements), and impulsive arm and hand movements to 
grab nearby objects and even people without conscious 
awareness of the intention to do so (alien-hand or anar-
chic-hand syndrome).
Another striking syndrome is utilization behavior, 
in which a patient compulsively grabs and uses objects 
without consideration of need or the social context. 
Examples are picking up and putting on multiple pairs 
of glasses or reaching for and eating food when the 
patient is not hungry or when the food is clearly part of 
someone else’s meal.
These deficits in the initiation and suppression 
of actions may represent opposite facets of the same 
functional role for SMA and especially pre-SMA in the 
conditional or context-dependent control of voluntary 
behavior.
Lesions affecting premotor cortex also lead to 
impairments in the selection of motor actions. For exam-
ple, when a normal monkey sees a tasty food treat behind 
a small transparent barrier, it readily reaches around the 
barrier to grasp it. However, after a large premotor cortex 
lesion, the monkey may persistently try to reach directly 
toward the treat and so repeatedly strikes the barrier with 
its hand, rather than making a detour around the barrier.
More focal lesions or inactivation of the ventral pre-
motor cortex perturbs the ability to use visual informa-
tion about an object to shape the hand appropriately for 
the object’s size, shape, and orientation before grasping it. 
Focal lesions of the dorsal premotor cortex affect the abil-
ity to learn and recall arbitrary sensorimotor mappings 
or conditional stimulus–response associations, whereas 
supplementary motor cortex lesions impede the ability to 
learn and recall temporal sequences of movement.
Box 34–2  Lesions of Premotor Cortex Lead to Impairments in the Selection, Initiation, and 
Suppression of Voluntary Behavior


===== Page 3 =====
830    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–7  Some neurons in the supplementary motor 
complex of monkeys encode a specific sequence of motor 
acts.  (Adapted, with permission, from Tanji 2001. Copyright © 
2001 by Annual Reviews.)
A. A neuron discharges selectively during the waiting period 
before the first movement of the memorized sequence push-
turn-pull (left). When the sequence is push-pull-turn (right), the 
cell remains relatively silent, even though the first movement in 
both sequences is the same (push). Triangles at the top of each 
raster plot indicate the start of the push movement.
B. Records of a neuron whose activity increases selectively 
during the interval between completion of one motor act, a 
pull, and the initiation of another act, a push. The cell is not 
active when a push is the first movement in the sequence or 
when pull is followed by turn.
A
Push
Turn
Pull
Push
Turn
Pull
Pull
Push
Turn
Pull
Push
Turn
B
1 s
1 s
potential, has its peak in the cortex centered in SMC. 
Because it occurs well before movement, the readiness 
potential has been widely interpreted as evidence that 
neural activity in this region is involved in forming the 
intention to move, not just in executing movement.
Neurons in both SMA and pre-SMA discharge 
before and during voluntary movements. Unlike M1 
neurons, the activity of most SMA neurons is less 
tightly coupled to particular actions of a body part 
and appears instead to be associated with more com-
plex, coordinated motor acts of the hand, arm, head, 
or trunk. Compared to SMA neurons, pre-SMA neu-
rons often begin to discharge much earlier in advance 
of movement onset and are less tightly coupled to the 
execution of movements.
The SMC has been implicated in the so-called 
executive control of behavior, such as operations 
required to switch between different actions, plans, 
and strategies. For example, in monkeys, some SMC 
neurons discharge strongly when a subject is presented 
with a cue instructing it to change movement targets 
or to suppress a previously intended movement. The 
SMC may therefore contain a system that can override 
motor plans when they are no longer appropriate.
The SMC has also been implicated in the organi-
zation and execution of movement sequences. Some 
SMC neurons discharge before the start of a particu-
lar sequence of three movements but not before a dif-
ferent sequence of the same three movements (Figure 
34–7). Other neurons discharge only when a particular 
movement occurs in a specific position in a sequence 
or when a particular pair of consecutive movements 
occurs regardless of their position in the sequence. 
In contrast, some other SMC neurons discharge only 
when the monkey makes the movement that occurs 
in a particular ordinal position of a sequence (eg, only 
the third) irrespective of its nature or how many move-
ments remain to be executed in the sequence.
These seemingly disparate functions may reflect a 
more general role of the SMC in contextual control of vol-
untary behavior. Contextual control involves selecting 
and executing those actions deemed appropriate on the 
basis of different combinations of internal and external 
cues as well as withholding inappropriate actions in 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    831
a specific environmental or social context. It also can 
involve organizing the sequence of actions required to 
achieve a particular goal. Contextual control likely also 
involves contributions from other neural circuits such 
as regions of the prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia.
The cingulate motor areas (CMA) may also contrib-
ute to the contextual control of behavior. CMA appears 
to be involved in selecting alternate actions follow-
ing motor errors or in response to changing reward 
contingencies. For example, monkeys were trained to 
push or turn a handle in response to a noninstructive 
trigger signal. Initially, the monkeys received a large 
reward if they made the same movement (pushing or 
turning the handle) in sequential trials. After several 
trials, the reward size began to decrease. If the mon-
keys then switched to the other movement, the reward 
size returned to maximum once that movement was 
repeated for several trials. The best strategy for the 
monkeys, therefore, was to switch between repetitions 
of either pushing or turning the handle as soon as they 
detected a reduction in reward size.
In this task, some neurons in the rostral CMA 
responded during the interval between the reception of 
reward and the start of the next trial. On trials with a 
reduced reward, task-related activity in these neurons 
did not change when the monkeys made the same move-
ment in the next trial; their activity only changed when 
the monkeys switched to the other movement in the next 
trial. Importantly, those same neurons did not show the 
same response change when a visual cue instructed the 
monkeys to change movements in the next trial. This 
suggests that these rostral CMA neurons were preferen-
tially involved in the voluntary decision to switch and 
move to the alternate goal based on action outcomes 
(reward size), but not by visual instructions to switch.
Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning 
Sensory-Guided Movement of the Arm
Some of the first neural evidence that the lateral premo-
tor cortex, including PMd and PMv, plays a crucial role 
in the selection and planning of sensory-guided motor 
actions came from recording studies by Ed Evarts, Steven 
Wise, and colleagues in the 1980s. These studies showed 
that many premotor neurons emitted brief short-latency 
discharge bursts in response to instructional cues that 
signaled specific movements, or sustained activity dur-
ing the instructed-delay period between the appearance 
of the instructional cue and a second cue that permitted 
the instructed movement (Figure 34–4).
This activity reflects information about the 
intended act, including the spatial location of the 
target, the direction of arm movement, and other 
movement attributes. Importantly, PMd delay-period 
activity can reflect the intention to reach to a particular 
location with either the contralateral or ipsilateral arm, 
even though the biomechanical details of the two arm 
movements are very different. This suggests that PMd 
activity can signal the intention to generate a motor act 
independent of the effector used to generate the action, 
in an extrinsic spatial coordinate framework consistent 
with a prediction of the sensorimotor coordinate trans-
formation model of motor planning. Imaging studies 
have likewise found evidence for an extrinsic spatial 
representation of finger-tapping sequences made with 
either hand in human premotor cortex.
Selection of an appropriate action from among 
multiple alternatives is a critical aspect of voluntary 
control. Delay-period activity in PMd can reflect that 
process. For example, in one experiment, recordings 
were made from PMd neurons in monkeys during a 
task in which the animals first received two colored 
spatial cues that identified two potential targets for 
reaching in opposite directions. After a memorized-delay 
period, a new centrally-located color cue informed the 
monkeys which of the spatial cues was the correct 
target. Following the first instruction, neural activ-
ity in PMd signaled both potential-reaching move-
ments, but immediately after the second instruction, 
activity in PMd signaled only the monkeys’ reach-
ing choice (Figure 34–8A). This showed that PMd 
can prepare multiple potential motor actions prior 
to the final decision about which action to take. Sub-
sequent studies suggest that this might be limited to 
no more than three to four simultaneous potential 
actions. Reach-related neurons in parietal area PRR 
also contribute to the preparation for two poten-
tial motor actions before the final action decision is 
made (Figure 34–8B), revealing how this process is 
distributed across multiple arm movement–related 
cortical neural populations.
PMd neurons can also signal a deliberate deci-
sion not to move. Many PMd neurons generate direc-
tionally tuned activity during an instructed-delay 
period when a colored visual cue at a target location 
instructs a monkey to reach to the target, but decrease 
their activity when a different colored cue at the same 
location instructs the monkey to refrain from reach-
ing to it. This differential activity is an unequivocal 
signal, seconds before the action is executed, about 
the monkey’s intention to reach in a particular direc-
tion or not to move in response to an instructional cue 
(Figure 34–9). Interestingly, many neurons in the parietal 
area PE/MIP studied in the same task continue to 
generate directionally tuned activity during the delay 
period even after the instructional cue to withhold 


===== Page 5 =====
832    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–8  Activity of reach-related cortical neurons in 
monkeys during a target selection task reflects potential 
movements to different targets as well as the chosen  
direction of reach.
A. The three-dimensional colored surface depicts the mean 
level of activity of a population of dorsal premotor cortex 
(PMd) neurons with respect to baseline in a task in which a 
monkey must choose one of two color-coded reach targets 
in each trial. Cells are sorted along one axis (labeled “cells”) 
based on their preferred movement direction (neurons 
located at the red and blue circles prefer movements at 
45° and 215°, respectively). Diagrams beside the neural 
response profile display the stimuli presented to the mon-
key at different times during the trial. Red and blue cues 
provide information about potential actions; green cues 
guide the monkeys through different stages of each trial but 
provide no information about what reach to make. Shortly 
after the start of each trial, two potential reach targets (blue 
and red spatial cues) appear in opposite locations relative to 
the starting position of the arm (green circle) for 500 ms and 
then disappear. After a memorized delay period, the color 
of the starting circle changes to either red or blue (color 
cue), indicating to the monkey which is the correct target, 
in this case at 45°. After a further delay period, the go signal 
(green circles at all eight possible target locations) instructs 
the monkey to begin reaching to its chosen target. During 
the period of target uncertainty between the appearance of 
the two spatial cues and the central color cue, PMd neurons 
that prefer the two potential reach movements (red and 
blue circles) are simultaneously activated, whereas neurons 
that prefer other movements are inactive or suppressed, so 
that the entire PMd population encodes the two potential 
reach actions. As soon as the color cue appears to identify 
the correct target, the PMd neural activity changes rapidly 
to signal the reach movement chosen by the monkey. Had 
the color cue designated the target at 215°, the neurons 
preferring that target (blue circle) would increase their activ-
ity, and the neurons preferring the target at 45° (red circle) 
would decrease their activity (not shown). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Cisek and Kalaska 2010. Copyright © 
2010 by Annual Reviews.)
B. In a second study of neural activity in the parietal reach 
region (PRR), the format of data is the same as in part A. In 
this study, the monkey is presented with a single spatial cue 
that instructs it to prepare to reach either to the cue’s loca-
tion (PD) or in the opposite direction (OD). After a random 
memorized delay period, a color cue specifies whether the 
reach should be to the remembered location of the spatial 
cue (green; PD) or in the OD (blue). PRR neural activity is 
sorted according to the preferred movement direction of 
each neuron, as in part A. Population activity initially speci-
fies the spatial cue location but then reflects both potential 
movement directions during the remainder of the memo-
rized delay period. Shortly after the color cue appears, the 
activity quickly shifts to reflect the chosen reach direction, 
either the PD or OD. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Klaes et al. 2011. Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc.)
PMd
PRR
B
A
A
B
500 ms
100 ms
Spatial
cues
Color
cue
Go
signal
Go
Activity
Cells
Cue
position
Activity
Time
Move
Time
Time
Move
Time
OD
PD
OD
PD
OD
PD
0
–10
+10
Activity
1.0
3.5
Memory
period
Memory
period
Spatial
cue


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    833
Figure 34–9  Decisions about response choices are evident 
in the activity of premotor cortex neurons in the mon-
key. (Reproduced, with permission, from Crammond and 
Kalaska 2000.)
A. In a reaction-time task (reaching), a cell exhibits gradually 
increasing tonic firing while waiting for the appearance of a 
target. When the target appears (go cue), the cell generates a 
directionally tuned response.
B. In an instructed-delay task, when a monkey is shown the 
target and instructed to move once the go cue appears, the cell 
generates a strong directionally tuned signal for the duration of 
the delay period before the go cue (top). When the monkey is 
shown the target and instructed not to move when the go cue 
appears, the cell’s activity decreases (bottom).
reaching, suggesting that the parietal cortex retains a 
representation of potential actions that ultimately are 
not executed.
Many neurons in premotor cortex also discharge 
during movement execution. Given this close proxim-
ity of planning- and execution-related activity, even at 
the level of individual neurons, a major question is why 
planning-related neural activity does not immediately 
initiate a movement. What prevents the movement 
from being executed prematurely? It does not appear 
that planning-related activity simply fails to exceed a 
minimum threshold required to initiate the movement 
or that there is a separate overt braking mechanism that 
must be released to allow the movement to begin.
A different way to interpret neural processing 
during the planning and execution of reaching that 
might provide answers to such questions comes from 
a dynamical-systems perspective. The idea is that corti-
cal motor circuits form a dynamical system whose dis-
tributed activity patterns evolve in time as a function 
of their initial state, input signals, and stochastic neural 
response variability (“noise”). Activity patterns during 
different stages of planning and execution thus reflect 
different states of the network, including a specific state 
during the delay period that can prepare the movement 
but not activate muscles (Figure 34–10). The overall 
similarity of the population-level activity patterns dur-
ing repetitions of the same movement shows that 
the entire population undergoes a coordinated pattern 
of co-modulation of activity during the planning and 
execution of the movement, determined by the synaptic 
connectivity within the neural circuit.
Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Applying 
Rules (Associations) That Govern Behavior
Behavior is often guided by arbitrary rules that link 
specific symbolic cues to particular actions. When 
driving your car, you must perform different actions 
depending on whether a traffic light is green, amber, 
or red. In monkeys that have learned to associate arbi-
trary cues with specific movements, many cells in pre-
motor areas respond selectively to specific cues. For 
instance, in order to select the correct target in the two-
target study in Figure 34–8, the monkeys had to apply 
a rule that mapped color to target location provided by 
the two sequential instructional cues.
The PMd is implicated in the acquisition of new 
movement-related associations or rules. In one experi-
ment, recordings from PMd neurons were made while 
the monkeys learned the association between four 
unfamiliar visual cues and four different movement 
A  Reaction-time task
B  Instructed-delay task
Target and 
go cue
Go
cue
“Go”
cue
Target and 
intention cue
Target and 
intention cue
Movement intended
No movement intended


===== Page 7 =====
834    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–10  The time-varying neural activity in the dorsal 
premotor cortex of monkeys during different stages of the 
planning and execution of a movement can be viewed as 
transitions between different activation states. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Churchland MM et al. 2010. Stimulus 
onset quenches neural variability: a widespread cortical phe-
nomenon. Nat Neurosci 13:369-378. Copyright © Springer 
Nature.)
A. A schematic illustration of how the simultaneous activity of 
neurons can be viewed as a trajectory through a multi-neuron 
activity “state space.” The time-varying activity level of three 
simultaneously recorded neurons is represented along three 
axes, which defines a three-neuron state space. A specific plan 
(reach left or reach right) requires different combinations of pre-
paratory firing rates for the three neurons (gray zones). Prior to 
the formation of the intention to move left or right, the baseline 
activity of the three neurons occupies a region in state space that 
is associated with holding the arm in its current position (open 
circles, for two different trials). When an instruction appears to 
make a reach to the right, the combined activity of the three 
neurons changes in a coordinated fashion, creating time-varying 
“neural trajectories” (gray arrows) that converge on the region of 
state space that is associated with generating a rightward move-
ment (filled circles within the “right reach” gray zone).
B. Projection of the simultaneous activity of a large popula-
tion of dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) neurons onto a two-
dimensional state space shortly before (pre-target) and after 
(post-target) the appearance of a reach target cue in a task in 
which the reach movement must be delayed until a subsequent 
go cue is presented. Gray lines show the temporal evolution 
of the neural trajectories during the earliest part of movement 
preparation from 200 ms before target cue until the speci-
fied pre- or post-target time (black dots) in 15 different trials 
to the same target location. Neural activity initially meanders 
randomly within the region of state space associated with the 
starting posture of the arm (left). It then begins to converge 
onto a smaller region of the state space shortly after the reach 
target instruction appears (center) and begins to evolve along 
the neural trajectory associated with entering the preparatory 
state for the reach (right).
C. A more complete illustration of the neural trajectories 
recorded during 18 different repeated trials to the same tar-
get in this delayed reaching task from the initial pre-target 
postural state to the onset of movement. Blue dots indi-
cate activity while holding the arm in the starting posture 
100 ms before appearance of the target instruction onset. 
Once the target instruction appears, the neural trajectories 
evolve toward a region of state space associated with the 
preparatory activity state during the delay period (green 
zone), where it dwells until a go cue appears that allows 
the monkey to initiate the withheld movement (green dots). 
While in this reach-preparatory part of the state space during 
the delay period, the arm stays at the start position because 
PMd activity in that part of state space is not capable of 
activating muscles (ie, it is “output-null”). When the go cue 
appears, the neural trajectories unfold toward a different 
region of state space associated with the initiation of the 
intended reach movement (gray zone and black dots). The 
neural activity can only cause the muscle activity for the 
intended movement when it enters this “output-potent” 
zone of state space. The trial-to-trial variability of the neural 
trajectories can account for intertrial variability in move-
ment kinematics and reaction times. One outlier trial (red) 
had a long reaction time and followed a more complex and 
time-consuming neural trajectory from the green to the gray 
zone. The output-null preparatory (green) and output-potent 
movement-initiation (gray) zones for reaches to different target 
locations occupy different regions of the total population state 
space distinct from those associated with this reach target.
D. Data are for the same target location as in part C but were 
recorded on a different day. The neural trajectory structure 
is fundamentally similar for the same movements between 
recording sessions. Differences in the overall pattern of activ-
ity can be explained by interday differences in the activity of 
individual neurons and differences in the composition of the 
recorded neural population between sessions.
A
B
C
D
Neuron 3
Neuron 2
Neuron 1
Trial 1
Trial 2
100 ms pre-target
Pre-target
Go cue
Movement
onset
100 ms post-target
200 ms post-target
Right
reach
Left
reach
ﬁring rate


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    835
directions. Although the monkeys’ choices were ini-
tially random, they learned the rules within a few dozen 
trials. The monkeys made an arm movement in response 
to each cue; during the early “guessing” phase of learn-
ing, the activity of many PMd neurons was weak but 
gradually increased in strength and directional tun-
ing as the monkeys learned which cue signaled which 
movement. Other neurons showed a reciprocal decline 
in activity as the rules were acquired. These changes in 
activity during learning reflected both the movement 
choices and the rising level of knowledge of the rules 
linking cues with actions.
The nature of the rule can also have a strong 
effect on neural responses. In monkeys that have been 
trained to choose between several possible move-
ments based on a spatial rule (a visual cue’s loca-
tion) or a semantic rule (a cue’s arbitrarily designated 
meaning independent of its location), many prefron-
tal and PMd neurons are preferentially active when 
the animal chooses a movement using one rule but 
not the other. This shows that the neural activity is 
related not just to a particular cue or action but also to 
the association between them.
Premotor areas are involved in the implementa-
tion of even abstract rules. For example, monkeys 
were trained in a task that required two decisions, 
one perceptual and the other behavioral, that had no 
prior association. In each trial, the monkeys first had 
to decide whether two sequentially presented visual 
images were the same or different (a match/nonmatch 
perceptual decision). In some trials, a rule cue presented 
at the same time as the sample visual image instructed 
the monkeys to move their hand if the two images 
were identical and to refrain from moving if they dif-
fered (a go/no-go motor decision); in other trials, the 
rule was reversed—move if the images differ and do 
not move if they match. Neural activity in PMd after 
the test visual images were presented was correlated 
more strongly to the motor decision than the percep-
tual decision in each trial, but both decisions were 
expressed in PMd. More strikingly, PMd activity was 
also correlated with the match/non-match behavioral 
rule during the delay period between the two visual 
images that guided the motor decision after the test 
image appeared (Figure 34–11). These results sug-
gest that PMd has a major role in applying rules that 
govern the appropriateness of a behavior and in mak-
ing behavioral decisions according to the prevailing 
rules. Neural recordings in prefrontal cortex during 
the same task (not shown) found a strong representa-
tion of the physical identity of the visual images, but 
weaker and later correlates of the behavioral rule and 
the motor decision than in PMd.
Ventral Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning 
Motor Actions of the Hand
The most lateral part of the premotor cortex, area PMv, 
is reciprocally connected with parietal cortex areas 
AIP, PF, and PFG and the secondary somatosensory 
area. Electrical stimulation shows that PMv contains 
extensively overlapping circuits that control hand and 
mouth movements.
Like AIP neurons, many PMv neurons appear to 
contribute to the control of hand actions based on the 
physical affordances offered by target objects. These 
neurons tend to fire preferentially during certain stereo-
typical hand actions, such as grasping, holding, tearing, 
or manipulating objects. Many neurons discharge only 
if the monkey uses a specific type of grip, such as a pre-
cision grip, whole-hand prehension, or finger prehen-
sion (Figure 34–12). Precision grip is the type most often 
represented. Some PMv neurons discharge throughout 
the entire action, while others discharge selectively at 
particular stages of one type of prehension, such as dur-
ing the opening or closing of the fingers.
Another striking property of PMv neurons is that 
their discharge often correlates with the goal of a motor 
act and not with the individual movements forming it. 
Thus, many PMv neurons discharge when grasping an 
object is executed with effectors as different as the right 
hand, the left hand, and even the mouth. Conversely, 
a PMv neuron may be active when an index finger 
is flexed to grasp an object but not when the animal 
flexes the same finger to scratch itself.
Premotor Cortex May Contribute to Perceptual 
Decisions That Guide Motor Actions
A series of studies provide evidence that cortical motor 
areas not only represent the sensory information that 
guides voluntary movements but also express the neu-
ral operations necessary to make and act on perceptual 
decisions. Monkeys were trained to discriminate the 
difference in frequency between two brief vibratory 
stimuli applied to one finger and separated in time by 
a few seconds. The animals had to decide whether the 
frequency of the second stimulus was higher or lower 
than the first and to report their perceptual decision 
by reaching out to push one of two buttons with the 
other hand.
The decision-making process in this task can be 
conceived as a chain of neural operations: (1) encode 
the first stimulus frequency (f1) when it is presented; 
(2) maintain a representation of f1 in working mem-
ory during the interval between the two stimuli; (3) 
encode the second stimulus frequency (f2) when it is 


===== Page 9 =====
836    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–11  Premotor cortex neurons in the monkey 
choose particular voluntary behaviors based on decisional 
rules. (Reproduced, with permission, from Wallis and Miller 2003.)
A. A monkey must make a decision about whether to release 
a lever or keep holding it based on two prior decisions: a per-
ceptual choice, whether a test image is the same as or differ-
ent from a sample image presented earlier, and a behavioral 
choice, whether the current rule is to release the lever when 
the test image is the same as the sample (match rule) or when 
it is different (nonmatch rule). The monkey is informed of the 
behavioral rule that applies in each trial by a rule cue, such as an 
auditory tone or juice drops, which is presented for 100 ms at 
the same time as the onset of the sample image at the start of 
the trial.
B. A neuron in the dorsal premotor cortex has a higher discharge 
rate whenever the nonmatch rule is in effect during the delay 
between the presentation of the first and second images. The 
responses to two different sample images (upper and lower 
plots) were recorded from the same cell, indicating that the rule-
dependent activity is not altered by changing the images. Nor, 
as shown by the pairs of curves associated with each rule, does 
activity depend on the type of rule cue (auditory tone or juice 
drops). (Tone cue trials: orange and blue curves; juice cue trials: 
red and black curves). Other dorsal premotor cortex cells (not 
shown) respond preferentially to the match rule over the non-
match rule. The differential activity of the neuron up to presenta-
tion of the test image reflects the rule that will guide the animal’s 
motor response to the test image, not the physical properties of 
the visual stimuli or the motor response.
A  Delayed match-to-sample task
B  Premotor neurons show rule-dependent activity
+
Match 
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Match
rule 
Nonmatch
rule
Sample image
Delay 
Test image 1
Delay
Test image 2
40
20
0
40
20
0
Firing rate (Hz)
0
800
2300
Response time (ms)
+
+
+
+
+
Nonmatch 
(hold)
Nonmatch 
(release)
Nonmatch 
(release)
Match 
(hold)
 Match
(release)
Match
(release)
Match
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Match
rule
Nonmatch
rule
Rule for 
release
Sample image A
Sample image B
Delay 
Rule 
cue
Test 
image 1
Sample 
image
presented; (4) compare f2 to the memory trace of f1; 
(5) decide whether the frequency of f2 is higher or 
lower than that of f1; and finally, (6) use that decision 
to choose the appropriate movement of the other hand. 
Everything prior to the last step would appear to fall 
entirely within the domain of sensory discriminative 
processing.
While the monkeys performed the task, neurons 
in the primary (S-I) and secondary (S-II) somatosen-
sory cortices encoded the frequencies of the stimuli 
while they were presented. During the interval 
between f1 and f2, there was no sustained activity in 
S-I representing the memorized f1 and only a tran-
sient representation in S-II, which vanished before f2 
was presented.
Strikingly, however, the activity of many neurons 
in the prefrontal cortex, SMC, and PMv scaled with 
the frequencies of f1 and f2 while they were being 
delivered. Furthermore, some prefrontal and premo-
tor neurons showed sustained activity proportional to 
the frequency of f1 during the delay period between f1 
and f2. Most remarkably, many neurons in those areas, 
especially in PMv, encoded the difference in frequency 
between f2 and f1 independently of their actual fre-
quencies when f2 was delivered (Figure 34–13). This 
centrally generated signal is appropriate to mediate 
the perceptual discrimination that determines which 
button to push. Neurons that encoded the f2–f1 differ-
ence were absent in S-I and were far more common in 
SMC and PMv than in S-II.


