===== Page 1 =====
1452    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–2  The pattern of electrical cur-
rent flow for an excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP) initiated at the apical 
dendrite of a pyramidal neuron in the 
cerebral cortex. Activity is detected by 
three electrodes: an intracellular electrode 
inserted in the apical dendrite (1), an extra-
cellular electrode positioned near the site of 
the EPSP in layer II of the cortex (2), and an 
extracellular electrode near the cell body in 
layer V (3). At the site of the EPSP (current 
sink), positive charge flows across the cell 
membrane (IEPSP) into the cytoplasm, down 
the dendritic cytoplasm, and then completes 
the loop by exiting through the membrane 
near the cell body (current source). The 
potentials recorded by the extracellular elec-
trodes at the sink and at the source have 
opposite polarity; the potentials recorded 
by the intracellular electrode have the same 
polarity regardless of the site. Rm, Ra, and Re 
are the resistances of the membrane, cyto-
plasm, and extracellular space, respectively.
The contribution of the activity of single neurons to 
the electroencephalogram (EEG) can be understood by 
examining a simplified cortical circuit and some basic 
electrical principles. Pyramidal neurons are the major 
projection neurons in the cortex. The apical dendrites 
of these cells, which are oriented perpendicular to the 
cell surface, receive a variety of synaptic inputs. Thus, 
synaptic activity in the pyramidal cells is the principal 
source of EEG activity.
To understand the contribution of a single neuron 
to the EEG, consider the flow of charge produced by an 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) on the apical 
dendrite of a cortical pyramidal neuron (Figure 58–2). 
Ionic current enters the dendrite at the site of generation 
of the EPSP, creating what is commonly called a current 
sink. It then must complete a loop by flowing down the 
dendrite and back out across the membrane at other 
sites, creating a current source.
The voltage signal created by a synaptic current is 
approximately predicted by Ohm’s law (V = IR, where V 
is voltage, I is current, and R is resistance). Because the 
membrane resistance (Rm) is much larger than that of the 
salt solution that constitutes the extracellular medium 
(Re), the voltage recorded across the membrane with an 
Box 58–1  The Contribution of Individual Neurons to the Electroencephalogram
I
Cortical surface
Current
sink
Contralateral
cortical afferent
Thalamocortical
afferent
Current
source
II,III
IV
V
VI
Ra
Re
Rm
IEPSP
+
–
+
–
+
–
1
2
3
+
–
Cortical 
layer


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1453
Figure 58–3  Surface electroencephalogram (EEG) 
recordings do not unambiguously indicate the polar-
ity of synaptic events.  The polarity of the surface EEG 
depends on the location of the synaptic activity within the 
cortex. A thalamocortical excitatory signal in layer V causes 
an upward voltage deflection at the surface EEG electrode 
because the electrode is nearer the current source. In 
contrast, an excitatory signal from the contralateral hemi-
sphere in layer II causes a downward deflection because 
the electrode is nearer the sink.
intracellular electrode (Vm) is also larger than the voltage 
at an extracellular electrode positioned near the current 
sink (Ve).
At the site of generation of an EPSP, the extracel-
lular electrode detects the voltage change due to charge 
flowing away from the electrode into the cytoplasm as 
a negative voltage deflection. However, an extracel-
lular electrode near the current source records a signal 
of opposite polarity (compare electrodes 1 and 3 in 
Figure 58–2). The situation is reversed if the site of the 
EPSP generation is on the basal segment of the apical 
dendrites.
In the cerebral cortex, excitatory axons from 
the contralateral hemisphere terminate primarily on 
dendrites in layers II and III, whereas thalamocortical 
axons terminate in layer IV (Figure 58–2). As a result, 
the activity measured by a surface EEG electrode will 
have opposite polarities for these two inputs even 
though the electrical event (membrane depolarization) 
is the same.
Similarly, the origin or polarity of cortical synap-
tic events cannot be unambiguously determined from 
surface EEG recordings alone. EPSPs in superficial 
layers and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) 
in deeper layers both appear as upward (negative) 
potentials, whereas EPSPs in deeper layers and IPSPs 
in superficial layers have downward (positive) poten-
tials (Figure 58–3).
I
Cortical
surface
Activity in cortex layer 5
Activity in cortex layer 2
II, III
IV
V
VI
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
Axons from
thalamus
Axons from
contralateral
cortex via
corpus callosum
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
+
–


===== Page 3 =====
1454    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–4  The electroencephalogram (EEG) can provide 
clues to the location of a seizure focus. Each trace repre-
sents the electrical activity between pairs of scalp electrodes 
as indicated in the electrode map. For example, electrode 
pairs 11–15 and 15–13 measure activity from the right tempo-
ral area. EEG activity in a patient with epilepsy shows sharp 
waves in the electrodes over the right temporal area (record 
enclosed in boxes). Such paroxysmal activity arises suddenly 
and disrupts the normal background EEG pattern. The focal 
abnormality may indicate that the seizure focus in this patient 
is in the right temporal lobe. Because the patient had no clini-
cal seizures during the recording, these are interictal spikes 
(see Figure 58-7). (Adapted, with permission, from Lothman 
and Collins 1990.)
wave or EEG spike can also provide a clue to the 
location of a seizure focus in a patient with epilepsy 
(Figure 58–4). New recording and analytical methods 
such as spectral analysis of the EEG are increasingly 
being used to detect abnormal zones of synchrony (fast 
ripples) within a seizure focus.
Focal Onset Seizures Originate Within a Small 
Group of Neurons
Despite the variety of clinically defined seizures, 
important insights into the generation of seizure activ-
ity can largely be understood by comparing the elec-
trographic patterns of focal onset seizures with those 
of generalized onset seizures.
The defining feature of focal onset seizures is that 
the abnormal electrical activity originates from a seizure 
focus. The seizure focus is considered to be nothing 
more than a small group of neurons, perhaps 1,000 or 
so, that have enhanced excitability and the ability to 
occasionally spread that activity to neighboring regions 
and thereby cause a seizure. The enhanced excitability 
(epileptiform activity) may result from many different 
1 s
50 µv
7
11
6
10
7
3
5
3
7
5
15
11
13
15
13
11
factors such as altered cellular properties, glial dysfunc-
tion, or altered synaptic connections caused by a local 
scar, blood clot, or tumor. The development of a focal 
onset seizure can be arbitrarily divided into four phases: 
(1) the interictal period between seizures followed by (2) 
synchronization of activity within the seizure focus, (3) 
seizure spread, and finally, (4) secondary generalization. 
Phases 2 to 4 represent the ictal phase of the seizure. Dif-
ferent factors contribute to each phase.
Much of our knowledge about the electrical events 
during seizures comes from studies of animal models 
of focal onset seizures. A seizure is induced in an ani-
mal by focal electrical stimulation or by acute injection 
of a convulsant agent. This approach along with in 
vitro studies of tissue from these animal models has 
provided a good understanding of electrical events 
within the focus during a seizure as well as during the 
onset of the interictal period.
Neurons in a Seizure Focus Have Abnormal 
Bursting Activity
How does electrical activity in a single neuron or group 
of neurons lead to a focal onset seizure? Each neuron 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1455
Figure 58–5  The conductances that underlie the paroxys-
mal depolarizing shift of a neuron in a seizure focus.
A. The paroxysmal depolarizing shift (PDS) is largely depend-
ent on α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate 
receptor-channels whose effectiveness is enhanced by the 
opening of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (gCa). Following the 
depolarization, the cell is hyperpolarized by activation of 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors (both ionotropic GABAA 
and metabotropic GABAB) as well as by voltage-gated and 
calcium-activated K+ channels (gK). (Adapted, with permission, 
from Lothman 1993a.)
B. Recurrent axon branches activate inhibitory neurons and 
cause feedback inhibition of the pyramidal neuron. Extrinsic excit-
atory inputs can also activate feedforward inhibition. The PDS 
represents exaggerated excitation in a seizure focus, whereas 
the inhibitory circuitry forms the basis of surround inhibition, 
important in restricting interictal activity to the seizure focus.
within a seizure focus has a stereotypic and synchro-
nized electrical response, the paroxysmal depolarizing 
shift, a depolarization that is sudden, large (20–40 mV), 
and long-lasting (50–200 ms), and that triggers a train 
of action potentials at its peak. The paroxysmal depo-
larizing shift is followed by an afterhyperpolarization 
(Figure 58–5A).
The paroxysmal depolarizing shift and afterhy-
perpolarization are shaped by the intrinsic mem-
brane properties of the neuron (eg, voltage-gated Na+, 
K+, and Ca2+ channels) and by synaptic inputs from 
excitatory and inhibitory neurons (primarily gluta-
matergic and GABAergic, respectively). The depo-
larizing phase results primarily from activation of 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic 
acid (AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-
type glutamate receptor-channels (Figure 58–5A), as 
well as voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ channels. NMDA-
type receptor-channels are particularly effective in 
enhancing excitability because depolarization relieves 
Mg2+ blockage of the channel. Removal of the blockage 
increases current through the channel, thus enhanc-
ing the depolarization and allowing additional Ca2+ to 
enter the neuron (Chapter 13).
The normal response of a cortical pyramidal neu-
ron to excitatory input consists of an excitatory post-
synaptic potential (EPSP) followed by an inhibitory 
postsynaptic potential (IPSP) (Figure 58–5B). Thus, 
0
–20
–40
Vm
–60
–80
100 ms
A  Interictal PDS within seizure focus
AMPA
GABA
gCa
gK
NMDA
Feedforward
inhibition
Feedback
inhibition
B  Basic cortical circuit
+
–
–
+
+
the paroxysmal depolarizing shift can be viewed as 
a massive enhancement of these depolarizing and 
hyperpolarizing synaptic components. The afterhy-
perpolarization is generated by voltage-dependent 
and Ca2+-dependent K+ channels as well as by a 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated Cl– conduct-
ance (ionotropic GABAA receptors) and K+conductance 
(metabotropic GABAB receptors) (Figure 58–5A). The 
Ca2+ influx through voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels 
and NMDA-type receptor-channels triggers the open-
ing of calcium-activated channels, particularly K+ 
channels. The afterhyperpolarization limits the dura-
tion of the paroxysmal depolarizing shift, and its grad-
ual disappearance is the most important factor in the 
onset of a focal onset seizure, as discussed later.
Thus, it is not surprising that many convul-
sants act by enhancing excitation or blocking inhibi-
tion. Conversely, anticonvulsants can act by blocking 
excitation or enhancing inhibition. For example, the 
benzodiazepines diazepam (Valium) and lorazepam 
(Ativan) enhance GABAA-mediated inhibition and are 
used in the emergency treatment of prolonged repetitive 
seizures. The anticonvulsants phenytoin (Dilantin) and 
carbamazepine (Tegretol) and several others reduce 
the opening of voltage-gated Na+ channels that under-
lie the action potential. Molecular models of the Na+ 
channel indicate that these drugs are more effective 
when the channel is in the open or activated state. 


===== Page 5 =====
1456    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–6  The spatial and tempo-
ral organization of a seizure focus 
depends on the interplay between 
excitation and inhibition of neurons in 
the focus.
A. The pyramidal cell a shows the typi-
cal electrical properties of neurons in 
a seizure focus (see part B). Excitation 
in cell a activates another pyramidal 
cell (b), and when many such cells fire 
synchronously, a spike is recorded on 
the electroencephalogram. However, 
cell a also activates γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)-ergic inhibitory interneurons 
(gray). These interneurons can reduce 
the activity of cells a and b through feed-
back inhibition, thus limiting the seizure 
focus temporally, as well as prevent the 
firing of cells outside the focus, repre-
sented here by cell c. This latter phe-
nomenon creates an inhibitory surround 
that acts to contain the hyperexcitability 
to the seizure focus during interictal 
periods. When extrinsic or intrinsic fac-
tors alter this balance of excitation and 
inhibition, the inhibitory surround begins 
to break down and the seizure activity 
spreads, leading to seizure generation. 
(Adapted, with permission, from  
Lothman and Collins 1990.)
B. The synaptic connections and activity 
patterns for cells a, b, and c shown in 
part A. Cells a and b (within the seizure 
focus) undergo a paroxysmal depolariz-
ing shift, whereas cell c (in the inhibitory 
surround) is hyperpolarized due to input 
from GABAergic inhibitory interneurons.
Thus, fittingly, the ability of these drugs to block Na+ 
channels is enhanced by repetitive activity associated 
with seizures; that is, the greatest effect is in those neu-
rons that need to be silenced the most.
The Breakdown of Surround Inhibition Leads to 
Synchronization
As long as the abnormal electrical activity is restricted 
to a small group of neurons, there are no clinical mani-
festations. The synchronization of neurons in a seizure 
focus is dependent not only on the intrinsic proper-
ties of each individual cell but also on the number and 
strength of connections between neurons. During the 
Inhibitory surround
I
II, III
IV
V
VI
A
B
a
a
d
b
Inhibitory
interneuron
Inhibitory
interneuron
a
b
c
c
c
Seizure focus
bb
interictal period, the abnormal activity is confined 
to the seizure focus by inhibition of the surrounding 
tissue.
This “inhibitory surround,” initially described by 
David Prince, is particularly dependent on feedfor-
ward and feedback inhibition by GABAergic inhibi-
tory interneurons (Figure 58–6A). Although inhibitory 
circuits in the cerebral cortex are often represented by 
simple diagrams (Figure 58–6B), the morphology and 
connectivity of cortical inhibitory neurons are actually 
quite complex and a topic of continuing investigation 
with many new methods such as cell type–specific 
viral labeling and optogenetic stimulation.
During the development of a focal seizure, the 
excitation in the circuit overcomes the inhibitory 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1457
Figure 58–7  A focal onset seizure 
begins with the loss of the afterhy-
perpolarization and surround inhibi-
tion. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Lothman 1993a.)
A. With the onset of a seizure (arrow), 
neurons in the seizure focus depolarize 
as in the first phase of a paroxysmal 
depolarizing shift. However, unlike the 
interictal period, the depolarization 
persists for seconds or minutes. The 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated 
inhibition fails, whereas excitatory 
activity in the α-amino-3-hydroxy-
5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA)- and N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA)-type glutamate receptors is 
functionally enhanced. This activity 
corresponds to the tonic phase of a 
secondarily generalized tonic-clonic sei-
zure. As the GABA-mediated inhibition 
gradually returns, the neurons in the 
seizure focus enter a period of oscilla-
tion corresponding to the clonic phase.
B. As the surround inhibition breaks 
down, neurons in the seizure focus 
become synchronously excited and 
send trains of action potentials to 
distant neurons, thus spreading the 
abnormal activity from the focus. Com-
pare this pattern of activity in cells a to 
c with that during the interictal period 
(Figure 58–6B).
surround, and the afterhyperpolarization in the neu-
rons of the original focus gradually disappears. As 
a result, a nearly continuous high-frequency train of 
action potentials is generated, and the seizure begins 
to spread beyond the original focus (Figure 58–7).
An important factor in the spread of focal onset sei-
zures appears to be that the intense firing of the pyram-
idal neurons results in a relative decrease in synaptic 
transmission from the inhibitory GABAergic interneu-
rons, although the interneurons remain viable. Whether 
this decrease results from a presynaptic change in the 
release of GABA or a postsynaptic change in GABA 
receptors is still not understood and may not be the 
same in all cases. Other factors that may contribute to 
the loss of the inhibitory surround over time include 
changes in dendritic morphology, the density of recep-
tors or channels, or a depolarizing shift in EK caused 
by extracellular K+ ion accumulation. Prolonged firing 
also transmits action potentials to distant sites in the 
brain, which in turn may trigger trains of action poten-
tials in neurons that project back to neurons in the sei-
zure focus (backpropagation). Reciprocal connections 
A
B
Tonic phase
Seizure focus
Distant
Clonic phase
0
–20
–40
Vm
–60
–80
AMPA
GABAA
gCa
NMDA
d
a
b
c
f
e
f
b
c
a
1 s
between the neocortex and thalamus may be particu-
larly important in this regard.
Despite our understanding of such mechanisms, 
we still do not know what causes a seizure to occur 
at any particular moment. The inability to predict 
when a seizure will occur is perhaps the most debilitat-
ing aspect of epilepsy. New approaches to this dilemma 
are discussed in Box 58–2. Some patients learn to rec-
ognize the triggers most critical for them, such as sleep 
deprivation or stress, and thus adjust their lifestyle to 
avoid these circumstances. But in many individuals, 
seizures do not follow a predictable pattern.
In a few patients, sensory stimuli such as flashing 
lights can trigger seizures, suggesting that repeated 
excitation of some circuits causes a change in excit-
ability. For example, NMDA-type glutamate recep-
tor activity and GABAergic inhibition can undergo 
changes dependent on the frequency of firing of the 
presynaptic neuron. This provides one possible molec-
ular mechanism for such changes in network excit-
ability. On a longer time scale, circadian rhythms and 
hormonal patterns may also influence the likelihood 


===== Page 7 =====
1458    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–8  Vagal nerve stimulation. Schematic of place-
ment of electrodes on the left vagus nerve powered by a 
battery implanted subcutaneously in the chest wall. The 
stimulation can be programmed at regular intervals (eg, every 
30 seconds) and can also be activated on demand by placing a 
magnet over the chest. (Adapted from Stacey and Litt 2008.)
Perhaps the most disabling aspect of seizures and epi-
lepsy is the uncertainty of it all—when will the next 
seizure occur? As you can imagine, this impacts employ-
ment, driving, and recreation and often prevents the 
development of an individual’s full potential. Patients 
with epilepsy sometimes have a brief warning or aura, 
but rarely do they have enough time to institute a thera-
peutic intervention such as a pill or an injection in order 
to abort the seizure.
Clinicians and epilepsy researchers have long rec-
ognized the importance of real-time seizure detection 
and real-time seizure prevention as a goal of therapy. Of 
course, acute detection must precede an acute treatment. 
However, in general, this approach has only been possi-
ble in patients undergoing EEG monitoring either with 
surface EEG electrodes or implanted electrodes. Several 
technologies are now emerging that allow new hope for 
detection, and thus enable efforts to abort or prevent 
an imminent seizure. Most are still in the experimental 
phase in animal models, but a few have reached clinical 
trials and even, in the case of vagal nerve stimulators, 
clinical practice. Seizure prevention can be imagined 
in two general ways: either altering the excitability of 
large regions of brain or somehow interrupting activity 
within a seizure focus. These two approaches can also be 
considered in engineering terms as open-loop or closed-
loop strategies, respectively.
The first approach led to the development in 1997 
of the vagal nerve stimulator, implanted in the neck and 
powered by a pacemaker-style battery (Figure 58–8). The 
Box 58–2  New Approaches to Real-Time Seizure Detection and Prevention
Vagus nerve
Electrodes
Battery


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1459
Figure 58–9  Closed-loop seizure detection and pre-
vention.  This schematic diagram of the closed-loop RNS 
System shows the intracranial strip and depth electrodes 
that detect seizure activity and subsequently deliver pro-
grammed stimulation to the seizure focus. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Heck et al. 2014.)
resulting chronic, intermittent stimulation of the vagus 
nerve has been effective in reducing seizure frequency 
in some patients. The patient can also activate the stimu-
lator with a hand-held magnet during an aura to see if 
acute stimulation can prevent a seizure. The exact mech-
anism of seizure reduction by vagal nerve stimulation is 
still unclear, but presumably involves activation of the 
autonomic nervous system, and thus, this form of stimu-
lation has limited specificity to particular brain regions.
Because many patients with intractable epilepsy 
have seizures that originate from one or more discrete 
foci in the brain, it would obviously be ideal to be able to 
detect abnormal activity within a seizure focus, and thus 
through some sort of feedback mechanism deliver a 
stimulus that would abort the spread of epileptiform 
activity from that focus. This goal has been an active area 
of investigation over the past decade, leading to a clinical 
trial the results of which were recently published. The 
device tested was a chronically implanted neurostimu-
lator (RNS System, Neuropace) that directly stimulates 
the seizure focus when epileptiform activity is detected 
(Figure 58–9).
In this multicenter double-blinded trial, the device 
was implanted in patients with intractable focal onset 
seizures with one or two seizure foci. The patients were 
monitored for an average of 5 years. The device can be 
programmed by the clinician to match characteristics 
for each patient. The patients were randomized into 
two groups, responsive stimulation or sham stimula-
tion groups, for the first 5 months, and then followed 
for up to 2 years. There was a 44% reduction in sei-
zure frequency after 1 year and a 53% reduction after 
2 years, suggestive of a progressive effect. The device 
was generally well tolerated. Thus, this approach has 
therapeutic potential for some patients and provides 
proof-of-concept evidence for closed-loop seizure detec-
tion and stimulation.
The RNS System uses electrical stimulation, but 
other strategies being studied in animals promise to 
refine methods of seizure prevention. These include 
neuronal stimulation or silencing using viral-mediated 
delivery of opto- or chemogenetic probes. In general, 
a replication-defective virus can be targeted to a spe-
cific cell type within a brain region. In the optogenetic 
approach, the virus is engineered to express ion chan-
nels or pumps that reduce neuron excitability when 
Neurostimulator
Depth
electrodes
Intracranial
strip
exposed to light. In the chemogenetic approach, a chem-
ical is delivered systemically. This strategy has now been 
successfully employed in animal models of epilepsy.
The optogenetic strategy is similar to the neuro-
stimulator except that stimulation is delivered through a 
fiber optic light guide implanted near the seizure focus. 
The advantage of this approach is that the virus is engi-
neered to deliver stimulation to a specific population 
of neurons. The chemogenetic approach has the advan-
tage of noninvasive delivery of the chemical, but lacks 
the speed that can be achieved with optical or electrical 
stimulation. Even when optimized and tested in clinical 
trials, these invasive approaches are likely to be useful 
only in a subset of focal onset epilepsies that have sta-
ble and well-defined seizure foci. Thus, continuing and 
complementary efforts to understand the genetic mech-
anisms of epileptogenesis, as well as new technologies 
such as stem cell therapies, remain essential.


===== Page 9 =====
1460    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–10  Focal and generalized onset seizures propa-
gate via several pathways. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Lothman 1993b.)
A. Focal onset seizures can spread locally from a focus via 
intrahemispheric fibers (1) and more remotely to homotopic 
contralateral cortex (2) and subcortical centers (3). The second-
ary generalization of a focal onset seizure spreads to subcorti-
cal centers via projections to the thalamus (4). Widespread 
thalamocortical interconnections then contribute to rapid activa-
tion of both hemispheres.
B. In a generalized onset seizure, such as a typical absence sei-
zure, interconnections between the thalamus and cortex are a 
major route of seizure propagation.
of seizures, as demonstrated by patients who have 
seizures only while sleeping (nocturnal epilepsy) or 
during their menstrual period (catamenial epilepsy). 
If we could develop continuous monitoring methods 
to predict the timing of seizure generation (Box 58–2), 
acute intervention to deliver a drug or change neural 
activity patterns to prevent seizures might become 
a therapeutic option. However, EEG studies reveal 
great variability between patients in pre-ictal patterns. 
Continuous chronic stimulation of neural circuits is 
another method of modifying the excitability of epilep-
tic circuits. As an example of this approach, implanted 
vagal nerve stimulators have been modestly successful 
in treating pharmaco-resistant epilepsy that does not 
respond to other treatments.
The Spread of Seizure Activity Involves Normal 
Cortical Circuitry
If activity in the seizure focus is sufficiently intense, 
the electrical activity begins to spread to other brain 
regions. Spread of seizure activity from a focus gener-
ally follows the same axonal pathways as does normal 
cortical activity. Thus, thalamocortical, subcortical, 
and transcallosal pathways can all become involved in 
seizure spread. Seizure activity can propagate from a 
seizure focus to other areas of the same hemisphere or 
across the corpus callosum to involve the contralateral 
hemisphere (Figure 58–10). Once both hemispheres 
become involved, a focal onset seizure has become sec-
ondarily generalized. At this point, the patient gener-
ally experiences loss of consciousness. The spread of a 
partial seizure usually occurs rapidly over a few sec-
onds, but can also evolve over many minutes. Rapid 
generalization is more likely if a focal onset seizure 
begins in the neocortex than if it begins in the limbic 
system (in particular, the hippocampus and amygdala).
An interesting unanswered question is what ter-
minates a seizure. Remarkably, few mechanisms for 
the self-limiting return to the interictal state have been 
defined with certainty. One definite conclusion at this 
point is that termination is not due to cellular metabolic 
exhaustion, because under severe conditions clinical 
seizures may continue for hours (see below). During 
the initial 30 seconds or so of a focal onset seizure that 
secondarily generalizes, neurons in the involved areas 
undergo prolonged depolarization and fire continu-
ously (due to loss of the afterhyperpolarization that 
normally follows a paroxysmal depolarizing shift). As 
the seizure evolves, the neurons begin to repolarize 
and the afterhyperpolarization reappears. The cycles 
of depolarization and repolarization correspond to the 
clonic phase of the seizure (Figure 58–7A).
Spread
Seizure
focus
1
2
3
A  Focal seizure
B  Primary generalized seizure
Secondary generalization
Thalamus
4
Seizure
focus


