===== Page 1 =====
844    Part V / Movement
The effects of primary motor cortex (M1) lesions differ 
across species. Large lesions in cats do not cause paraly-
sis; the animals can move and walk on a flat open sur-
face. However, they have severe difficulties using visual 
information to navigate within a complex environment, 
avoid obstacles, or climb the rungs of a ladder. In cats, 
the pyramidal tract neurons in M1 are much more 
strongly activated when an animal must modify its nor-
mal stepping motion to clear an obstacle under visual 
guidance than during normal unimpeded locomotion 
over a flat, featureless surface (Chapter 33).
Large M1 lesions in monkeys have more drastic 
consequences, including initial paralysis and usually 
the permanent loss of independent movements of the 
thumb and fingers. Monkeys nevertheless recover some 
ability to make clumsy movements of the hands and 
arms and to walk and climb.
More focal lesions of M1 typically result in mus-
cle weakness, slowing and imprecision of movements, 
and discoordination of multi-joint motions, perhaps as 
a result of selective perturbations of the control circuitry 
for specific muscles or muscle groups. Lesions limited 
to part of the motor map, such as the contralateral arm, 
leg, or face, lead to paralysis of that body part. There 
is diminished use of the affected body part, and move-
ments of the distal extremities are much more affected 
than those of the proximal arm and trunk.
The severity of the deficits also depends on the 
level of required skill. Control of fine motor skills, such 
as independent movements of the fingers and hand and 
precision grip, is abolished. Any residual control of the 
fingers and the hand is usually reduced to clumsy, claw-
like, synchronous flexion and extension motions of all 
fingers, not unlike the unskilled grasps of young infants. 
Remaining motor functions, such as postural activity, 
locomotion, reaching, and grasping objects with the 
whole hand, are often clumsy.
In humans, large motor cortex lesions are particu-
larly devastating, resulting in severe motor deficits or 
complete paralysis of affected body parts, usually with 
limited potential for recovery. This presumably reflects 
the increased importance in humans of descending sig-
nals from M1 onto spinal interneuronal circuits and spi-
nal motor neurons and a diminished capacity of other 
cortical and subcortical motor structures to compensate 
for the loss of those descending M1 signals.
Box 34–3  Lesions in Primary Motor Cortex Lead to Impairments in Motor Execution
those for more proximal parts of the arm. The termi-
nal of a CM cell axon often branches and terminates 
on spinal motor neurons for several different agonist 
muscles and can also influence the contractile activ-
ity of still more muscles through synapses on spinal 
interneurons (Figure 34–17B,C). This termination pat-
tern is organized to produce coordinated patterns of 
activity in a muscle field of agonist and antagonist mus-
cles. Most frequently, a CM cell axon directly excites 
the spinal motor neurons for several agonist muscles 
and indirectly suppresses the activity of some antago-
nist muscles through spinal inhibitory interneurons  
(Figure 34–17C). The fact that CM cells are more prom-
inent in humans than in other species may be one of 
the reasons why lesions of M1 in humans have a more 
profound effect on voluntary motor control compared 
to other mammals (Box 34–3).
The complexity of the motor map in M1—as 
revealed by short trains of electrical stimuli and ana-
tomical and neurophysiological studies of direct and 
indirect M1 descending outputs targeting single mus-
cles and small muscle groups—shows how motor 
commands from M1 to the spinal motor apparatus are 
able to control movements of every part of the body, 
with special focus on the fingers, hand, arm, face, and 
mouth in primates.
Activity in the Primary Motor Cortex Reflects Many 
Spatial and Temporal Features of Motor Output
As already noted, a given action such as reaching 
for an object can be described on many levels, rang-
ing from the hand’s spatial trajectory and velocity to 
its joint-centered causal forces and muscle activity 
(Figure 34–1A). Representational models assume that 
the motor system directly plans and controls specific 
parameters of movement. They predict that different 
neural populations encode the intended movement 
in a parameter space (ie, hand or joint motion or joint 
muscular torque) and perform the transformations 
between them. Dynamical models predict that neural 
circuits control movements through changes in their 
activation state from its current state to the desired 
final state. As their activity changes across time, cor-
relates of various parameters and properties of the 
intended movement can be observed in the activity 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    845
of single neurons and neural populations. However, 
the activity of most neurons reflects a combination of 
parameters that does not correspond to any identifi-
able parameter in any specific coordinate framework.
Despite their different assumptions, both perspec-
tives suggest that one can infer the possible contribution 
of different neurons and different neural structures to 
motor control by studying how their activity correlates 
with different parameters of movements. The activity 
of M1 neurons has been intensively studied since the 
1960s to try to reveal, for instance, whether M1 gen-
erates a high-level signal about the hand motion or a 
lower-level kinetic signal more related to the causal 
forces and muscle activity.
Knowledge about the nature of the control signals 
generated by M1 also helps to clarify the role of other 
motor structures, notably the spinal cord. If M1 encodes 
specific information about muscle activity patterns, less 
computational processing would be necessary at the spi-
nal level. In contrast, if M1 mainly encodes higher-level 
information about the intended movement, the spinal 
cord would have to perform the processes that convert 
this global signal into detailed patterns of muscle activity.
However, one of the major experimental chal-
lenges in identifying how M1 controls movement is 
the fact that virtually all movement-related param-
eters are intercorrelated through the laws of motion. 
As a consequence, a particular muscular force (kinetics) 
will cause a specific motion (kinematics) given an ini-
tial condition (posture, movement) of the body. As a 
result, if one recorded neural activity while a monkey 
makes reaching movements in different directions, a 
neuron that theoretically signals the spatial direction 
of movement will also inevitably show a correlation 
with the direction of causal forces. Likewise, the con-
tractile activity of a muscle will co-vary systematically 
with the spatial direction of movement even though it 
is clearly generating the causal forces. Unless the task 
design adequately dissociates these different classes of 
parameters, it will yield ambiguous information about 
the functional role of each neuron.
Edward Evarts was the first to examine this issue 
in the 1960s, in pioneering single-neuron recordings in 
monkeys while they made simple flexion/extension 
movements of the wrist. Using a system of pulleys and 
weights, he applied a load to the wrist of the monkey 
that pulled the wrist in either the direction of flexion or 
extension in different trials. This required the monkey 
to alter the level of wrist muscle activity to compensate 
for the load while making the movements. As a result, 
the kinematics (direction and amplitude) of wrist 
movements remained constant, but the kinetics (forces 
and muscle activity) changed with the load.
Using a microelectrode, he located single neurons 
in the M1 motor map that modulated their activity 
when the monkey made movements of the wrist with-
out the external load. In some neurons, their discharge 
increased during wrist flexion (preferred movement direc-
tion) and was suppressed during extension, whereas 
others displayed the opposite pattern. This movement-
related activity typically began 50 to 150 ms before the 
onset of agonist muscle activity, supporting a causal 
link between M1 neural activity and movement. When 
a load was applied, many M1 neurons increased their 
activity when the load resisted movement in their pre-
ferred direction and decreased activity when the load 
assisted the movement (Figure 34–18). These changes 
in neural activity paralleled the changes in muscle 
activity required to compensate for the external load.
Subsequent studies have confirmed that the activ-
ity of many M1 neurons varies systematically with the 
magnitude of muscle force output. This is best shown 
in tasks in which monkeys generate isometric forces 
against immovable objects that prevent movement. 
The activity of many M1 neurons, including CM cells, 
varies with the direction and level of static isometric 
output forces generated across a single joint, such as 
the wrist or elbow, as well as during precise pinches 
using the thumb and index finger (Figure 34–19A). At 
least over part of the tested range, these responses vary 
linearly with the level of static force.
Most natural behaviors involve multi-joint, multi-
muscle actions. For instance, reaching movements of 
the arm in different directions requires different pat-
terns of coordinated motions at the shoulder and elbow. 
Proximal limb muscle activity during reaching shows 
a roughly cosine pattern of activity with maximal 
activity in a specific movement direction, its preferred 
movement direction, that gradually diminishes as the 
angle between the desired direction of reach and the 
muscle’s preferred direction increases (Figure 34–20A). 
Like the proximal arm muscles, single neurons related 
to shoulder and elbow movements respond in a con-
tinuously graded fashion during movements in differ-
ent reach directions centered on a preferred direction 
of maximal activity (Figure 34–20B). Different neurons 
have different preferred directions that cover the entire 
directional continuum around the circle, and during 
any given movement, neurons with a wide range of 
preferred directions discharge at different rates.
As Ed Evarts had shown in single-joint tasks, much 
of the M1 activity during reaching is closely related to 
the causal kinetics. For instance, in monkeys trained 
to make reaching movements in eight directions while 
compensating for external loads that pulled the arm in 
different directions, the reach-related activity of both 


===== Page 3 =====
846    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–18  Activity of a motor cortex neuron correlates 
with changes in the direction and amplitude of muscle 
forces during wrist movements.  The records are from an 
M1 neuron with an axon that projected down the pyramidal 
tract. The monkey flexes its wrist under three load conditions. 
When no load is applied to the wrist, the neuron fires before 
and during flexion (A). When a load opposing flexion is applied, 
the activity of the flexor muscles and the neuron increases 
(B). When a load assisting wrist flexion is applied, the flexor 
muscles and neuron fall silent (C). In all three conditions, the 
wrist displacement is the same, but the neural activity changes 
as the loads and compensatory muscle activity change. Thus, 
the activity of this motor cortex neuron is better related to the 
direction and level of forces and to muscle activity exerted dur-
ing the movement than to the direction of wrist displacement. 
(Adapted from Evarts 1968.)
Flexors
Extensors
Neuron
B  Load opposes ﬂexors
Flexors
Extensors
Neuron
C  Load assists ﬂexors
Flexors
Extensors
Neuron
Recording 
from neuron 
in wrist area 
of M1
Restraint
Potentiometer 
measures 
wrist angle
Weight
opposes ﬂexors
Pulley
Flexion
Extension
Weight
assists ﬂexors
Lever 
position
A  No load
proximal-arm muscles and many M1 neurons changed 
systematically with the direction of the external loads 
and the corresponding corrective forces that the mon-
keys had to generate for each reach direction. Both 
muscle and neural activity increased when the load 
resisted movements in their preferred directions and 
decreased when the loads assisted those movements. 
In addition, when a monkey uses its whole arm to exert 
constant isometric force levels in different directions 
at the hand, the activity of many M1 neurons varies 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    847
Figure 34–19  Activity in many primary motor cortex neu-
rons correlates with the level and direction of force exerted 
in an isometric action.
A. The activity of many primary motor cortex neurons increases 
with the amplitude of static torque generated across a single 
joint. The plot shows the tonic firing rates of several different 
corticomotoneuronal cells at different levels of static torque 
exerted in the direction of wrist extension. Other motor cortex 
neurons show increasing activity with torque exerted in the 
direction of wrist flexion, and so would show response func-
tions with the opposite slope (not shown). (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Fetz and Cheney 1980.)
B. When a monkey uses its whole arm to push on an immov-
able handle in its hand, the activity of some primary motor 
cortex neurons varies with the direction of isometric forces. 
Each of the eight raster plots shows the activity of the same 
primary motor cortex neuron during five repeated force ramps 
in one direction. Each row shows the pattern of spikes during 
a single trial of the task. The position of each raster of activity 
corresponds to the direction in which the monkey is generating 
isometric forces on the handle. The onset of the force ramp is 
indicated by the vertical line labeled M. The thick ticks on the 
left of that line in each row indicate when the target appeared 
on a computer monitor, telling the monkey the direction in 
which it should push on the handle. The central polar plot illus-
trates the directional tuning function of the neuron as a function 
of the direction of isometric forces. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Sergio and Kalaska 2003.)
14
M
M
M
M
M
M
500
1500 ms
12
10
8
6
Static torque (×105 dyne-cm)
4
2
Tonic ﬁring frequency (ips)
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
A  Neuronal activity increases with 
 
the amplitude of static torque
B  Neuronal activity varies with the direction of isometric force
M
M
systematically with force direction, and the directional 
tuning curves for isometric force resemble those for 
activity during reaching movements (Figure 34–19B).
The complex and nonlinear properties of multi-
segmented limbs present a major control problem for 
the motor system. For instance, one can make reaching 
movements with similar hand trajectories but differ-
ent arm geometries that require changes in the causal 
joint-centered torques and muscle activity. In one 
experiment, when monkeys made horizontal reaching 
movements along the same planar spatial hand trajec-
tories while holding the arm in different spatial orien-
tations (ie, elbow raised versus lowered), the activity of 
proximal-arm muscles and many M1 neurons showed 
corresponding changes in the strength and directional 
tuning of their reach-related activity. This indicates that 
the M1 neurons generate signals that take into account 
the changes in intrinsic limb biomechanics during the 
reaching movements.
Similarly, arm movements toward or away from 
the body require much larger angular motion at the 
shoulder and elbow joints compared to movements to 
the right or left. In contrast, muscular torques tend to be 
larger for movements to the right and left. Both of these 
factors influence the amount of muscle activity required 
to move the limb, which can be quantified by a single 
term, joint muscular power (joint angular velocity mul-
tiplied by net muscular torque about that joint). With the 
limb in the horizontal plane, joint power is greatest for 
movements away from the body and slightly to the left, 


===== Page 5 =====
848    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–20  Limb muscles and primary motor cortical 
neurons are broadly tuned to the direction of reaching.
A. Plots show the activity of posterior deltoid of the right arm, 
a shoulder extensor, during arm movements in eight directions 
(see panel C) (central panel displays mean hand trajectories). 
The muscle is initially maximally active for movements at 270° 
(towards the body, preferred direction = 250°) and diminishes 
for movements in other directions. Black lines denote the 
mean activity of the muscle across multiple trials, and data are 
aligned on movement onset (vertical thin line). (Abbreviation: 
EMG, electromyography.)
B. Raster plots show the firing pattern of a single primary 
motor cortex neuron during whole-arm movements in eight 
directions. The neuron discharges at the maximal rate for move-
ments near 135° and 180° and at lesser intensities for move-
ments in other directions. The cell’s lowest firing rate is for 
movements opposite the cell’s preferred direction. Each row of 
thin tics in each raster plot represents the activity in a single 
trial, aligned at the time of movement onset (time 0); thick 
tics, time of target appearance. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Georgopoulos et al. 1982. Copyright © 1982 Society for 
Neuroscience.)
C. Hand trajectories when reaching from a central position in 
the horizontal plane.
D. Peak joint power (joint muscular torques multiplied by  
joint velocity) for movements performed in different spatial 
directions (shoulder and elbow power added together).  
A large amount of power is required to reach away from the 
body and to the upper left and to reach toward the body and to  
the lower right. (Right X-axis is at 0°.)
E. Preferred directions of proximal-limb muscles tend to be for 
movements that require greater muscular power, reflecting 
the obvious link between muscle use and the physical require-
ments of the motor task. Each dot represents an individual 
muscle binned into 22.5° sectors; the blue dot represents the 
preferred direction of the muscle displayed in panel A.
F. Distribution of preferred directions of neurons in primary motor 
cortex (M1). Each dot represents an individual neuron, and the 
blue dot represents the preferred direction of the neuron displayed 
in panel B. (Adapted, with permission, from Scott et al. 2001.)
Normalized rectiﬁed EMG
Preferred
direction
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
0
–500
1000
500
Preferred
direction
Onset of
movement
Onset of
movement
Right
Left
Toward
Away
Right
Left
Toward
Away
B  Primary motor cortex cell activity
A  Posterior deltoid EMG activity
C  Hand motion
D  Joint power
E  Muscle activity
F  M1 Activity
0.1 W
100 ms


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    849
Figure 34–21  The activity of some primary motor cortex 
neurons can be correlated with particular patterns of muscle 
activity. Bursts of activity in a single corticomotoneuron during a 
reach-and-grasp movement to retrieve food pellets from a small 
well are correlated with bursts of contractile activity in several of 
its target muscles at different times during the movement. (Abbre-
viations: APB, abductor pollicis brevis; BR, brachioradialis; ED2, 3, 
extensor digitorum 2, 3; ips, impulses per second;TLAT, lateral 
triceps.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Griffin et al. 2008.)
and toward the body and to the right (Figure 34–20C,D). 
This bias in the physics of limb movement leads to a bias 
in the preferred directions of shoulder and elbow mus-
cles, which tend to be maximally active in these same 
directions (Figure 34–20E). Correspondingly, the distri-
bution of preferred directions of neurons in M1 also par-
allels this bias, with neurons tending to have preferred 
directions either away and slightly to the left or toward 
and to the right (Figure 34–20F). Thus, the physics of the 
limb dictates the pattern of muscle activity needed to 
generate movement, and this in turn is reflected in the 
pattern of neural activity in M1.
The impact of limb physics on M1 activity extends to 
the level of muscle-related signals. The activity of some 
single M1 neurons, including CM cells, can be correlated 
with specific components of the contraction patterns of 
different muscles during such diverse tasks as isometric 
force generation, precision pinching of objects between 
the thumb and index finger, and complex reaching and 
grasping actions (Figure 34–21). These findings high-
light how M1 contributes to the specification of mus-
cle activity patterns for motor actions, including onset 
times and magnitudes. Nevertheless, the final pattern 
of muscle activity will only be generated by the spinal 
motor neurons since they alone take into account the 
additional influence of other descending supraspinal 
inputs and local spinal interneuronal processes.
All the studies described so far related the activity 
of single M1 neurons to motor output. However, vol-
untary motor control is implemented by the simultane-
ous coordinated activity of many neurons throughout 
the motor system. Their activity is noisy, varying sto-
chastically between repetitions of the same movement. 
Furthermore, their broad symmetrical movement-
related tuning curves introduce a high level of uncer-
tainty as to what the limb should do in response to the 
ambiguous signal generated by each neuron.
A simple computational approach was developed 
to extract a unique signal about each reaching move-
ment by pooling the heterogeneous single-neuron 
activity of the recorded M1 population. The activity of 
each neuron is represented by a vector pointing in its 
preferred direction; the length of the vector varies as 
a function of its mean discharge rate during reaches 
in each direction. This vector notation implies that an 
increase in the activity of a given M1 neuron evokes 
changes in activity in the spinal motor apparatus and 
muscles that causes the arm to move along a path 
corresponding to the neuron’s task-related preferred 
direction; the strength of that single-neuron influence 
varies systematically with the difference between the 
neuron’s preferred direction and the desired move-
ment (Chapter 39, Figure 39–6). When the reach-related 
Corticomotoneuron
Target muscle
TLAT
50 ips
0 ips
BR
ED2, 3
APB
Home plate
Target food well
Task segment
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.5 s
activity of about 250 M1 neurons was represented 
by variable-length vectors for each of the eight reach 
directions and summed, the direction of the net result-
ant population vectors varied systematically with the 
actual reach directions (Figure 34–22A).
The novel insights of this analysis were that the 
control of a given reach movement involves coordi-
nated changes in the activity of M1 neurons distrib-
uted throughout the M1 arm motor map and that their 
pooled activity clearly distinguishes the unique identity 
of each of the reach actions generated by the eight dif-
ferent distributed patterns of population activity. Sub-
sequent studies demonstrated that “instantaneous” 
population vectors extracted from the pooled activity 
of large populations of M1 neurons during sequential 
20-ms time bins from the start to the end of movement 
predicted the continually changing trajectory of the 


===== Page 7 =====
850    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–22  Population codes relate M1 activity to differ-
ent properties of movement.
A. The eight single-neuron vector clusters (thin black lines) 
and the population vectors (blue arrows) represent the activity 
of the same population of cells during reaching movements in 
eight different directions. Each single-neuron vector points in 
the neuron’s preferred movement direction, and its length is 
proportional to the discharge of the neuron during that move-
ment. The population vectors were calculated by vectorial addi-
tion of all the single-cell vectors in each cluster; dashed arrows 
represent the direction of movement of the arm. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Georgopoulos et al. 1983.)
B. Comparison of hand kinematics and kinetics and neural 
population activity in an isometric task and when moving a 
handle with a large mass. Force and neural trajectories were 
generated by linking sequences of 20-ms output force vectors 
or neural population vectors tip-to-tail for each direction of force 
or movement output. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Sergio et al. 2005.)
arm motions 100 to 150 ms into the future while mon-
keys made reaching movements or traced spirals on a 
computer monitor. This showed that the simple vector 
notation could be used to extract from the activity of 
populations of neurons a signal about intended motor 
output even on a moment-to-moment basis. These find-
ings were anticipated by a prescient study in 1970 by 
Donald Humphrey and colleagues, who showed that 
the appropriately summed activity of three to five M1 
neurons was better correlated to the temporal patterns 
of motor output during single-joint movements than 
was the signal of any of the single neurons.
Subsequent studies used the population-vector 
decoder algorithm to provide further insight into 
neural processing in M1. In one study, the activity of 
proximal arm–related M1 neurons was recorded while 
monkeys performed two tasks (Figure 34–22B). In the 
first task, they generated isometric force ramps in eight 
different spatial directions uniformly distributed at 45° 
intervals in a horizontal plane against a rigid handle 
that they held in their hand, without arm movements. 
A 20-ms population-vector decoder was used to extract 
the net directional bias of the pooled activity of many 
M1 neurons, and the result showed that these pooled 
signals varied systematically with the direction of out-
put forces throughout the duration of the force-ramp 
generation, even though there were no movements. 
However, unlike the actual uniformly distributed 
directions of the forces generated by the monkey at 
the hand, the decoded population-vector signals were 
skewed toward the x-axis. This showed that the M1 
activity reflected the nonlinear relationship between 
causal shoulder muscle torques and measured isomet-
ric forces at the hand resulting from the complex bio-
mechanical properties of the arm (see Figure 34–20).
In the second task, the monkeys made reaching 
movements of the arm in the same eight directions to 
move a heavy handle. This required an initial accelera-
tive force in the direction of movement and then a tran-
sient reversal of the direction of forces to decelerate the 
movement of their arm and the mass as it approached 
the target. The decoded M1 population-vector signals 
in this task varied dramatically through time. They 
were directed initially toward the target but then tran-
siently reversed just before the peak of hand veloc-
ity. This showed once again that the M1 activity was 
more closely correlated with the time course of causal 
forces generating the reaching movements, including 
their transient directional reversal, than to the uninter-
rupted motion of the hand toward the target. They also 
found that correlates of the forces to generate reach-
ing were strongest in M1, weaker in PMd, and largely 
absent in PE/MIP. This indicated that, unlike M1, 
90°
0°
A
B
Isometric
force
Movement
Hand path
Force trajectory
Neural trajectory


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    851
reach-related neurons in area PE/MIP generated a reli-
able signal about stable arm postures and the kinemat-
ics of arm movements independent of the underlying 
causal forces and muscle activity.
Finally, one study has shown that reliable sig-
nals about the time-varying activity of proximal-arm 
muscles during reaching movements can be extracted 
from the activity of a population of simultaneously 
recorded M1 neurons. Another study found that the 
pooled activity of M1 neurons that fire selectively in 
connection with either shoulder or elbow movements 
can predict the changes in onset times and levels of 
contractile activity of the shoulder or elbow muscles 
during reaches in different directions.
These studies showed that the pooled activity of 
many M1 neurons is a rich and reliable source of signals 
about different time-varying attributes of whole-arm 
movements. This provided an important conceptual 
foundation for the development of more sophisticated 
decoder algorithms in brain–machine interfaces that 
make use of the movement-related information availa-
ble in the simultaneous activity of many M1 neurons to 
allow subjects to control the actions of neuroprosthetic 
devices by covert modulations of M1 neuron activity 
without overt limb movements (Chapter 39).
Primary Motor Cortical Activity Also Reflects 
Higher-Order Features of Movement
Activity in M1 is not correlated only with causal forces 
and muscle activity. Many studies, beginning with 
those of Ed Evarts, that have attempted to dissociate 
kinematic from kinetic properties of motor outputs 
have found that the activity of some M1 neurons var-
ies with the direction of movement but is only weakly 
influenced or not influenced at all by changes in out-
put forces. Such neurons appear to preferentially sig-
nal the kinematic aspects of limb motion.
Changes in behavioral task can influence the rela-
tionship between M1 activity and motor output. One 
study has highlighted how contextual changes in an 
isometric force task altered the coding of force mag-
nitude by M1 neurons. Either the order of forces or 
the range of expected forces results in changes in the 
activity in M1. They suggested that M1 neurons could 
dynamically adjust their relationship to output forces 
to optimize precision of control as a function of the 
range of forces that would be encountered in a given 
context. Another study found that many CM neurons 
may discharge intensely when monkeys performed 
precisely controlled force tasks with low force levels 
but are relatively inactive when the monkeys gener-
ate powerful contractions of the same muscles to make 
brisk, back-and-forth movements of the handle. Like-
wise, a study demonstrated that CM cells in M1 could 
be very active when monkeys generated a precision-
pinch grip of the thumb and index finger with rela-
tively low force output, but were much less active or 
nearly silent when the animals generated much larger 
forces with a power grip involving the entire hand.
Still another study has shown that some M1 neu-
rons that respond to loads applied to the limb dur-
ing postural control can lose this load sensitivity as 
soon as the monkey makes a reaching movement to 
another spatial target, and vice versa. That is, those 
neurons can reflect output forces during postural 
control, but reflect only kinematics during move-
ment. This change in the cell’s response occurs quite 
abruptly, about 150 ms before the onset of move-
ment. Importantly, any neurons that are sensitive to 
loads during both posture and movement will retain 
the same motor field across behaviors; that is, if the 
neuron responds only to shoulder flexor loads dur-
ing postural control, it will respond only to shoulder 
flexor loads during reaching.
Even a simple change in the metrics of limb move-
ment can have a large influence on M1 activity. In a 
study of monkeys making slow or fast reaching move-
ments in different directions from a central target to 
peripheral targets, proximal limb muscles displayed 
relatively simple scaling of their activity patterns, 
reflecting increased forces for faster and longer reaches. 
In contrast, M1 neurons displayed a broad range of 
changes in their activity patterns that rarely paralleled 
the pattern of changes observed for muscles.
Activity in neurons can also correlate with higher-
level features of movement such as the nature of an 
upcoming motor action. This was demonstrated in a 
study in which monkeys were trained to make wrist 
movements to three targets in a row starting from one 
extreme, stopping at a central position, and then fin-
ishing at the other extreme. Visual cues instructed the 
monkeys when to make each movement. Because the 
task used a predictable sequence of wrist movements, 
the monkeys knew before the visual cues appeared 
what would be the next direction of movement. While 
many M1 neurons signaled the current wrist posture or 
the direction of each movement while they were being 
performed, some M1 neurons reliably signaled the 
next movement in the sequence before the visual cue 
appeared. Many subsequent studies have confirmed 
that M1 neurons can signal impending intended move-
ments, although these planning-like signals are not as 
prominent in M1 as in premotor cortical areas.
In summary, neural recording studies have 
revealed a diverse range of response properties within 


===== Page 9 =====
852    Part V / Movement
and across movement-related cortical areas, with 
stronger correlations to causal movement kinetics in 
M1 and to higher-order motor parameters in premotor 
and parietal cortex. However, these experimental find-
ings have not yet led to a single unifying hypothesis 
about how cortical motor circuits control voluntary 
movements. Part of this uncertainty may result from 
inadequacies in experimental task design.
Representational motor-control models have inter-
preted these complex results as evidence of the trans-
formations between different levels of representation 
of intended movements performed by neural popula-
tions distributed across different cortical motor areas. 
In contrast, nonrepresentational motor-control models 
such as optimal feedback control argue that these same 
results can only be interpreted as evidence of when 
and where neural correlates of different motor output 
parameters emerge in the dynamical activity distrib-
uted across cortical motor areas but do not shed much 
insight into the underlying neural computations. This 
illustrates the experimental challenges still confronting 
researchers as they try to reverse engineer the cortical 
motor circuitry to reveal its internal computational 
organization.
Sensory Feedback Is Transmitted Rapidly to the 
Primary Motor Cortex and Other Cortical Regions
Postcentral and posterior parietal cortex provide much of 
the sensory information related to the position and motion 
of the body and the location of spatial goals that is impor-
tant in voluntary motor control, although the cerebellum 
is likely another important source (Chapter 37).
The type of afferent information transmitted to 
M1 differs between the proximal and distal portions 
of the limb. Afferent input from cutaneous and muscle 
sensory neurons is equally prevalent for hand-related 
neurons, reflecting the importance for both sources of 
sensory feedback when grasping and manipulating 
objects with the hand. Muscle afferents provide the 
major source of feedback from the proximal limb. Infor-
mation from muscles is more prevalent in the rostral 
M1, whereas cutaneous input is more common in the 
caudal M1. Muscle afferent feedback to M1 is surpris-
ingly rapid as it takes as little as 20 ms for M1 neurons 
to respond following a mechanical disturbance to the 
limb. Analogous to reaching, neural activity is broadly 
tuned to the direction of the mechanical disturbance.
Sensory feedback supports our ability to make 
rapid goal-directed corrections for motor errors that 
arise during movement planning and execution or are 
caused by unexpected disturbances of the limb. When 
a perturbing mechanical load is applied to the limb, the 
motor system generates a multipeaked compensatory 
electromyographic response, beginning with a short-
latency stretch response (20–40 ms after the perturba-
tion), followed by a long-latency response (50–100 ms) 
and then a so-called “voluntary” response (≥100 ms). 
The short latency of the initial response indicates that 
it is generated at the spinal level. The response is rela-
tively small and stereotyped, and its intensity scales 
with the magnitude of the applied load. In contrast, 
motor corrections beginning in the long-latency epoch 
(50–100 ms) are modulated by a broad range of factors 
necessary to attain a behavioral goal, including the 
physics of the limb and environment, the presence of 
obstacles in the environment, the urgency of the goal, 
and properties of the target, including alternate goals. 
These context-dependent features suggest the long-
latency feedback epoch is an adaptive process in which 
the control policy (ie, feedback gains) is adjusted based 
on the behavioral goal, as predicted by the optimal 
feedback control model.
The ability of the motor system to rapidly gener-
ate these goal-directed long-latency motor responses is 
supported by a transcortical feedback pathway. Neural 
activity across frontoparietal circuits responds rapidly 
to mechanical disturbances to a limb, and the pattern 
of activity across the cortex depends on the behavio-
ral context. Perturbation-related activity is observed in 
all cortical regions beginning at approximately 20 ms 
after the disturbance even if the monkey is distracted 
by watching a movie and does not have to respond to 
the disturbance (Figure 34–23A,B). If the monkey is 
actively maintaining its hand at a spatial goal, there 
is an immediate increase in the neural response in 
parietal area PE following the disturbance, followed 
shortly thereafter by changes in activity in other corti-
cal regions (Figure 34–23A,B). If the disturbance is a 
cue that instructs the monkey to move to another spa-
tial target, then M1 activity reflects the need for a more 
vigorous response if the disturbance knocks the hand 
away from the target compared to knocking the hand 
into the target (Figure 34–23C). In contrast, perturba-
tion-related activity in PE remains similar regardless 
of target location.
The Primary Motor Cortex Is Dynamic and 
Adaptable
One of the most remarkable properties of the brain 
is the adaptability of its circuitry to changes in the 
environment—the capacity to learn from experience 
and to store the acquired knowledge as memories. 
When human subjects practice a motor skill, perfor-
mance improves.


