===== Page 1 =====
812    Part V / Movement
of gait based on visual information. PPC neu-
rons estimate the relative location of objects 
with respect to the body and retain information 
in working memory to facilitate coordination of 
the limbs. The contribution of other cortical and 
subcortical areas to locomotor planning remains 
little studied.
10.  Inputs from the cerebellum and the basal ganglia 
are used to correct motor errors and select the 
appropriate patterns of motor activity. The contri-
bution of the basal ganglia to the control of locomo-
tion is complex and is only now being determined.
11.  The available evidence suggests that the neural 
control mechanisms determined from experi-
ments in animals are also used to control locomo-
tion in humans, including the existence of a CPG. 
Major advances remain to be made in under-
standing the mechanisms of spinal and supraspi-
nal influences on human locomotor control.
12.  Recent technological advances now give us an 
unparalleled opportunity to investigate the con-
trol mechanisms underlying locomotion. Molec-
ular and genetic advances provide the ability 
to manipulate behavior at both the cellular and 
systems level and allow detailed study of the 
contributions of brain stem and spinal circuits 
to the initiation and regulation of locomotion. 
Advances in multineuronal recording tech-
niques in animals, as well as the development 
of high-resolution recordings of human brain 
activity, will facilitate our understanding of the 
contribution of cortical structures to the control 
of locomotion.
 Trevor Drew  
 Ole Kiehn 
Suggested Reading
Armstrong DM. 1988. The supraspinal control of mamma-
lian locomotion. J Physiol 405:1–37.
Brown T. 1911. The intrinsic factors in the act of progression 
in mammals. Proc R Soc B 84:308–319.
Drew T, Andujar JE, Lajoie K, Yakovenko S. 2008. Cortical 
mechanisms involved in visuomotor coordination during 
precision walking. Brain Res Rev 57:199–211.
Grillner S. 2006. Biological pattern generation: the cellular 
and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 
52:751–766.
Jankowska E. 2008. Spinal interneuronal networks in the cat: 
elementary components. Brain Res Rev 57:46–55.
Kiehn O. 2016. Decoding the organization of spinal circuits 
that control locomotion. Nat Rev Neurosci 17:224–238.
Orlovsky G, Deliagina TG, Grillner S. 1999. Neuronal Control of 
Locomotion: From Mollusc to Man. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Pearson KG. 2008. Role of sensory feedback in the control of 
stance duration in walking cats. Brain Res Rev 57:222–227.
Rossignol S. 1996. Neural control of stereotypic limb move-
ments. Supplement 29. In: Handbook of Physiology, Exercise: 
Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems. New York: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Sherrington CS. 1913. Further observations on the produc-
tion of reflex stepping by combination of reflex excitation 
with reflex inhibition. J Physiol 47:196–214.
Takakusaki K, Chiba R, Nozu T, Okumura T. 2016. Brainstem 
control of locomotion and muscle tone with special refer-
ence to the role of the mesopontine tegmentum and med-
ullary reticulospinal systems. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 
123:695–729.
References
Ampatzis K, Song J, Ausborn J, El Manira A. 2014. Separate 
microcircuit modules of distinct v2a interneurons and 
motoneurons control the speed of locomotion. Neuron 
83:934–943.
Bouvier J, Caggiano V, Leiras R, et al. 2015. Descending com-
mand neurons in the brain stem that halt locomotion. Cell 
163:1191–1203.
Brocard F, Tazerart S, Vinay L. 2010. Do pacemakers drive 
the central pattern generator for locomotion in mammals? 
Neuroscientist 16:139–155.
Buchanan JT, Grillner S. 1987. Newly identified “glutamate 
interneurons” and their role in locomotion in the lamprey 
spinal cord. Science 236:312–314.
Butt SJ, Kiehn O. 2003. Functional identification of interneu-
rons responsible for left-right coordination of hindlimbs 
in mammals. Neuron 38:953–963.
Caggiano V, Leiras R, Goni-Erro H, et al. 2018. Midbrain cir-
cuits that set locomotor speed and gait selection. Nature 
553:455–460.
Capelli P, Pivetta C, Soledad Esposito M, Arber S. 2017. 
Locomotor speed control circuits in the caudal brainstem. 
Nature 551:373–377.
Choi JT, Bouyer LJ, Nielsen JB. 2015. Disruption of locomotor 
adaptation with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion over the motor cortex. Cereb Cortex 25:1981–1986.
Conway BA, Hultborn H, Kiehn O. 1987. Proprioceptive 
input resets central locomotor rhythm in the spinal cat. 
Exp Brain Res 68:643–656.
Crone SA, Quinlan KA, Zagoraiou L, et al. 2008. Genetic 
ablation of V2a ipsilateral interneurons disrupts left-right 
locomotor coordination in mammalian spinal cord. Neuron 
60:70–83.
Dougherty KJ, Zagoraiou L, Satoh D, et al. 2013. Locomotor 
rhythm generation linked to the output of spinal shox2 
excitatory interneurons. Neuron 80:920–933.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    813
Drew T. 1988. Motor cortical cell discharge during voluntary 
gait modification. Brain Res 457:181–187.
Drew T. 1991. Functional organization within the medul-
lary reticular formation of the intact unanesthetized cat. 
III. Microstimulation during locomotion. J Neurophysiol 
66:919–938.
Drew T, Dubuc R, Rossignol S. 1986. Discharge patterns of 
reticulospinal and other reticular neurons in chronic, 
unrestrained cats walking on a treadmill. J Neurophysiol 
55:375–401.
Drew T, Marigold DS. 2015. Taking the next step: cortical 
contributions to the control of locomotion. Curr Opin Neu-
robiol 33C:25–33.
Dubuc R, Brocard F, Antri M, et al. 2008. Initiation of locomo-
tion in lampreys. Brain Res Rev 57:172–182.
Edgerton VR, Leon RD, Harkema SJ, et al. 2001. Retraining 
the injured spinal cord. J Physiol 533:15–22.
Engberg I, Lundberg A. 1969. An electromyographic analy-
sis of muscular activity in the hindlimb of the cat during 
unrestrained locomotion. Acta Physiol Scand 75:614–630.
Forssberg H. 1985. Ontogeny of human locomotor control. I. 
Infant stepping, supported locomotion and transition to 
independent locomotion. Exp Brain Res 57:480–493.
Goulding M. 2009. Circuits controlling vertebrate loco-
motion: moving in a new direction. Nat Rev Neurosci 
10:507–518.
Grillner S. 2006. Biological pattern generation: the cellular 
and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 
52:751–766.
Grillner S. 1981. Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, 
and fish. In: V Brooks (ed). Handbook of Physiology. 
Rockville, MD: American Physiological Society.
Grillner S, Jessell TM. 2009. Measured motion: searching for 
simplicity in spinal locomotor networks. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 19:572–586.
Grillner S, Rossignol S. 1978. On the initiation of the swing 
phase of locomotion in chronic spinal cats. Brain Res 
146:269–277.
Grillner S, Zangger P. 1979. On the central generation of loco-
motion in the low spinal cat. Exp Brain Res 34:241–261.
Grillner S, Zangger P. 1984. The effect of dorsal root transec-
tion on the efferent motor pattern in the cat’s hindlimb 
during locomotion. Acta Physiol Scand 120:393–405.
Hagglund M, Borgius L, Dougherty KJ, Kiehn O. 2010. Acti-
vation of groups of excitatory neurons in the mammalian 
spinal cord or hindbrain evokes locomotion. Nat Neurosci 
13:246–252.
Harris-Warrick RM. 2011. Neuromodulation and flexibility 
in central pattern generator networks. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
21:685–692.
Hiebert GW, Whelan PJ, Prochazka A, Pearson KG. 1996. 
Contribution of hind limb flexor muscle afferents to the tim-
ing of phase transitions in the cat step cycle. J Neurophysiol 
75:1126–1137.
Hounsgaard J, Hultborn H, Kiehn O. 1986. Transmitter-
controlled properties of alpha-motoneurones causing 
long-lasting motor discharge to brief excitatory inputs. 
Prog Brain Res 64:39–49.
Hultborn H, Nielsen JB. 2007. Spinal control of locomotion—
from cat to man. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 189:111–121.
Jessell TM. 2000. Neuronal specification in the spinal cord: 
inductive signals and transcriptional codes. Nat Rev 
Genet 1:20–29.
Jordan LM, Liu J, Hedlund PB, Akay T, Pearson KG. 2008. 
Descending command systems for the initiation of loco-
motion in mammals. Brain Res Rev 57:183–191.
Juvin L, Gratsch S, Trillaud-Doppia E, Gariepy JF, Buschges 
A, Dubuc R. 2016. A specific population of reticulospinal 
neurons controls the termination of locomotion. Cell Rep 
15:2377–2386.
Kiehn O. 2006. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal 
cord. Annu Rev Neurosci 29:279–306.
Kiehn O, Sillar KT, Kjaerulff O, McDearmid JR. 1999. Effects 
of noradrenaline on locomotor rhythm-generating networks 
in the isolated neonatal rat spinal cord. J Neurophysiol 
82:741–746.
Kriellaars DJ, Brownstone RM, Noga BR, Jordan LM. 1994. 
Mechanical entrainment of fictive locomotion in the 
decerebrate cat. J Neurophysiol 71:2074–2086.
Lajoie K, Andujar JE, Pearson K, Drew T. 2010. Neurons in 
area 5 of the posterior parietal cortex in the cat contrib-
ute to interlimb coordination during visually guided 
locomotion: a role in working memory. J Neurophysiol 
103:2234–2254.
Lanuza GM, Gosgnach S, Pierani A, Jessell TM, Goulding 
M. 2004. Genetic identification of spinal interneurons 
that coordinate left-right locomotor activity necessary for 
walking movements. Neuron 42:375–386.
McCrea DA, Rybak IA. 2007. Modeling the mammalian loco-
motor CPG: insights from mistakes and perturbations. 
Prog Brain Res 165:235–253.
McLean DL, Masino MA, Koh IY, Lindquist WB, Fetcho JR. 
2008. Continuous shifts in the active set of spinal interneu-
rons during changes in locomotor speed. Nat Neurosci 
11:1419–1429.
McVea DA, Pearson KG. 2009. Object avoidance during loco-
motion. Adv Exp Med Biol 629:293–315.
Pearson KG, Rossignol S. 1991. Fictive motor patterns in 
chronic spinal cats. J Neurophysiol 66:1874–1887.
Picton LD, Sillar KT. 2016. Mechanisms underlying the 
endogenous dopaminergic inhibition of spinal locomotor 
circuit function in Xenopus tadpoles. Sci Rep 6:35749.
Rossignol S, Frigon A. 2011. Recovery of locomotion after 
spinal cord injury: some facts and mechanisms. Annu Rev 
Neurosci 34:413–440.
Rybak IA, Stecina K, Shevtsova NA, McCrea DA. 2006. Mod-
elling spinal circuitry involved in locomotor pattern gen-
eration: insights from the effects of afferent stimulation. 
J Physiol 577:641–658.
Ryczko D, Dubuc R. 2013. The multifunctional mesence-
phalic locomotor region. Curr Pharm Des 19:4448–4470.
Shik M, Severin F, Orlovskii G. 1966. [Control of walking and 
running by means of electric stimulation of the midbrain]. 
Biofizika 11:659–666. [article in Russian]
Soffe SR, Roberts A, Li WC. 2009. Defining the excitatory 
neurons that drive the locomotor rhythm in a simple 


===== Page 3 =====
814    Part V / Movement
vertebrate: insights into the origin of reticulospinal con-
trol. J Physiol 587:4829–4844.
Talpalar AE, Bouvier J, Borgius L, Fortin G, Pierani A, Kiehn 
O. 2013. Dual-mode operation of neuronal networks 
involved in left-right alternation. Nature 500:85–88.
Talpalar AE, Endo T, Low P, et al. 2011. Identification of 
minimal neuronal networks involved in flexor-extensor 
alternation in the mammalian spinal cord. Neuron 71: 
1071–1084.
Wernig A, Muller S, Nanassy A, Cagol E. 1995. Laufband 
therapy based on ‘rules of spinal locomotion’ is effective 
in spinal cord injured persons. Eur J Neurosci 7:823–829.
Whelan PJ, Hiebert GW, Pearson KG. 1995. Stimulation of 
the group I extensor afferents prolongs the stance phase 
in walking cats. Exp Brain Res 103:20–30.
Yang JF, Mitton M, Musselman KE, Patrick SK, Tajino J. 
2015. Characteristics of the developing human locomotor 
system: similarities to other mammals. Dev Psychobiol 
57:397–408.
Zagoraiou L, Akay T, Martin JF, Brownstone RM, Jessell 
TM, Miles GB. 2009. A cluster of cholinergic premotor 
interneurons modulates mouse locomotor activity. Neuron 
64:645–662.
Zhang J, Lanuza GM, Britz O, et al. 2014. V1 and v2b interneu-
rons secure the alternating flexor-extensor motor activity 
mice require for limbed locomotion. Neuron 82:138–150.
Zhang Y, Narayan S, Geiman E, et al. 2008. V3 spinal neurons 
establish a robust and balanced locomotor rhythm during 
walking. Neuron 60:84–96.


===== Page 4 =====
34
Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices
Several Cortical Motor Areas Are Active When the Motor 
Actions of Others Are Being Observed
Many Aspects of Voluntary Control Are Distributed 
Across Parietal and Premotor Cortex
The Primary Motor Cortex Plays an Important Role  
in Motor Execution
The Primary Motor Cortex Includes a Detailed Map of 
the Motor Periphery
Some Neurons in the Primary Motor Cortex Project 
Directly to Spinal Motor Neurons
Activity in the Primary Motor Cortex Reflects Many 
Spatial and Temporal Features of Motor Output
Primary Motor Cortical Activity Also Reflects  
Higher-Order Features of Movement
Sensory Feedback Is Transmitted Rapidly to the Primary 
Motor Cortex and Other Cortical Regions
The Primary Motor Cortex Is Dynamic and Adaptable
Highlights
I
n this chapter, we describe how  the cerebral 
cortex uses sensory information from the external 
world to guide motor actions that allow the indi-
vidual to interact with the surrounding environment. 
We begin with a general description of what we mean 
by the term voluntary movement and some theoreti-
cal frameworks for understanding its control, followed 
by the basic anatomy of the cortical circuits involved 
in voluntary motor behavior. We then consider how 
information related to the body, external space, and 
behavioral goals is combined and processed in parietal 
cortical regions. This is followed by a discussion of the 
Voluntary Movement Is the Physical Manifestation of an 
Intention to Act
Theoretical Frameworks Help Interpret Behavior and the 
Neural Basis of Voluntary Control
Many Frontal and Parietal Cortical Regions Are Involved 
in Voluntary Control
Descending Motor Commands Are Principally 
Transmitted by the Corticospinal Tract
Imposing a Delay Period Before the Onset of Movement 
Isolates the Neural Activity Associated With Planning 
From That Associated With Executing the Action
Parietal Cortex Provides Information About the World  
and the Body for State Estimation to Plan and Execute  
Motor Actions
The Parietal Cortex Links Sensory Information  
to Motor Actions
Body Position and Motion Are Represented in Several 
Areas of Posterior Parietal Cortex
Spatial Goals Are Represented in Several Areas of 
Posterior Parietal Cortex
Internally Generated Feedback May Influence  
Parietal Cortex Activity
Premotor Cortex Supports Motor Selection and Planning
Medial Premotor Cortex Is Involved in the Contextual 
Control of Voluntary Actions
Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning  
Sensory-Guided Movement of the Arm
Dorsal Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Applying Rules 
(Associations) That Govern Behavior
Ventral Premotor Cortex Is Involved in Planning Motor 
Actions of the Hand
Premotor Cortex May Contribute to Perceptual  
Decisions That Guide Motor Actions


===== Page 5 =====
816    Part V / Movement
role of premotor cortical regions in selecting and plan-
ning motor actions. Finally, we examine the role played 
by the primary motor cortex in motor execution.
Voluntary Movement Is the Physical 
Manifestation of an Intention to Act
Animals, including humans, have a nervous system 
not just so that they can sense their world or think 
about it, but primarily to interact with it to survive and 
reproduce. Understanding how purposeful actions are 
achieved is one of the great challenges in neuroscience. 
We focus here on the cerebral cortical control of volun-
tary motor behavior, in particular voluntary arm and 
hand movements in primates.
In contrast to stereotypical fixed-latency reflexive 
responses that are automatically triggered by incoming 
sensory stimuli (Chapter 32), voluntary movements 
are purposeful, intentional, and context-dependent, 
and are typically accompanied, at least in humans, by 
a sense of “ownership” of the actions, the sense that 
the actions have been willfully caused by the individual. 
Decisions to act are often made without an external 
trigger stimulus. Moreover, the continuous flux of 
events and conditions in the world presents chang-
ing opportunities for action, and thus voluntary action 
involves choices between alternatives, including the 
choice not to act. Finally, the same object or event can 
evoke different actions at different times, depending 
on the current context.
Throughout evolution, these features of volun-
tary behavior have become increasingly prominent 
in higher primates, especially in humans, indicating 
that the neural circuits controlling voluntary behav-
ior in primates are adaptive. In particular, evolution 
has resulted in an increasing degree of dissociation of 
the physical properties of sensory inputs from their 
behavioral salience to the individual. Adaptation of 
the control circuits also enhances the repertoire of vol-
untary motor actions available to a species by allow-
ing individuals to remember and learn from prior 
experience, to predict the future outcomes of different 
action choices, and to adopt new strategies and find 
new solutions to attain their desired goals. Volitional 
self-control over how, when, and even whether to act 
endows primate voluntary behavior with much of its 
richness and flexibility and prevents behavior from 
becoming impulsive, compulsive, or even harmful.
Voluntary behavior is the physical manifestation 
of an individual’s intention to act on the environment, 
usually to achieve a goal immediately or at some point 
in the future. This may require single nonstereotypical 
movements or sequences of actions tailored to current 
conditions and to the longer-term objectives of the 
individual. The ability to use fingers, hands, and arms 
independent of locomotion further helps primates, and 
especially humans, exploit their environment. Most 
animals must search their environment for food when 
hungry. In contrast, humans can “forage” by using 
their hands to cook a meal or simply enter a few num-
bers on a cellphone to order food for delivery. Because 
large areas of the cerebral cortex are implicated in vari-
ous aspects of voluntary motor control, the study of 
the cortical control of voluntary movement provides 
important insights into the purposive functional 
organization of the cerebral cortex as a whole.
Theoretical Frameworks Help Interpret Behavior 
and the Neural Basis of Voluntary Control
The neural processes by which individuals acquire 
information about their environment and the relation-
ship of their body to it, decide how to interact with the 
environment to achieve short- or long-term goals, and 
organize and execute the voluntary movement(s) that 
will fulfill their goals are traditionally partitioned into 
three analytic components: Perceptual mechanisms 
generate an internal representation of the external 
world and the individual within it, cognitive processes 
use this internal model of the world to select a course of 
action to interact with its environment, and the chosen 
plan of action is then relayed to the motor systems for 
implementation. This serial view of the brain’s overall 
functional organization has long dominated neurosci-
ence; this textbook, for example, has separate sections 
dedicated to perception, cognition, and movement.
The brain must transform a goal into motor com-
mands that realize the goal. For example, taking a sip 
of coffee requires the brain to convert visual informa-
tion about the coffee cup and somatic information 
about the current posture and motion of your arm and 
hand into a pattern of muscle contractions that moves 
your hand to the cup, grasps it, and then lifts it to 
your mouth. Many behavioral and modeling studies 
suggest that this could be accomplished by a series of 
transformations of sensorimotor coordinates that con-
vert the retinal image of the cup into motor commands 
(Figure 34–1A).
Variants of this sensorimotor transformation 
model have guided the design and interpretation of 
many studies on the control of voluntary arm move-
ments. Neural recording studies, including many that 
will be described here, have found possible neural 
correlates of the motor parameters and sensorimo-
tor transformations presumed to underlie movement 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    817
Figure 34–1  Theoretical frameworks for interpreting neural 
processing during voluntary motor actions.
A. The concept of sensorimotor transformations addresses 
the basic problem that tasks such as reaching to a visual target 
require the brain and spinal cord to convert sensory informa-
tion about the spatial location of the target, initially repre-
sented in retinal coordinates, into patterns of muscle activity 
to move the limb to the target object. It is assumed that this 
sensorimotor transformation involves the use of intermediary 
representations—representation of the location of the target 
object relative to the body, the spatiotemporal trajectory of the 
hand (extrinsic kinematics), and motion of the joints (intrinsic 
kinematics) necessary to reach and grasp the object—before 
generating the patterns of neural activity that specify the causal 
forces (kinetics) or muscle activity.
B. Optimal feedback control recognizes three key processes 
for control. Optimal state and goal estimation (red box) inte-
grates sensory feedback from various modalities along with 
an efference copy of motor commands to estimate the pre-
sent position and motion of the body and objects in the world. 
Task selection (blue box) involves processes that identify 
behavioral goals based on internal desires and information 
about the state of the body and the world. Control policy 
(green box) determines the feedback gains, operations, and 
processes necessary to generate motor commands to control 
movement.
Extrinsic
kinematics
Extrinsic
coordinates
Kinetics/
muscle
A
Intrinsic
kinematics
Optimal
feedback
control policy
Optimal
state and goal
estimation
Motor
commands
Sensory
feedback
Efference
copy
Task
selection
B
planning and execution. This conceptual framework 
is an example of a representational model of brain func-
tion. Just as the activity of neurons in primary sensory 
areas appears to encode specific physical properties 
of stimuli, the sensorimotor transformation model 
assumes that the activity of neurons in the motor sys-
tem explicitly encodes or represents specific properties 
and parameters of the intended movement.
However, the sensorimotor transformation model 
has important limitations. Among them, the param-
eters and coordinate systems typically used in such 
models were imported from physics and engineering, 
rather than derived from the physiological proper-
ties of biological sensors and effectors. Furthermore, 
the model places all emphasis on strictly serial feed-
forward computations and relegates feedback circuits 
primarily to the detection and correction of perfor-
mance errors after they are committed. The model also 
requires that every temporal detail of a movement be 
explicitly calculated before the motor system can gen-
erate any motor commands. Another limitation is its 
rigidity; it assumes that the same sequence of com-
putations controls every movement in every context. 
Finally, this approach has not addressed how the pro-
posed sensorimotor transformations could be imple-
mented by neurons.
In recent years, theoretical studies of the motor 
system have been moving away from strictly represen-
tational models to more dynamical causal models. This 
approach begins with the premise that the functional 
architecture of motor control circuits evolved to gen-
erate movements, not to represent their parameters. 


===== Page 7 =====
818    Part V / Movement
These circuit properties were acquired by evolutionary 
changes in neural circuitry and by experience-dependent 
adaptive processes during postnatal development that 
produce the patterns of synaptic connectivity within 
the neural circuits that are necessary to generate the 
desired movements. Spinal and supraspinal motor 
circuits ensure that spinal motor neurons generate 
the appropriate muscle contraction signals across task 
conditions without relying on computational formal-
isms such as coordinate transformations.
One such theoretical framework is optimal feed-
back control (Figure 34–1B; and see Chapter 30). There 
are many different forms of optimal control, and each 
captures important aspects of control. Optimal feed-
back control, as the name implies, emphasizes the 
importance of feedback signals for the planning and 
control of movements. It is optimal in the sense that it 
emphasizes the importance of the behavioral goal and 
the current context in determining how best to plan 
and control movements. This flexibility can explain 
how human motor performance can be both highly 
variable and yet successful.
The optimal feedback control framework also 
divides the control of voluntary movements into three 
key processes: state estimation, task selection, and con-
trol policy (Figure 34–1B). State estimation involves for-
ward internal models that use efference copies of motor 
commands and external sensory feedback to provide 
the best estimate of the present state of the body and the 
environment (Chapter 30). Task selection involves the 
neural processes by which the brain chooses a behavio-
ral goal in the current context and what motor action(s) 
might best attain that goal. This selection can be based 
on the sensory evidence supporting alternative actions 
and alternate options to attain the goal, and on other fac-
tors that influence the optimal response such as motiva-
tional state, task urgency, preferences, relative benefits 
versus risks, the mechanical properties of the body and 
environment, and even the biomechanical costs of dif-
ferent action choices. Finally, the control policy provides 
the set of rules and computations that establish how to 
generate the motor commands to attain the behavioral 
goal given the present state of the body and the envi-
ronment. Importantly, the control policy process in opti-
mal feedback control is not a series of pure feedforward 
computations to calculate every instantaneous detail 
of a desired movement trajectory and associated mus-
cle activity patterns before movement onset. Instead, 
it involves context- and time-dependent adjustments 
to feedback circuit gains that allow the spatiotemporal 
form of muscle activity to emerge dynamically in real 
time as part of the control process underlying move-
ment generation.
The sensorimotor transformation and optimal 
feedback control models are not mutually incompati-
ble hypotheses. Optimal feedback control explains cer-
tain features of motor behavior but is largely agnostic 
as to the neural implementation for control. It assumes 
that motor circuits are dynamical systems that attain 
desired goals under varying task constraints. As a 
result, a given neuron may contribute to sensorimotor 
control in different task conditions, but its activity may 
not correspond to a specific movement parameter in a 
definable coordinate framework. In contrast, sensori-
motor transformation models do not fully explain how 
real-time movement control is implemented by motor 
circuits, but emphasize the need to convert informa-
tion from sensory signals to motor commands.
Even if the neural control system is dynamical, 
the system it controls—the musculoskeletal plant—is 
a physical object that must obey the universal physical 
laws of motion. Thus, neural activity should show cor-
relations with those physical parameters and laws that 
will help to infer how those neurons are contributing to 
voluntary motor control, even if they are not attempt-
ing to encode those terms. Indeed, experimental tasks 
that dissociate different types of movement-related 
information have revealed important differences in 
how neural activity in different cortical motor regions 
correlates with different movement properties and dif-
ferent aspects of movement planning and execution. 
Finally, we can impose arbitrary volitional control on 
how we move. For example, we can choose to make 
an unobstructed reaching movement efficiently along 
a straight path to the target or whimsically along a 
complex curved path even though there is no obstacle 
to avoid and the movement is energetically costly. The 
experimental challenge is to reveal how the brain can 
implement this willful control with neurons and neu-
ral circuits.
Many Frontal and Parietal Cortical Regions Are 
Involved in Voluntary Control
Here we describe the regions of frontal and parietal cor-
tex that convert sensory inputs into motor commands 
to produce voluntary movement. We then examine the 
neural circuits involved in the voluntary control of arm 
and hand movements that are prominent components 
of the motor repertory of primates. We focus on stud-
ies in the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta), as much of 
our knowledge of the cortical control of the arm and 
hand comes from this species and the neural circuity 
underlying human voluntary control appears to have 
a similar organization. Many other neural structures, 
including the prefrontal cortex, the basal ganglia, and 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 34 / Voluntary Movement: Motor Cortices    819
cerebellum, also play critical roles in the global organi-
zation of goal-directed voluntary behavior (Chapters 
37 and 38).
Several different nomenclatures have been used 
in partitioning the precentral, postcentral, and parietal 
cortex, based on regional differences in cytoarchitec-
tonic and myeloarchitectonic details, cortico-cortical 
connectivity, the distribution of different marker mol-
ecules, and regional differences in neural response 
properties. Here we will use some of the more widely 
accepted terminology without describing approximate 
homologies among the various nomenclatures.
Based on the pioneering cytoarchitectonic stud-
ies of humans by Brodmann, the different lobes of the 
monkey’s cerebral cortex were divided into smaller 
regions, including two in precentral cortex (areas 4 and 6),  
four in the postcentral cortex (areas 1, 2, 3a, and 3b), 
and at least two in the superior and inferior parietal 
cortex (areas 5 and 7). While these cytoarchitectonic 
divisions persist in the literature, subsequent anatomi-
cal and functional studies have radically changed the 
view of how the precentral and parietal cortices are 
organized (Figure 34–2).
Current maps usually place the primary motor cortex 
(M1), the cortical region most directly involved in motor 
execution in primates, in Brodmann’s area 4. Brod-
mann’s area 6 is now typically divided into five or six 
functional areas that are principally involved in different 
aspects of the planning and control of motor actions of 
different parts of the body. Arm-control regions include 
the dorsal premotor cortex (PMd) and predorsal premotor 
cortex (pre-PMd), in the caudal and rostral parts of the 
dorsal convexity of lateral area 6, respectively. Hand-
control regions include the ventral premotor cortex (PMv), 
found on the ventral convexity of area 6, which has been 
further divided into two or three smaller subregions. A 
variety of functions related to motor selection, sequenc-
ing, and initiation have been found in medial premotor 
cortical regions. These include a region on the medial 
surface of the cortical hemisphere that was originally 
called the secondary motor cortex by Woolsey and col-
leagues, who discovered it, but is now called the supple-
mentary motor area. This region is in turn split into two 
regions, a supplementary motor area proper (SMA) in the 
caudal part and a presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) 
in the rostral part. Outside of Brodmann’s area 6, three 
additional motor areas, the dorsal, ventral, and ros-
tral cingulate motor areas (CMAd, CMAv, and CMAr, 
respectively), are also involved in motor selection but 
have not been as well studied as more lateral premotor 
areas.
The primary somatosensory cortex (S-I; includ-
ing areas 1, 2, 3a, and 3b) is located in the anterior 
postcentral gyrus. It processes cutaneous and mus-
cle mechanoreceptor signals from the periphery and 
transmits that information to other parietal and pre-
central cortical regions (Chapter 19). Like area 6, 
Brodmann’s parietal areas 5 and 7 are now divided 
into several regions within and adjacent to the intra-
parietal sulcus (IPS), each of which integrates various 
types of sensory information about the body or spatial 
goals for voluntary motor control. These include pari-
etal lobe areas PE and PEc on the rostral or superior 
bank, and PF, PFG, PG, and OPT on the caudal, inferior 
bank. Areas inside the IPS include the anterior, lateral, 
medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP, LIP, MIP, 
and VIP, respectively) as well as intraparietal area PEip 
and higher visual area V6A.
These precentral, postcentral, and parietal corti-
cal regions are interconnected by complex patterns of 
reciprocal, convergent, and divergent projections. The 
SMA, PMd, and PMv have somatotopically organized 
reciprocal connections not only with M1 but also with 
each other. Both the SMA and M1 receive somatotopi-
cally organized input from S-I and the dorsorostral 
parietal cortex, whereas PMd and PMv are recipro-
cally connected with progressively more caudal, 
medial, and lateral parts of the parietal cortex. These 
somatosensory and parietal inputs provide the pri-
mary motor and caudal premotor regions with sensory 
information related to behavioral goals, target objects, 
and the position and motion of the body that is used to 
plan and guide motor acts.
In contrast, pre-SMA and pre-PMd project to 
SMA and PMd but do not project to M1 and are 
only weakly connected with the parietal lobe. They 
instead have reciprocal connections with prefrontal 
cortex and so may impose more arbitrary context-
dependent control over voluntary behavior. Pre-
frontal cortex is also connected with other premotor 
cortical regions.
The control of hand and arm motor actions is 
implemented by partially segregated parallel circuits 
distributed across several parietal and precentral 
motor areas. Hand motor function is generally sup-
ported by frontoparietal circuits that are located more 
laterally, notably AIP and PMv. In contrast, proximal 
arm motor function is supported by circuits that are 
more medial, notably parietal areas PE and MIP and 
precentral areas PMd, SMA, and pre-SMA.
Descending Motor Commands Are Principally 
Transmitted by the Corticospinal Tract
Older textbooks often referred to the primary motor 
cortex (M1) as the “final common path.” Other 


===== Page 9 =====
820    Part V / Movement
Figure 34–2  Parietal and frontal motor areas that support 
voluntary control. For illustration purposes, the intraparietal 
sulcus is opened in the bottom panel. The parietal areas are des-
ignated in Constantin von Economo’s terminology by the letter P 
(parietal), followed by letters instead of numbers to indicate the 
cytoarchitectonically different areas. Areas PF and PFG roughly 
correspond to Brodmann’s area 7b, and areas PG and OPT to 
Brodmann’s area 7a. Areas inside the intraparietal sulcus include 
the anterior, lateral, medial, and ventral intraparietal areas (AIP, 
LIP, MIP, VIP, respectively), as well as the PE intraparietal area 
(PEip) and visual area 6A (V6A). Arrows show the patterns of 
the principal reciprocal connections between functionally related 
parietal and frontal motor areas. (Abbreviations: CMAr, rostral 
cingulate motor area; CMAv, ventral cingulate motor area; 
CMd, dorsal cingulate motor area; F, frontal; M1, primary motor 
cortex; OPT, occipito-parieto-temporal; P, parietal; PE, PF, and 
PFG are parietal areas according to the nomenclature of von 
Economo; PMd, dorsal premotor cortex; PMv, ventral premotor 
cortex; Pre-PMd, predorsal premotor cortex; S-I, primary soma-
tosensory cortex; SMA, supplemental motor area.)
A  Human
B  Macaque monkey
Supplementary
motor area 
Primary
motor
cortex
Cingulate
motor areas
CMAr
CMAd
CMAv
Cingulate
motor
areas
Premotor
cortex
Leg
Arm
Leg
Face
PMd
(F2)
PMv
(F5)
(F4)
V6A
AIP
VIP
PEip
MIP
LIP
Areas on the cortical convexity
Areas inside the parietal sulcus
PE
PEc
PF
Face
PFG
PG
OPT
PMd
(F2)
Leg
Leg
Arm
Pre-PMd
(F7)
Pre-
SMA
SMA
SMA
M1
(F1)
M1
S-I
S-I
PMv
(F5)
(F4)
cortical motor areas were thought to influence vol-
untary movements via their projections to M1, which 
then formulated the descending motor command that 
was transmitted to the spinal cord. This is not correct.
Several cortical motor regions outside of M1 
project to subcortical areas of the brain as well as to 
the spinal cord in parallel with the descending pro-
jections from M1. The key descending pathway for 


