===== Page 1 =====
1340    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
spatial memory by encoding a representation of an 
animal’s location in its environment.
Explicit Memory in Mammals Involves 
Synaptic Plasticity in the Hippocampus
Unlike working memory, which is thought to be main-
tained by ongoing neural activity in the prefrontal cor-
tex (Chapter 52), the long-term storage of information 
is thought to depend on long-lasting changes in the 
strength of connections among specific ensembles of 
neurons (neural assemblies) in the hippocampus that 
encode particular elements of memory.
The idea that memory storage involves long-lasting 
structural changes in the brain, first referred to as an 
“engram” by the German biologist Richard Semon in 
the early 20th century, dates back to the French philoso-
pher Rene Descartes. In an attempt to locate an engram, 
the American psychologist Karl Lashley examined the 
effects of lesions in different regions of the neocortex 
on the ability of a rat to learn to navigate a maze. Since 
the performance in the maze seemed to be directly pro-
portional to the size of the lesion, rather than its precise 
location, Lashley concluded that any memory trace 
must be distributed throughout the brain. Although it 
is now generally accepted that storage of an explicit 
memory is distributed throughout the neocortex, it is 
also clear that the process of storing memory requires 
the hippocampus, as demonstrated by the pioneering 
studies of Brenda Milner on patient H.M. (Chapter 52)  
and subsequent studies in animals with targeted 
lesions of the hippocampus. Thus, understanding how 
the brain stores explicit memory depends on an under-
standing of how the cortico-hippocampal circuit 
processes and stores information.
The nature of the basic mechanisms for memory 
storage was and remains the subject of much specu-
lation and debate among psychologists and neurosci-
entists. One influential theory was proposed by the 
Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb, who suggested 
in 1949 that memory-encoding neural assemblies may 
be generated when synaptic connections are strength-
ened based on experience. According to Hebb’s rule: 
“When an axon of cell A . . . excites cell B and repeat-
edly or persistently takes part in firing it, some growth 
process or metabolic change takes place in one or both 
cells so that A’s efficiency as one of the cells firing B 
is increased.” The key element of Hebb’s rule is the 
requirement for coincidence of pre- and postsynaptic 
firing, and so the rule has sometimes been rephrased 
as “Cells that fire together, wire together.” A similar  
Hebbian coincidence principle is thought to be involved 
in fine-tuning synaptic connections during the late stages 
of development (Chapter 49). Hebb’s ideas were later 
refined by the theoretical neuroscientist David Marr, 
based on a consideration of the hippocampal circuit.
The hippocampus comprises a loop of connections 
that process multimodal sensory and spatial informa-
tion from the superficial layers of the nearby entorhi-
nal cortex. This information passes through multiple 
synapses before arriving at the hippocampal CA1 
region, the major output area of the hippocampus. The 
critical importance of CA1 neurons in learning and 
memory is seen in the profound memory loss exhib-
ited by patients with lesions in this region alone, an 
observation supported by numerous animal studies. 
Information from the entorhinal cortex reaches CA1 
neurons along two excitatory pathways, one direct and 
one indirect.
In the indirect pathway, the axons of neurons in 
layer II of the entorhinal cortex project through the  
perforant pathway to excite the granule cells of the den-
tate gyrus (an area considered part of the hippocampus). 
Next, the axons of the granule cells project in the mossy 
fiber pathway to excite the pyramidal cells in the CA3 
region of the hippocampus. Finally, axons of the CA3 
neurons project through the Schaffer collateral pathway to 
make excitatory synapses on more proximal regions of 
the dendrites of the CA1 pyramidal cells (Figure 54–1). 
(Because of its three successive excitatory synaptic con-
nections, the indirect pathway is often referred to as the 
trisynaptic pathway). Finally, CA1 pyramidal cells pro-
ject back to the deep layers of entorhinal cortex and for-
ward to the subiculum, another medial temporal lobe 
structure that connects the hippocampus with a wide 
diversity of brain regions.
In parallel with the indirect pathway, the entorhi-
nal cortex also projects directly to CA3 and CA1 hip-
pocampal regions. In the direct pathway to CA1, 
neurons in layer III of the entorhinal cortex send their 
axons through the perforant pathway to form excita-
tory synapses on the very distal regions of the api-
cal dendrites of CA1 neurons (such projections are 
also called the temporoammonic pathway). Interactions 
between direct and indirect inputs at each stage of the 
hippocampal circuit are likely important for memory 
storage or recall, although the precise nature of these 
interactions remains to be determined.
In addition to the above pathways that link differ-
ent stages of the hippocampal circuit, CA3 pyramidal 
neurons also make strong excitatory connections with 
one another. This self-excitation through recurrent col-
laterals is thought to contribute to associative aspects 
of memory storage and recall. Under pathological con-
ditions, such self-excitation can lead to seizures.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1341
Figure 54–1  The cortico-hippocampal synaptic circuit is 
important for declarative memory. Information arrives in the 
hippocampus from the entorhinal cortex through the perforant 
pathways, which provide both direct and indirect input to 
pyramidal neurons in area CA1, the major output neurons of the 
hippocampus. (Arrows denote the direction of impulse flow.) 
The indirect trisynaptic pathway has three component connec-
tions. Neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex send their 
axons through the perforant path to make excitatory synapses 
onto the granule cells of the dentate gyrus. The granule cells 
project through the mossy fiber pathway and make excitatory 
synapses with the pyramidal cells in area CA3 of the hippocam-
pus. The CA3 cells excite the pyramidal cells in CA1 by means 
of the Schaffer collateral pathway. In the direct pathway,  
neurons in layer III of the entorhinal cortex project through  
the perforant path to make excitatory synapses on the  
distal dendrites of CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurons without 
inter vening synapses (shown only for CA1).
Dentate 
region
Entorhinal 
cortex
CA3
Mossy ﬁber pathway
Schaffer collateral 
pathway
Dentate 
region
Perforant pathway
from entorhinal cortex
CA1
Granule
cell
Direct
Trisynaptic
CA3
CA1
Hippocampus
Fornix
Direct
Trisynaptic
Finally, neurons in the relatively small CA2 region, 
located between CA3 and CA1, receive information 
from entorhinal cortex layer II through both a direct 
pathway and an indirect pathway via the dentate 
gyrus and CA3. The CA2 region also receives strong 
input from hypothalamic nuclei that release oxy-
tocin and vasopressin, hormones important for social 
behavior. In turn, CA2 sends a strong output to CA1, 


===== Page 3 =====
1342    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
providing CA1 with a third source of excitatory input 
(in addition to the direct and trisynaptic routes from 
the entorhinal cortex).
Long-Term Potentiation at Distinct Hippocampal 
Pathways Is Essential for Explicit Memory Storage
How is information stored in the hippocampal circuit 
to provide a long-lasting memory trace? In 1973, Timo-
thy Bliss and Terje Lømo discovered that a brief period 
of high-frequency synaptic stimulation causes a persis-
tent increase in the amplitude of hippocampal excita-
tory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs), a process termed 
long-term potentiation or LTP (Chapter 13). The enhance-
ment in the EPSP, in turn, increases the probability that 
the postsynaptic cell will fire action potentials.
Bliss and Lømo examined the initial stage of the 
indirect hippocampal pathway—the synapses formed 
by the perforant pathway from entorhinal cortex layer 
II neurons with dentate gyrus granule neurons. Subse-
quent studies showed that brief high-frequency trains 
of stimulation can induce forms of LTP at nearly all 
excitatory synapses of this indirect pathway as well 
as at the direct perforant path synapses with CA3 and 
CA1 neurons (Figure 54–2). LTP can last for days or 
even weeks when induced in intact animals using 
implanted electrodes and can last several hours in iso-
lated slices of hippocampus and in hippocampal neu-
rons in cell culture.
Studies in the different hippocampal pathways 
have shown that LTP at different synapses is not a 
single process. Rather, it comprises a family of pro-
cesses that strengthen synaptic transmission at differ-
ent hippocampal synapses through distinct cellular 
and molecular mechanisms. Indeed, even at a single 
synapse, different forms of LTP can be induced by dif-
ferent patterns of synaptic activity, although these dis-
tinct processes share many important similarities.
All forms of LTP are induced by synaptic activity in 
the pathway that is being potentiated—that is, LTP is 
homosynaptic. In addition, LTP is synapse specific; only 
those synapses that are activated by the tetanic stimu-
lation are potentiated. However, the various forms of 
LTP differ in their dependence on specific receptors 
and ion channels. In addition, different forms of LTP 
recruit different second-messenger signaling path-
ways that act at different synaptic sites. Some forms 
of LTP result from an enhancement of the postsynaptic 
response to the neurotransmitter glutamate, whereas 
other forms of LTP result from the enhancement of glu-
tamate release from the presynaptic terminal, and still 
other forms of LTP engage both the presynaptic and 
postsynaptic neurons.
The similarities and differences in the mechanisms 
of different forms of LTP can be seen by compar-
ing LTP at Schaffer collateral, mossy fiber, and direct 
entorhinal synapses. In all three pathways, synaptic 
transmission is persistently enhanced in response to 
a brief tetanic stimulation. However, the contribution 
of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor to the 
induction of LTP differs in the three pathways. At the 
Schaffer collateral synapses, the induction of LTP in 
response to a brief 100-Hz stimulation is completely 
blocked when the tetanus is applied in the presence of 
the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phospho-
novaleric acid (AP5 or APV). In contrast, APV only 
partially inhibits the induction of LTP at the direct 
entorhinal synapses with CA1 neurons and has no 
effect on LTP at the mossy fiber synapses with CA3 
pyramidal neurons (Figure 54–2).
Long-term potentiation in the mossy fiber path-
way is largely presynaptic and is triggered by the large 
Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic terminals during the 
tetanus. The Ca2+ influx activates a calcium/calmodulin- 
dependent adenylyl cyclase, thereby increasing the 
production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) and activating protein kinase A (PKA; see 
Chapter 14). This leads to the phosphorylation of pre-
synaptic vesicle proteins that enhance the release of 
glutamate from the mossy fiber terminals, resulting 
in an increase in the EPSP. Activity in the postsynaptic 
cell is not required for this form of LTP. Thus, unlike 
Hebbian plasticity, mossy fiber LTP is nonassociative.
In the Schaffer collateral pathway, however, LTP is 
associative, largely as a result of the properties of the 
NMDA receptors (Figure 54–3; see also Chapter 13). 
As is the case with most excitatory synapses in the 
brain, glutamate released from the Schaffer collat-
eral terminals activates both α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and NMDA  
receptor-channels in the postsynaptic membrane of 
CA1 pyramidal neurons. However, unlike the AMPA 
receptors, activation of the NMDA receptors is associa-
tive because it requires simultaneous presynaptic and 
postsynaptic activity. This is because the pore of the 
NMDA receptor-channel is normally blocked by extra-
cellular Mg2+ at typical negative resting potentials, 
which prevents these channels from conducting ions in 
response to glutamate. For the NMDA receptor-chan-
nel to function efficiently, the postsynaptic membrane 
must be depolarized sufficiently to expel the bound 
Mg2+ by electrostatic repulsion. In this manner, the 
NMDA receptor-channel acts as a coincidence detec-
tor: It is functional only when (1) the action potentials 
in the presynaptic neuron release glutamate that binds  
to the receptor and (2) the membrane of the postsynaptic 


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 54–2  Different neural mechanisms underlie long-term 
potentiation at each of the three synapses in the trisynaptic 
pathway. Long-term potentiation (LTP) occurs at synapses through-
out the hippocampus but depends to differing degrees on activation 
of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors.
A. Tetanic stimulation of the Schaffer collateral fibers (at time 0 in 
the plot) induces LTP at the synapses between presynaptic CA3 
pyramidal neurons and postsynaptic CA1 pyramidal neurons. The 
plot shows the size of the extracellular field excitatory postsynap-
tic potential (fEPSP) as a percentage of the baseline fEPSP prior to 
induction of LTP. At these synapses, LTP requires activation of the 
NMDA receptor-channels in the postsynaptic CA1 neurons as it is 
completely blocked when the tetanus is delivered in the presence 
of the NMDA receptor antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric 
acid (APV). (Adapted from Morgan and Teyler 2001.)
B. Tetanic stimulation of the direct pathway from entorhinal cor-
tex to CA1 neurons generates LTP of the fEPSP that depends 
partly on activation of the NMDA receptor-channels and partly 
on activation of L-type voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. It is there-
fore only partially blocked by APV. Addition of APV and nifedi-
pine, a dihydropyridine that blocks L type channels, is needed 
to fully inhibit LTP.
C. Tetanic stimulation of the mossy fiber pathway induces LTP at 
the synapses with the pyramidal cells in the CA3 region. In this 
experiment, the excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) was meas-
ured under voltage-clamp conditions. This LTP does not require 
activation of the NMDA receptors and so is not blocked by APV. 
However, it does require activation of protein kinase A (PKA) and 
so is blocked by the kinase inhibitor H-89. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Zalutsky and Nicoll 1990. Copyright © 1990 AAAS.)
Control
100
150
200
250
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
–10
0
10
20
30
C  Mossy ﬁber pathway LTP
B  Direct perforant pathway LTP
A  Schaffer collateral pathway LTP
CA1
CA3
Schaffer collateral 
pathway
CA1
Direct perforant 
pathway
CA1
Mossy ﬁber pathway
–10
100
150
200
0
40
60
Extracellular
recording
Extracellular
recording
Voltage-clamp
recording
APV
Control
APV
APV + nifedipine
Schaffer 
collateral 
Mossy 
ﬁber 
Direct perforant
pathway
CA3
CA1
CA1
Key participants in different forms 
of LTP
NMDA receptors 
NMDA receptors and 
L-type Ca2+ channels 
Presynaptic 
PKA
–10
0
10
20
Control, APV
30
100
200
300
400
500
600
EPSC (percent of baseline)
Time (min)
PKA inhibitor (H-89)
CA3
CA3


===== Page 5 =====
1344    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Adenylyl 
cyclase
Effectors
cAMP
PKA
Nucleus
CRE
CREB-1
CA1
CA3
P
P
P
MAP kinase
Enhanced
transmitter
release
Ca2+
Mg2+
NMDA
receptor
AMPA
receptor
New
AMPA
receptor
CA1 neuron spine
1
2
3
4
5
7
6
8
Late LTP
CA3 neuron terminal
Ca2+/
calmodulin
?
Retrograde
messenger
Early LTP
Late LTP
(new synapse)
NO?
Glu
P
P
NMDA
receptor
AMPA
receptor
Glu
P
mRNA
PKMζ
Retrograde
signal
NO
synthase 
CaMKII
PKC


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1345
Figure 54–3  (Opposite) A model for the induction of long-
term potentiation (LTP) at Schaffer collateral synapses. A 
single high-frequency tetanus induces early LTP. The large depo-
larization of the postsynaptic membrane (caused by strong activa-
tion of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic 
acid [AMPA] receptors) relieves the Mg2+ blockade of the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-channels (1), allowing 
Ca2+, Na+, and K+ to flow through these channels. The result-
ing increase of Ca2+ in the dendritic spine (2) triggers calcium-
dependent kinases (3)—calcium/calmodulin–dependent kinase  
(CaMKII) and protein kinase C (PKC)—leading to induction of 
LTP. Second-messenger cascades activated during induction of 
LTP have two main effects on synaptic transmission. Phospho-
rylation through activation of protein kinases, including PKC, 
enhances current through the AMPA receptor-channels, in part 
by causing insertion of new receptors into the spine synapses 
(4). In addition, the postsynaptic cell releases retrograde 
messengers, such as nitric oxide (NO), that activate protein 
kinases in the presynaptic terminal to enhance subsequent 
transmitter release (5). Repeated bouts of tetanic stimula-
tion induce late LTP. The prolonged increase in Ca2+ influx 
recruits adenylyl cyclase (6), which generates cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) that activates protein kinase A (PKA). 
This leads to the activation of MAP kinase, which translocates 
to the nucleus where it phosphorylates CREB-1. CREB-1 in 
turn activates transcription of targets (containing the CRE  
promoter) that are thought to lead to the growth of  
new synaptic connections (7). Repeated stimulation also 
activates translation of mRNA encoding PKMζ, a constitu-
tively active isoform of PKC (8). This leads to a long-lasting 
increase in the number of AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic 
membrane.
cell is sufficiently depolarized by strong synaptic activ-
ity to relieve the Mg2+ block. Thus, the NMDA receptor 
is able to associate presynaptic and postsynaptic activity 
to recruit plasticity mechanisms that strengthen connec-
tions between pairs of cells, fulfilling Hebb’s coinci-
dence requirement for synaptic modification.
What are the functional consequences of the activa-
tion of NMDA receptors by strong synaptic excitation? 
Whereas most AMPA receptor-channels conduct only 
monovalent cations (Na+ and K+), the NMDA receptor-
channels have a high permeability to Ca2+ (Chapter 13). 
Thus, the opening of these channels leads to a significant 
increase in the Ca2+concentration in the postsynaptic 
cell. The increase in intracellular Ca2+ activates several 
downstream signaling pathways—including calcium/
calmodulin–dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), pro-
tein kinase C (PKC), and tyrosine kinases—that lead 
to changes that enhance the magnitude of the EPSP at 
Schaffer collateral synapses (Figure 54–3).
Different Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms 
Contribute to the Forms of Expression of  
Long-Term Potentiation
Neuroscientists often find it useful to distinguish 
between the induction of LTP (the biochemical reac-
tions activated by the tetanic stimulation) and the 
expression of LTP (the long-term changes responsible 
for enhanced synaptic transmission). The mechanisms 
for the induction of LTP at the CA3-CA1 synapse are 
largely postsynaptic. Is the expression of LTP at this 
synapse caused by an increase in transmitter release, 
an increased postsynaptic response to a fixed amount 
of transmitter, or some combination of the two?
A number of lines of experiments suggest that the 
form of expression of LTP depends on the type of syn-
apse and precise pattern of activity that induces LTP. 
In many cases, the expression of LTP in CA1 neurons 
in response to Ca2+ influx through NMDA receptor-
channels depends on an increase in the response of 
the postsynaptic membrane to glutamate. But stronger 
patterns of stimulation can elicit forms of LTP at the 
same synapse whose expression depends on presyn-
aptic events that enhance transmitter release.
One of the key pieces of evidence for a postsyn-
aptic contribution to the expression of LTP at Schaffer 
collateral synapses comes from an examination of so-
called “silent synapses.” In some recordings from pairs 
of hippocampal pyramidal neurons, stimulation of an 
action potential in one neuron fails to elicit a response 
in the postsynaptic neuron when that neuron is at its 
resting potential (approximately −70 mV). This result 
is not surprising, as each hippocampal presynaptic 
neuron is connected to only a small number of other 
neurons. What is surprising is that in some neuronal 
pairs that appear unconnected when the postsynap-
tic membrane is initially at –70 mV, stimulation of the 
same presynaptic neuron is able to elicit a large excita-
tory postsynaptic current in the second neuron when 
the second neuron is depolarized under voltage clamp 
to +30 mV. In such neuronal pairs, the postsynaptic 
membrane appears to lack functional AMPA recep-
tors so that the excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) 
is mediated solely by NMDA receptors-channels. As a 
result, there is no measurable EPSC when the mem-
brane is held at the cell’s resting potential (−70 mV) 
because of the strong Mg2+ block of these receptor-
channels (the synapse is effectively silent). However, 
a large EPSC can be generated at +30 mV because the 
depolarization relieves the block (Figure 54–4).
The key finding from these experiments is seen 
following the induction of LTP using strong synaptic 
stimulation. Pairs of neurons initially connected solely 
by silent synapses now often exhibit large EPSPs at the 


===== Page 7 =====
1346    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Figure 54–4  Adding α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors to silent syn-
apses during long-term potentiation (LTP).
A. Intracellular recordings are obtained from a pair of hippocam-
pal pyramidal neurons. An action potential (AP) is triggered 
in neuron a by a depolarizing current pulse, and the resultant 
excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) produced in neuron b is 
recorded under voltage-clamp conditions.
B. Before induction of LTP, there is no EPSC in cell b  
(top traces) in response to an action potential in cell a (bottom 
traces) when the membrane potential of neuron b is at its  
resting value of −65 mV (1). However, when neuron 
b is depolarized by the voltage clamp to +30 mV, the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are activated and slow 
EPSCs characteristic of these receptors are observed (2). LTP 
is then induced by pairing action potentials in neuron a with 
postsynaptic depolarization in neuron b to relieve the Mg2+ 
block of the NMDA receptors. After this pairing, fast EPSCs 
initiated by activation of AMPA receptors are seen in cell b (3). 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Montgomery, Pavlidis, and 
Madison 2001. Copyright © 2001 Cell Press.)
C. Mechanism of the unsilencing of silent synapses. Prior to 
LTP, the dendritic spine contacted by a presynaptic CA3 neuron 
contains only NMDA receptors. Following induction of LTP, 
intracellular vesicles containing AMPA receptors fuse with the 
plasma membrane at the synapse, adding AMPA receptors to 
the membrane.
1  Before LTP (–65 mV)
2  Before LTP (+30 mV)
3  After LTP (–65 mV)
Stimulate AP in cell a
Record EPSC in cell b
20 pA
20 mV
10 ms
20 pA
20 mV
10 ms
NMDA 
receptor
AMPA 
receptor
Pairing
Silent synapse
Unsilenced synapse
Before LTP
After LTP
A
C
B
NMDA receptor EPSC
AMPA receptor EPSC
20 pA
30 mV
10 ms
a
b
negative resting potential, and these EPSPs are medi-
ated by AMPA receptors. The simplest interpretation of 
this result is that LTP somehow recruits new functional 
AMPA receptors to the silent synapse membrane, a 
process Roberto Malinow refers to as “AMPAfication.”
How does the induction of LTP increase the 
response of AMPA receptors? The strong synaptic 
stimulation used to induce LTP triggers glutamate 
release at both silent and nonsilent synapses on the 
same postsynaptic neuron. This leads to the opening 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 54 / The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of Explicit Memory Storage     1347
of a large number of AMPA receptor-channels at the 
nonsilent synapses, which in turn produces a large 
postsynaptic depolarization. The depolarization then 
propagates throughout the neuron, thus relieving Mg2+ 
block of the NMDA receptor-channels at both the non-
silent and silent synapses. At the silent synapses, the 
Ca2+ influx through the NMDA receptor-channels acti-
vates a biochemical cascade that ultimately leads to the 
insertion of clusters of AMPA receptors in the postsyn-
aptic membrane. These newly inserted AMPA recep-
tors are thought to come from a reserve pool stored in 
endosomal vesicles within dendritic spines, the site of 
all excitatory input to pyramidal neurons (Chapter 13). 
Calcium influx through the NMDA receptor-channels 
elevates spine Ca2+ levels, triggering a postsynaptic 
signaling cascade that leads to phosphorylation of the 
cytoplasmic tail of the vesicular AMPA receptors 
by PKC (Chapter 14), leading to their insertion in the 
postsynaptic membrane (Figure 54–3).
Because the induction of almost all forms of post-
synaptic LTP requires Ca2+ influx into the postsynaptic 
cell, the finding that transmitter release is enhanced 
during some forms of LTP implies that the presynap-
tic cell must receive a signal from the postsynaptic cell 
that LTP has been induced. There is now evidence 
that calcium-activated second messengers in the post-
synaptic cell, or perhaps Ca2+ itself, cause the postsyn-
aptic cell to release one or more chemical messengers, 
including the gas nitric oxide, that diffuse to the 
presynaptic terminals to enhance transmitter release  
(Figure 54–3 and Chapter 14). Importantly, these diffusi-
ble retrograde signals appear to affect only those presyn-
aptic terminals that have been activated by the tetanic 
stimulation, thereby preserving synapse specificity.
Long-Term Potentiation Has Early and Late Phases
Long-term potentiation has two phases, early and 
late, that provide a means of regulating the duration 
–30
0
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
30
60
Time (min)
90
120
150
180
210
A  Late vs early LTP
B  Early LTP does not require protein synthesis
Early LTP (1 train)
Late LTP (4 trains)
C  Late LTP requires protein synthesis
–30
0
0
40
80
120
160
200
30
60
Time (min)
Protein synthesis
inhibited
(anisomycin)
Protein synthesis
inhibited
(anisomycin)
Control
Control
–30
40
80
120
160
200
240
0
0
60
120
180
Time (min)
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
fEPSP (percent of baseline)
Figure 54–5  (Right) Long-term potentiation (LTP) in the CA1 
region of the hippocampus has early and late phases.
A. Early LTP is induced by a single tetanus lasting 1 second at 
100 Hz, whereas late LTP is induced by four tetani given  
10 minutes apart. Early LTP of the field excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (fEPSP) lasts only 1 to 2 hours, whereas the late LTP 
lasts more than 8 hours (only the first 3.5 hours are shown).
B. Early LTP induced by one tetanus is not blocked by anisomy-
cin (bar), an inhibitor of protein synthesis.
C. Late LTP, normally induced by three trains of stimulation, 
is blocked by anisomycin. (Three or four trains can be used to 
induce late LTP.) (Panels B and C reproduced, with permission, 
from Huang and Kandel 1994.)
of the enhancement of synaptic transmission. The 
phase we have focused on up to now lasts for only 1 to  
3 hours and is termed early LTP; this phase is typically 
induced by a single train of 100-Hz tetanic stimulation 
for 1 second. More prolonged periods of activity (using 
three or four trains of 100-Hz tetanic stimulation, each 
lasting 1 second) induce a late phase of LTP that can 
last 24 hours or even longer. Unlike early LTP, late LTP 
requires the synthesis of new proteins (Figure 54–5). 


===== Page 9 =====
1348    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Whereas the early phase of LTP is mediated by changes 
at existing synapses, late LTP is thought to result from 
the growth of new synaptic connections between pairs 
of co-activated neurons.
Although the mechanisms for early LTP in the Schaf-
fer collateral and mossy fiber pathways are quite differ-
ent, the mechanisms for late LTP in the two pathways 
appear similar (Figure 54–3). In both pathways, late LTP 
recruits the cAMP and PKA signaling pathway to acti-
vate by phosphorylation the cAMP response element 
binding protein (CREB) transcription factor, leading to 
the synthesis of new mRNAs and proteins. Like sensi-
tization of the gill-withdrawal reflex in Aplysia, which 
also involves cAMP, PKA, and CREB (Chapter 53),  
late LTP in the Schaffer collateral pathway is synapse 
specific. When two independent sets of synapses in the 
same postsynaptic CA1 neuron are stimulated using 
two electrodes spaced some distance apart, the appli-
cation of four trains of tetanic stimulation to one set of 
synapses induces late LTP only at the activated syn-
apses; synaptic transmission is not altered at the sec-
ond set of synapses that were not tetanized.
How can late LTP achieve synapse specificity 
given that transcription and most translation occurs 
in the cell body, such that newly synthesized proteins 
should be available to all synapses of a cell? To explain 
synapse specificity, Uwe Frey and Richard Morris pro-
posed the synaptic capture hypothesis, in which syn-
apses that are activated during the tetanus are tagged 
in some way, perhaps by protein phosphorylation, that 
enables them to make use of (“capture”) the newly 
synthesized proteins. Frey and Morris tested this idea 
using the two-pathway protocol described above. 
They delivered four tetani to induce late LTP at one set 
of synapses with one electrode and delivered a single 
tetanus to a second set of synapses with the other elec-
trode. Although a single tetanus on its own induces 
only early LTP, it is able to induce late LTP when deliv-
ered within 2–3 hours of the four tetani from the first 
electrode. This phenomenon is similar to the synapse-
specific capture of long-term facilitation at the sensory-
motor neuron synapses in Aplysia (Chapter 53).
According to Frey and Morris, the single train of 
tetanic stimulation, although not sufficient to induce 
new protein synthesis, is sufficient to tag the activated 
synapses, allowing them to capture the newly syn-
thesized proteins produced in response to the prior 
delivery of the four trains of tetanic stimulation. The 
increased synaptic plasticity that this tagging mecha-
nism affords, and its limitation to the period when 
newly synthesized proteins are around, may explain 
the recent finding that hippocampal cell assemblies 
that store memories of events closely spaced in time 
have a larger number of common neurons than do cell 
assemblies for events widely separated in time.
How can a few brief trains of synaptic stimulation 
produce such long-lasting increases in synaptic trans-
mission? One mechanism proposed by John Lisman 
depends on the unique properties of CaMKII. After 
a brief exposure to Ca2+, CaMKII can be converted to 
a calcium-independent state through its autophos-
phorylation at threonine-286 (Thr286). This ability to 
become persistently active in response to a transient 
Ca2+ stimulus has led to the suggestion that CaMKII 
may act as a simple molecular switch that can extend 
the duration of LTP following its initial activation.
Studies from Todd Sacktor have suggested that 
longer-lasting changes that maintain late LTP may 
depend on an atypical isoform of PKC termed PKMζ 
(PKM zeta). Most isoforms of PKC contain both a reg-
ulatory domain and a catalytic domain (Chapter 14). 
Binding of diacylglycerol, phospholipids, and Ca2+ to 
the regulatory domain relieves inhibitory domain bind-
ing to the catalytic domain, allowing PKC to phospho-
rylate its protein substrates. In contrast, PKMζ lacks a 
regulatory domain and so is constitutively active.
Levels of PKMζ in the hippocampus are normally 
low. Tetanic stimulation that induces LTP leads to an 
increase in synthesis of PKMζ through enhanced trans-
lation of its mRNA. Because this mRNA is present in 
the CA1 neuron dendrites, its translation can rapidly 
alter synaptic strength. Blockade of PKMζ with a pep-
tide inhibitor during the tetanic stimulation blocks late 
LTP but not early LTP. If the blocker is applied several 
hours after LTP induction, the late LTP that had been 
established will be reversed. This result indicates that 
the maintenance of late LTP requires the ongoing activ-
ity of PKMζ to maintain the increase in AMPA recep-
tors in the postsynaptic membrane (Figure 54–3). A 
second atypical PKC isoform may substitute for PKMζ 
under certain conditions, which may explain the sur-
prising finding that genetic deletion of PKMζ has little 
effect on late LTP.
Constitutively active forms of protein kinases 
may not be the only mechanism for maintaining 
long-lasting synaptic changes in the hippocampus. 
Repeated stimulation may lead to the formation of 
new synaptic connections, just as long-term facilita-
tion leads to the formation of new synapses during 
learning in Aplysia. In addition, long-lasting synaptic 
changes likely involve epigenetic changes in chroma-
tin structure. During late LTP, phosphorylated CREB 
activates gene expression by recruiting the CREB 
binding protein (CBP), which acts as a histone acet-
ylase, transferring an acetyl group to specific lysine 
residues on histone proteins, and thereby producing 


