===== Page 1 =====
1228    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 49–16  (Right) Reorganization of sensory maps in the 
optic tectum of owls after systematic displacement of the 
retinal image.  The retinal image in adolescent owls can be 
displaced by prism goggles, which shift images from 5° to 30°. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 
2002 Springer Nature.)
A. Before application of the prisms, the visual and auditory neu-
ral maps coincide.
B. The prism goggles displace the retinal image by 23°. Conse-
quently, the neural and auditory maps are out of alignment.
C. The two brain maps are once again congruent 42 days after 
prism application because the auditory map has shifted to realign 
with the visual map.
D. Soon after the prisms are removed, the visual map reverts to 
its original position, but the auditory map remains in its shifted 
position.
with receptive fields centered on a particular location 
are also tuned to ITDs that correspond to sounds emit-
ted from that same point in space. The registration is 
imprecise at early stages but becomes progressively 
more precise during early adolescence as a conse-
quence of the animal’s experience.
Crucial insight into how this registration occurs 
came from experiments in which prisms were mounted 
over the eyes of young owls. The prisms shifted the 
retinal image horizontally so that the visual map in 
the tectum reflected a world systematically displaced 
from its “actual” orientation. This change abruptly 
disrupted the correspondence between visual and 
auditory receptive fields. Over the next several weeks, 
however, the ITD to which tectal neurons responded 
optimally, ie, their auditory receptive field, changed 
until the visual and auditory maps came back into reg-
ister (Figure 49–16). Thus, the visual map instructs the 
auditory map.
Further experiments showed that this reorganiza-
tion resulted from rewiring of connections between 
two deeper auditory nuclei (Figure 49–17). When 
prism goggles were placed on young owls, changes 
in ITD tuning were fully adaptive in that the animals 
compensated completely for the effects of the prisms. 
In contrast, goggles placed on mature owls (older than 
7 months of age) had little effect. Thus, reorganization 
of this auditory projection occurs optimally during a 
critical juvenile period.
Different Functions and Brain Regions Have 
Different Critical Periods of Development
Not all brain circuits are stabilized at the same time. 
Even within the visual cortex, the critical periods for 
organization of inputs differ among layers in both mice 
10
–10
+10
10
30
L
R
10
–10
+10
10
30
L
R
Auditory stimuli
Visual stimuli 
mutations
Head orientation 
in response to:
–5
10
–10
+10
10
20
30
L
R
10
–5
+5
10
30
L
R
A  Before prisms
B  Soon after visual 
 
ﬁeld is displaced 
 
23° rightward 
C  42 days after 
 
displacement 
D  Soon after removal
 
of prisms 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1229
Visual-ﬁeld azimuth
Site of
plasticity
0° 20°40°
ITD in 
frequency-
speciﬁc 
channels
Auditory 
space map
Multimodal 
space map
0 µs
50 µs
100 µs
20°40°60°
20°40°60°
60°
50 µs
100 µs
150 µs
0 µs
0 µs
50 µs
100 µs
Inferior colliculus
Optic 
tectum
Central 
nucleus
External 
nucleus
A  Normal
B  Animal wearing 
 
prism goggles
C  After auditory 
 
remapping
20° 
prisms
Superimposed 
visual and 
auditory maps
Misaligned 
visual and 
auditory maps
Realigned 
visual and 
auditory 
maps
Figure 49–17  The effect of prism experience on information 
flow in the midbrain auditory localization pathway in the 
barn owl. (Adapted from Knudsen 2002.)
A. The auditory pathway in a normal owl. The interaural time 
difference (ITD) is measured and mapped in frequency-specific 
channels in the brain stem. This information ascends to the infe-
rior colliculus, where a neural map of auditory space is created. 
The map is conveyed to the optic tectum where it merges with 
a map of visual space.
B. After an owl is fitted with prism goggles, the visual and audi-
tory space maps in the optic tectum become misaligned.
C. After reorganization of auditory maps, the visual and auditory 
maps are once again in alignment.
and monkeys. As an example, the neural connections 
in layer IVC of the visual cortex of the monkey are not 
affected by monocular deprivation by the time the 
animal is 2 months old. In contrast, connections in the 
upper and lower layers continue to be influenced by 
sensory experience (or lack of it) for almost the entire 
first year after birth. Critical periods for other features 
of the visual system, such as orientation tuning, occur 
at different developmental stages (Figure 49–18A).
The timing of critical periods also varies between 
brain regions (Figure 49–18B). The adverse conse-
quences of sensory deprivation for the primary sen-
sory regions of the brain are generally fully realized 
early in postnatal development. In contrast, social 
experience can affect the intracortical connections 
over a much longer period. These differences may 
explain why certain types of learning are optimal 
at particular stages of development. For example, 
certain cognitive capacities—language, music, and 
mathematics—usually must be acquired well before 
puberty if they are to develop at all. In addition, 
insults to the brain at specific early stages of postnatal 
life may selectively affect the development of certain 
perceptual abilities and behavior.
Critical Periods Can Be Reopened  
in Adulthood
By definition, critical periods are limited in time. Nev-
ertheless, they are less sharply defined than originally 
thought. Extending or reopening critical periods in 
adulthood could increase brain plasticity and make it 
possible to facilitate recovery from strokes and other 
insults that impair discrete regions of the nervous 
system.
Some of the first evidence for plasticity in the adult 
cortex came from studies by Merzenich and colleagues 
on the representation of the fingers of monkeys in 
the somatosensory cortex. Recordings of neuronal 
receptive fields in normal adult animals showed that 
each digit is mapped in an orderly way on the corti-
cal surface, with abrupt discontinuities between areas 
responding to different digits (Figure 49–19A). Ampu-
tation of a digit left the cortical representation of that 
digit initially unresponsive, but after several months, 
areas serving the neighboring digits filled in the gap 
(Figure 49–19B). Much as happens in the visual cortex 
following monocular deprivation, the somatosensory 
map was readjusted so that the cortex could devote 


===== Page 3 =====
1230    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 49–18  The timing of critical periods varies 
with brain function. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Hensch 2005. Copyright © 2005 Springer Nature.)
A. In cats, the critical periods for development of ori-
entation or direction selectivity in visual neurons occur 
earlier than those for establishment of ocular domi-
nance and slow-wave sleep oscillation.
B. In humans, the timing of periods for development 
of sensory processing, language, and cognitive func-
tions varies.
Plasticity
Plasticity
Eye
opening
Development
Orientation 
or direction 
selectivity
Ocular
dominance
Slow-wave
sleep oscillations
A  Critical periods for visual function in cats
B  Critical periods for sensory and cognitive skills in humans
Birth
1 year
15 years
Age
Sensory pathways
(vision, hearing)
Language
Other cognitive 
function
most of its resources to useful inputs. Conversely, 
when two fingers were sutured together so they 
received coincident input, a swath of cortex on both 
sides of the border between the two digit areas eventu-
ally became responsive to both areas (Figure 49–19C). 
This result suggests that, as in the visual system, bor-
ders may result from competition and can be blurred 
when competition declines. What was most surprising 
was that these effects occurred in adulthood, long after 
all known critical periods had closed.
In the years since Merzenich’s studies, evidence 
has accumulated that critical periods can be reopened 
in many systems. We illustrate this principle by return-
ing to two areas in which critical periods have been 
well mapped, the optic tectum in the owl and the vis-
ual cortex in the mouse.
Visual and Auditory Maps Can Be Aligned in Adults
In initial studies of the matching of auditory and 
visual maps in owls, realignment following displace-
ment of the visual field with prism goggles was largely 
restricted to an early sensitive period (Figures 49–16 
and 49–17). However, three strategies dramatically 
enhance binaural tuning plasticity in adult owls.
First, when adult owls that had worn goggles as 
adolescents are refitted with the goggles, the auditory 
map again shifts to align with the new visual map 
(Figure 49–20A). In contrast, in adult owls that had not 
worn the goggles as adolescents, the use of goggles has 
little effect on the organization of the auditory map. 
Thus, the events of map rearrangement during the nor-
mal critical period must leave a neural trace that per-
mits rearrangement later in life. In fact, in the owls that 
wore prisms in early life, axons to auditory nuclei that 
were normally pruned were maintained, providing a 
structural basis for the reorganization in adulthood.
A second method for inducing late plasticity is to 
displace the retinal image in small steps by having the 
owl wear a series of prism spectacles of progressively 
increasing strength. Under these conditions, adjust-
ment of the auditory map is typically three- to fourfold 
greater than the response to a single large displace-
ment of the retinal image (Figure 49–20B).
The third technique is to allow owls to hunt live 
prey. In earlier experiments, animals were housed and 
fed under standard laboratory conditions. However, 
when adult prism-wearing owls are allowed to cap-
ture live mice under low light conditions for 10 weeks, 
they exhibit far greater plasticity of binaural tuning 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1231
Figure 49–19  (Left) Representation of digits in somatosensory 
cortex can be remapped in adult monkeys. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Merzenich et al. 1984 and Allard et al. 1991.)
A. Lightly touching specific spots on the digits (left) elicits 
responses from neurons in somatosensory cortex (right), 
revealing orderly topographic maps of each digit on the corti-
cal surface. Abrupt discontinuities distinguish regions serving 
adjacent digits.
B. Following amputation of a digit, the cortical region it previ-
ously supplied is left unresponsive. Several months later, axons 
from the adjacent digits (2 and 4) have formed synaptic connec-
tions in the unresponsive area.
C. After digits 3 and 4 have been sutured together, they 
received simultaneous sensory stimulation, and cortical regions 
at the border between areas representing the digits become 
responsive to both.
Digit 5
1 cm
500 µm
Legs
Trunk
Arm
Face
Somatosensory
cortex
Hand
A
B
C
1 mm
Digit 1
Digit 1
Digit 2
Digit 2
Digit 2
Digit 3
Digit 3
Digits
3 and 4
Digit 4
Digit 4
Digit 4
Digit 5
Digit 5
1 mm
than owls fed dead mice (Figure 49–19C), albeit less 
than that exhibited by juvenile owls that did not hunt. 
The finding that hunting increases the plasticity of bin-
aural tuning in adult owls dramatically demonstrates 
that behavioral context affects the ability of the nerv-
ous system to reorganize. Whether this effect results 
from increased sensory information, attention, arousal, 
motivation, or reward needs to be resolved.
Binocular Circuits Can Be Remodeled in Adults
As the body of observations on monocular deprivation 
grew, it became apparent that some plasticity persisted 
beyond the classical critical period in cats, rats, and mice. 
In mice, for example, modest shifts in ocular dominance 
occur even when one eye is deprived of vision at 2 or  
3 months of age. By 4 months of age, however, monocu-
lar deprivation has no detectable effect.
Over the past decade, several interventions have 
been discovered that enhance the extent of ocular 
dominance plasticity in young adults and even enable 
substantial plasticity in older animals. Some are non-
invasive: Environmental enrichment, social interaction 
(via group housing), visual stimulation, and exercise 
all increase the magnitude and speed of changes that 
occur following monocular deprivation in adults. A 
second group of interventions targets mechanisms 
that appear to affect the timing of the normal critical 
period. As noted above, treating the cortex with chon-
droitinase to disrupt perineuronal nets or interfer-
ence with the inhibitory effects of myelin on axonal 
growth can both extend and reopen the critical period. 
Remarkably, transplantation of immature inhibitory 
interneurons into the visual cortex also reopens the 
critical period even in 6-month-old mice.
How can we reconcile the strong evidence for criti-
cal periods with the newer evidence for reorganization 


===== Page 5 =====
1232    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Days with prisms
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
10
20
30
40
50
B  The effect of incremental change
A  The effect of early experience
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
–20
0
20
40
60
80
Age 
(days)
Adolescence
Adulthood
Auditory map shift (ITD, µs) 
Auditory map shift (ITD, µs) 
Auditory map shift (ITD, µs) 
Sensitive period
Prior prism 
exposure in 
adolescence
6°
11°
17°
23°
C  The effect of hunting
No hunting
With hunting
5
10
15
20
25
30
Figure 49–20  Different behavioral conditions have different 
effects on the realignment of visual and auditory neural 
maps in the mature barn owl.
A. The remodeling of the auditory maps that results from wear-
ing prism goggles for a brief period during adolescence leaves 
a neural trace that can be reactivated in the adult. When these 
birds are fitted with the goggles as adults, the auditory map 
is still able to realign with the visual map. (Abbreviation: ITD, 
interaural time difference.) (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
B. When an animal is fitted with a series of prisms, each of 
which produces a small displacement in the visual image, the 
auditory map is successfully brought into alignment. The dot-
ted line shows the extent of realignment if the animal is fitted 
with a 23° prism on day 0. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Linkenhoker and Knudsen 2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer 
Nature.)
C. If an adult owl has the opportunity to hunt live prey while 
wearing prism goggles, auditory remapping occurs, perhaps 
because of enhanced motivation to sharpen perception.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Bergan et al. 2005.  
Copyright © 2005 Society for Neuroscience.)
of circuitry in adults? The plasticity observed in adults 
is modest and slow compared to that seen during the 
critical period, and its mechanisms differ in some 
respects from those for earlier deprivation. These 
differences result from two factors. First, from early 
postnatal life into adolescence, the molecular environ-
ment in the brain is conducive to axonal growth, and 
cellular mechanisms are optimal for promoting the 
formation, strengthening, weakening, and elimina-
tion of synapses. Under these conditions, circuits can 
readily change in response to experience. Conversely, 
in mature circuits, molecular and structural elements 
promote stability and impede plasticity. Second, in a 
developing circuit, no particular pattern of connectiv-
ity is firmly entrenched, so there is less to overcome. 
The connections specified by genetic determinants are 
less precise, and the connections themselves are rela-
tively weak. The patterns of neural activity that result 
from experience sharpen and even realign these pat-
terns of connectivity.
In sum, experience during critical periods has a 
potent effect on circuits because the cellular and molec-
ular conditions are optimal for plasticity and because 
the instructed pattern of connectivity does not have 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1233
to compete with a long-existing pattern. These differ-
ences help explain the special behavioral, pharmaco-
logical, or genetic interventions needed to stimulate 
plasticity in adults.
Highlights
  1.  Although the nervous system is malleable 
throughout life, plasticity is particularly great 
during restricted intervals in early postnatal life 
called critical periods. Alterations that occur dur-
ing these periods are nearly irreversible.
  2.  Critical periods vary in time among brain areas 
and tasks. For example, children with strabismus 
(crossed eyes) will never have good stereoscopic 
vision unless their eyes are brought into align-
ment during the first few postnatal years, and 
people cannot learn a new language without an 
accent after their early teens.
  3.  The richest understanding of critical periods 
comes from studies initiated by Hubel and Wiesel 
on how input from the two eyes is integrated 
in the cortex. They deprived one eye of vision 
for varying periods in young cats or monkeys. 
In normal animals, most neurons in visual cor-
tex are binocularly responsive, but following 
monocular deprivation for a brief period in early 
postnatal life, most cortical cells permanently 
lost responsiveness to input from the once-closed 
eye. Responses in the eye itself and the lateral 
geniculate nucleus were nearly normal, pinpoint-
ing the cortex as the site of change. Much longer 
deprivation in adulthood had little effect.
  4.  A structural basis for the loss of binocularity 
was seen in the alternating pattern of ocular 
dominance columns, within which neurons are 
dominated by input from one eye or the other. 
Following monocular deprivation during the 
critical period, columns representing the open 
eye expanded at the expense of those represent-
ing the closed eye. This form of plasticity may be 
designed to optimize the use of cortical space for 
each individual at each time period—for exam-
ple, subtly shifting binocular interactions as the 
head grows and the eyes become further apart.
  5.  The binocular interaction reflects competition 
between the two sets of inputs, since vision and 
symmetrical columns are retained following bin-
ocular deprivation. Many lines of evidence indicate 
that the competition depends on patterns of activity 
arising in the two eyes, with inputs from each eye 
being more synchronous with each other than with 
inputs from the other eye. Postnatally, synchrony is 
driven by visual experience. Prenatally or prior to 
eye opening, patterned spontaneous activity in the 
two eyes accounts for the synchrony.
  6.  Cellular mechanisms underlying the effects of 
monocular deprivation have been studied in 
greatest detail in mice. Following monocular 
deprivation, input from the closed eye is weak-
ened rapidly by a process akin to long-term 
depression (LTD). Shortly thereafter, input from 
the other eye is strengthened, partly by a com-
pensatory mechanism called homeostatic plastic-
ity. Structural remodeling of thalamic axons and 
cortical dendrites occurs later.
  7.  Maturation of inhibitory interneurons is a main 
determinant of when the critical period opens. 
The end of the critical period is marked by the 
formation of myelin and proteoglycan-rich 
perineuronal structures that hamper structural 
remodeling.
  8.  Although plasticity of binocular interactions was 
initially believed to be confined to early postnatal 
life, it is now apparent that critical periods can 
be “reopened” to some extent in adults. In some 
cases, this can be done by altering the animal’s 
environment or the way in which the altered 
experience is delivered. Critical periods can also 
be reopened by manipulating some of the factors 
that normally close them in adolescence.
  9.  Plasticity in adulthood is modest in magnitude 
and difficult to trigger compared to early post-
natal critical periods. Nonetheless, reopening of 
critical periods could, if properly controlled, enable 
reorganization to compensate for losses incurred 
from injuries, disease, and early maladaptive 
experience.
10.  Critical periods occur during development of 
numerous systems, such as formation of orderly 
maps of auditory, somatosensory, and visual 
input onto relevant sensory cortices. Many of the 
principles and mechanisms that characterize the 
plasticity of binocular interactions also regulate 
these critical periods, including roles of sponta-
neous and experience-dependent activity, com-
petition, alterations in excitatory and inhibitory 
synapses, and selective growth and pruning of 
inputs to achieve appropriate patterns of adult 
connectivity.
11.  The existence of critical periods demonstrates 
that the brain’s ability to remodel declines pre-
cipitously in adulthood. This seems disadvan-
tageous but may represent a useful adaptation, 
allowing each brain to adapt to its environment 


===== Page 7 =====
1234    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
as it develops, but then buffering it against exces-
sive change later, perhaps even enabling skills 
and memories to persist. If this is the case, thera-
pies based on reopening critical periods in adults 
may come at a cost.
 Joshua R. Sanes 
Selected Reading
Espinosa JS, Stryker MP. 2012. Development and plasticity of 
the primary visual cortex. Neuron 75:230–249.
Harlow HF. 1958. The nature of love. Am Psychol 13: 
673–685.
Hensch TK, Quinlan EM. 2018. Critical periods in amblyopia. 
Vis Neurosci 35:E014.
Hübener M, Bonhoeffer T. 2014. Neuronal plasticity: beyond 
the critical period. Cell 159:727–737.
Knudsen EI. 2002. Instructed learning in the auditory locali-
zation pathway of the barn owl. Nature 417:322–328.
Leighton AH, Lohmann C. 2016. The wiring of developing 
sensory circuits: from patterned spontaneous activity to 
synaptic plasticity mechanisms. Front Neural Circuits 
10:71.
Thompson A, Gribizis A, Chen C, Crair MC. 2017. Activity-
dependent development of visual receptive fields. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 42:136–143.
Wiesel TN. 1982. Postnatal development of the visual cortex 
and the influence of environment. Nature 299:583–591.
References
Allard T, Clark SA, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM. 1991. Reor-
ganization of somatosensory area 3b representations in 
adult owl monkeys after digital syndactyly. J Neurophysiol 
66:1048–1058.
Antonini A, Stryker MP. 1993. Rapid remodeling of axonal 
arbors in the visual cortex. Science 260:1819–1812.
Behen ME, Helder E, Rothermel R, Solomon K, Chugani 
HT. 2008. Incidence of specific absolute neurocogni-
tive impairment in globally intact children with histo-
ries of early severe deprivation. Child Neuropsychol 14: 
453–469.
Bergan JF, Ro P, Ro D, Knudsen EI. 2005. Hunting increases 
adaptive auditory map plasticity in adult barn owls.  
J Neurosci 25:9816–9820.
Blankenship A, Ford K, Johnson J, et al. 2009. Synaptic and 
extrasynaptic factors governing glutamatergic retinal 
waves. Neuron 62:230–241.
Buonomano DV, Merzenich MM. 1998. Cortical plasticity: 
from synapses to maps. Annu Rev Neurosci 21:149–186.
Constantine-Paton M, Law MI. 1978. Eye-specific termination 
bands in tecta of three-eyed frogs. Science 202:639–641.
Davis MF, Figueroa Velez DX, et al. 2015. Inhibitory neu-
ron transplantation into adult visual cortex creates a 
new critical period that rescues impaired vision. Neuron 
86:1055–1066.
Eluvathingal TJ, Chugani HT, Behen ME, et al. 2006. 
Abnormal brain connectivity in children after early severe 
socioemotional deprivation: a diffusion tensor imaging 
study. Pediatrics 117:2093–2100.
Galli L, Maffei L. 1988. Spontaneous impulse activity of 
rat retinal ganglion cells in prenatal life. Science 242: 
90–91.
Hebb DO. 1949. Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological 
Theory. New York: Wiley.
Hensch TK. 2005. Critical period plasticity in local cortical 
circuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:877–888.
Hensch TK, Fagiolini M, Mataga N, Stryker MP, Baekkeskov 
S, Kash SF. 1998. Local GABA circuit control of experience-
dependent plasticity in developing visual cortex. Science 
282:1504–1508.
Hofer S, Mrsic-Flogel T, Bonhoeffer T, Hubener M. 2009. 
Experience leaves a lasting structural trace in cortical cir-
cuits. Nature 457:313–317.
Hong YK, Park S, Litvina EY, Morales J, Sanes JR, Chen C. 
2014. Refinement of the retinogeniculate synapse by bou-
ton clustering. Neuron 84:332–339.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1965. Binocular interaction in striate 
cortex of kittens reared with artificial squint. J Neuro-
physiol 28:1041–1059.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. 1977. Ferrier lecture: functional archi-
tecture of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proc R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci 198:1–59.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN, LeVay S. 1977. Plasticity of ocular 
dominance columns in monkey striate cortex. Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 278:377–409.
Khibnik LA, Cho KK, Bear MF. 2010. Relative contribution 
of feed forward excitatory connections to expression of 
ocular dominance plasticity in layer 4 of visual cortex. 
Neuron 66:493–500.
Kral A, Sharma A. 2012. Developmental neuroplasticity after 
cochlear implantation. Trends Neurosci 35:111–122.
Linkenhoker BA, Knudsen EI. 2002 Incremental training 
increases the plasticity of the auditory space map in adult 
barn owls. Nature 419:293–296.
Löwel S. 1994. Ocular dominance column development: stra-
bismus changes the spacing of adjacent columns in cat 
visual cortex. J Neurosci 14:7451–7468.
McGee AW, Yang Y, Fischer QS, Daw NW, Strittmatter SM. 
2005. Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited 
by myelin and Nogo receptor. Science 309:2222–2226.
Meister M, Wong ROL, Baylor DA, Shatz CJ. 1991. Synchro-
nous bursts of action potentials in ganglion cells of the 
developing mammalian retina. Science 252:939–943.
Merzenich MM, Nelson RJ, Stryker MP, Cynader MS, 
Schoppmann A, Zook JM. 1984. Somatosensory cortical 
map changes following digit amputation in adult mon-
keys. J Comp Neurol 224:591–605.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 49 / Experience and the Refinement of Synaptic Connections     1235
Nelson CA 3rd, Zeanah CH, Fox NA, Marshall PJ, Smyke AT, 
Guthrie D. 2007. Cognitive recovery in socially deprived 
young children: the Bucharest Early Intervention Project. 
Science 318:1937–1940.
Oray S, Majewska A, Sur M. 2004. Dendritic spine dynamics 
are regulated by monocular deprivation and extracellular 
matrix degradation. Neuron 44:1021–1030.
Pizzorusso T, Medini P, Berardi N, Chierzi S, Fawcett 
JW, Maffei L. 2002. Reactivation of ocular dominance  
plasticity in the adult visual cortex. Science 298:1248–1251.
Rakic P. 1981. Development of visual centers in the primate 
brain depends on binocular competition before birth. 
Science 214:928–931.
Sanes JR, Yamagata M. 1999. Formation of lamina-specific 
synaptic connections. Curr Opin Neurobiol 9:79–87.
Shatz CJ, Stryker MP. 1988. Prenatal tetrodotoxin infusion 
blocks segregation of retino-geniculate afferents. Science 
242:87–89.
Van Sluyters RC, Levitt FB. 1980. Experimental strabismus in 
the kitten. J Neurophysiol 43:686–699.
Zhang J, Ackman JB, Xu HP, Crair MC. 2011. Visual map 
development depends on the temporal pattern of binocu-
lar activity in mice. Nat Neurosci 15:298–307.


===== Page 9 =====
50
Repairing the Damaged Brain
have been renowned for their ability to localize lesions 
with great precision but until recently have had little 
to offer in terms of treatment. This situation is now 
changing.
Advances in our understanding of the structure, 
function, and chemistry of the brain’s neurons, glial 
cells, and synapses have led to new ideas for treat-
ment. Many of these are now in clinical trials, and 
some are already available to patients. Developmental 
neuroscience is emerging as a major contributor to this 
sea change for three main reasons. First, efforts to pre-
serve or replace neurons lost to damage or disease rely 
on recent advances in our understanding of the mecha-
nisms that control the generation and death of nerve 
cells in embryos (Chapters 45 and 46). Second, efforts 
to improve the regeneration of neural pathways fol-
lowing injury draw heavily on what we have learned 
about the growth of axons and the formation of syn-
apses (Chapters 47 and 48). Third, there is increasing 
evidence that some devastating brain disorders, such 
as autism and schizophrenia, are the result of distur-
bances in the formation of neural circuits in embryonic 
or early postnatal life. Accordingly, studies of normal 
development provide an essential foundation for dis-
covering precisely what has gone wrong in disease.
In this chapter, we focus on the first two of these 
issues: how neuroscientists hope to augment the lim-
ited ability of neurons to recover normal function. We 
shall begin by describing how axons degenerate fol-
lowing the separation of the axon and its terminals 
from the cell body. The regeneration of severed axons 
is robust in the peripheral nervous system of mam-
mals and in the central nervous system of lower verte-
brates, but very poor in the central nervous system of 
Damage to the Axon Affects Both the Neuron and 
Neighboring Cells
Axon Degeneration Is an Active Process
Axotomy Leads to Reactive Responses in Nearby Cells
Central Axons Regenerate Poorly After Injury
Therapeutic Interventions May Promote Regeneration of 
Injured Central Neurons
Environmental Factors Support the Regeneration of 
Injured Axons
Components of Myelin Inhibit Neurite Outgrowth
Injury-Induced Scarring Hinders Axonal Regeneration
An Intrinsic Growth Program Promotes Regeneration
Formation of New Connections by Intact Axons Can 
Lead to Recovery of Function Following Injury
Neurons in the Injured Brain Die but New Ones Can Be Born
Therapeutic Interventions May Retain or Replace Injured 
Central Neurons
Transplantation of Neurons or Their Progenitors Can 
Replace Lost Neurons
Stimulation of Neurogenesis in Regions of Injury May 
Contribute to Restoring Function
Transplantation of Nonneuronal Cells or Their 
Progenitors Can Improve Neuronal Function
Restoration of Function Is the Aim of  
Regenerative Therapies
Highlights
F
or much of its history, neurology has been a 
discipline of outstanding diagnostic rigor but lit-
tle therapeutic efficacy. Simply put, neurologists 


