===== Page 1 =====
1132    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Asymmetric
Progenitor cells
Neurons
Oligodendrocytes
Symmetric
A  Strategies of cell division
B
P
N
P
G
P
P
P
P
N
P
N
N
Figure 46–1  Neural progenitor cells have different modes 
of division.
A. Asymmetric and symmetric modes of cell division. A pro-
genitor cell (P) can undergo asymmetric division to generate 
a neuron (N) and a glial cell (G), or a neuron and another pro-
genitor. This mode of division contributes to the generation 
of neurons at early stages of development and of glial cells 
at later stages, typical of many regions of the central nervous 
system. Progenitor cells can also undergo symmetric division 
to generate two additional progenitor cells or two postmitotic 
neurons.
B. Time-lapse cinematography captures the divisions and dif-
ferentiation of isolated cortical progenitor cells in the rodent. 
Lineage diagrams illustrate cells that undergo predominantly 
asymmetric division, giving rise to neurons, or symmetric 
division, giving rise to oligodendrocytes. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Qian et al. 1998. Permission conveyed through 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
transmembrane ligand Delta and its receptor Notch. 
This signaling system was revealed in genetic stud-
ies in Drosophila. Neurons emerge from within a 
larger cluster of ectodermal cells, called a proneural 
region, all of which have the potential to generate 
neurons. Yet within the proneural region, only cer-
tain cells form neurons; the others become epider-
mal support cells.
Delta and Notch are initially expressed at similar 
levels by all proneural cells (Figure 46–3A). With time, 
however, Notch activity is enhanced in one cell and 
suppressed in its neighbor. The cell in which Notch 
activity is highest loses the potential to form a neuron 
and acquires an alternative fate. The binding of Delta 
to Notch results in proteolytic cleavage of the Notch 
cytoplasmic domain, which then enters the nucleus. 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1133
Figure 46–2  Radial glial cells serve as precursors to neu-
rons in the central nervous system and also provide a scaf-
fold for radial neuronal migration.  The nuclei of progenitor 
cells in the ventricular zone of the developing cerebral cortex 
migrate along the apical-basal axis as they progress through the 
cell cycle. Left: During the G1 phase, the nuclei rise from the 
inner (apical) surface of the ventricular zone. During the  
S phase, they reside in the outer (basal) third of the ventricular 
zone. During the G2 phase, they migrate apically, and mitosis 
(M) occurs when the nuclei reach the ventricular surface. Right: 
During cell division, radial glial cells give rise to postmitotic neu-
rons that migrate away from the ventricular zone using radial 
glial cells as a guide.
Radial 
glial cell
Neuron
Ventricular zone
Radial glia
Apical
surface
Basal (pial) surface
Interkinetic nuclear migration
M
G 2
S
G 1
Radial glial cell division
generates neurons
Neuronal migration on radial glial cells
There, it functions as a transcription factor, regulating 
the activity of a cascade of other transcription factors 
of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family. The bHLH 
transcription factors suppress the ability of the cell to 
become a neuron and reduce the level of expression of 
the ligand Delta (Figure 46–3B,C).
The initial difference in Notch levels between cells 
may be small and in some cases stochastic (random). 
Through this feedback pathway, however, these initial 
minor differences are amplified to generate all-or-none 
differences in the status of Notch activation and, con-
sequently, the fates of the two cells. This basic logic of 
Delta-Notch and bHLH signaling has been conserved 
in vertebrate and invertebrate neural tissues.
How does Notch signaling regulate neuronal and 
glial production in mammals? At early stages in the 
development of the mammalian cortex, Notch sign-
aling promotes the generation of radial glial cells by 
activating members of the Hes family of bHLH tran-
scriptional repressors. Two of these proteins, Hes1 and 
Hes5, appear to maintain radial glial cell character 
by activating the expression of an ErbB class tyrosine 
kinase receptor for neuregulin, a secreted signal that 
promotes radial glial cell identity. The Notch ligand 
Delta1 as well as neuregulin are expressed by newly 
generated cortical neurons; thus, the radial glial cells 
depend on feedback signals from their neuronal prog-
eny for continued production.
At later stages of cortical development, Notch 
signaling continues to activate Hes proteins, but a 
change in the intracellular response pathway results 
in astrocyte differentiation. At this stage, the Hes pro-
teins work by activating a transcription factor, STAT3, 
which recruits the serine-threonine kinase JAK2, a 
potent inducer of astrocyte differentiation. STAT3 also 
activates expression of astrocyte-specific genes such as 
the glial-fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
The generation of oligodendrocytes, the second 
major class of glial cells in the central nervous system, 
follows many of the principles that control neuron 


===== Page 3 =====
1134    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A
B
C
Delta
Notch
Suppressor of hairless
Enhancer of split
Achaete-scute
Becomes neuronal precursor
Becomes support cell
Figure 46–3  Delta binds the receptor Notch 
and determines neuronal fate.
A. At the onset of the interaction between two 
cells, Delta engages the receptor Notch. Delta and 
Notch are expressed at similar levels in each cell, 
and thus their initial signaling strength is equal.
B. A small imbalance in the strength of Delta-
Notch signaling breaks the symmetry of the inter-
action. In this example, the left cell provides a 
slightly greater Delta signal, thus activating Notch 
signaling in the right cell to a greater extent. 
On binding by Delta, the cytoplasmic domain of 
Notch is cleaved to form a proteolytic fragment 
called Notch-Intra, which enters the nucleus 
of the cell and initiates a basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) transcriptional cascade that regulates 
the level of Delta expression. Notch-Intra forms 
a transcriptional complex with a bHLH protein, 
suppressor of hairless, which binds to and acti-
vates the gene encoding a second bHLH protein, 
enhancer of split. Once activated, enhancer of 
split binds to and represses expression of the 
gene encoding a third bHLH protein, achaete-
scute. Achaete-scute activity promotes expres-
sion of Delta. Thus, by repressing achaete-scute, 
enhancer of split decreases transcriptional  
activation of the Delta gene and production of 
Delta protein. This diminishes the ability of the 
cell on the right to activate Notch signaling in the 
left cell.
C. Once the level of Notch signaling in the left 
cell has been reduced, suppressor of hairless no 
longer activates enhancer of split, and the level 
of expression of achaete-scute increases, result-
ing in enhanced expression of Delta and further 
activation of Notch signaling in the right cell. In 
this way, a small initial imbalance in Delta-Notch 
signaling is rapidly amplified into a marked asym-
metry in the level of Notch activation in the two 
cells. In the mammalian central nervous system, 
cells with high levels of Notch activation are 
diverted from neuronal fates, whereas cells with 
low levels of Notch activation become neurons.
and astrocyte production (Figure 46–4). Notch signal-
ing regulates the expression of two bHLH transcrip-
tion factors, Olig1 and Olig2, which have essential 
roles in the production of embryonic and postnatal 
oligodendrocytes.
Additional mechanisms exist to ensure that the 
effects of Notch signals are avoided in cells des-
tined to become neurons. One involves a cytoplas-
mic protein called Numb. The key role of Numb in 
neurogenesis was first shown in Drosophila, where 
it determines the neuronal fate of daughter cells of 
asymmetrically dividing progenitors. In the mam-
malian cortex, Numb is preferentially localized in 
neuronal daughters and antagonizes Notch signal-
ing. Loss of Numb activity causes progenitor cells to 
proliferate extensively. The inhibition of Notch sign-
aling results in the expression of several proneural 
bHLH transcription factors, notably Mash1, neuro-
genin-1, and neurogenin-2. Neurogenins promote 
neuronal production by activating downstream 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1135
Figure 46–4  Notch signaling 
regulates the fate of cells in 
the developing cerebral cortex.  
Notch signaling has several roles in 
cell differentiation in the develop-
ing cerebral cortex. Activation of 
Notch signaling in glial progenitor 
cells results in differentiation of 
the cells as astrocytes and inhibits 
differentiation as oligodendrocytes 
(left pathway). Notch signaling 
also inhibits progenitor cells from 
differentiating into neurons (right 
pathway). (Photo of oligodendro-
cyte reproduced, with permission, 
from David H. Rowitch; photo of 
astrocyte reproduced, with permis-
sion, from SAASTA on behalf of 
photographers Edward Nyatia and 
Dirk Michael Lang; photo of neuron 
reproduced, with permission, from 
Masatoshi Takeichi.)
Stem cell
Neuron
Astrocyte
Glial
progenitor
Neuronal
progenitor
Oligodendrocyte
precursor
Notch signal
inhibits 
Notch signal
promotes 
Oligodendrocyte
Notch signal
inhibits
bHLH proteins such as neuroD, and they block the 
formation of astrocytes by inhibiting JAK and STAT 
signaling.
Although Delta-Notch signaling and bHLH tran-
scription factor activators lie at the heart of the decision 
to produce neurons or glial cells, several additional 
transcriptional pathways augment this core molecular 
program. One important transcription factor, REST/
NRSF, represses the expression of neuronal genes in 
neural progenitors and glial cells. REST/NRSF is rap-
idly degraded as neurons differentiate, permitting the 
expression of neurogenic bHLH factors and other neu-
ronal genes. Homeodomain transcription factors of the 
SoxB class also play an important role in maintaining 
neural progenitors by blocking neurogenic bHLH pro-
tein activity. The differentiation of neurons therefore 
requires the avoidance of REST/NRSF and SoxB pro-
tein activity.
The Layers of the Cerebral Cortex Are 
Established by Sequential Addition of 
Newborn Neurons
The ventricular zone in the most anterior portion of 
the mammalian neural tube gives rise to the cerebral 
cortex in a series of steps. Cells from the ventricular 
zone, which is on the apical edge of the neuroepithe-
lium, initially migrate basally to form a subventricu-
lar zone, which houses a set of progenitor cells with 
a more restricted set of fates. Next to form is an inter-
mediate zone, through which newly formed neurons 
migrate, and a preplate, which houses the earliest-
born neurons. Additional neurons migrate to form a 
layer called the cortical plate, which lies within the 
preplate. The cortical plate thereby divides the pre-
plate into an apical subplate and a basal marginal 
zone (Figure 46–5A).


===== Page 5 =====
1136    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
C
Wild type (late)
First generated
Last generated
B  Cortical cells follow “inside-ﬁrst outside-last”
     pattern of migration
Reelin mutant
Doublecortin mutant
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VI
V
IV
III
II
SP
WM
VZ
WM
VZ
WM
VZ
SP
MZ
CP
VZ
A  Timeline of neuron generation
15.5
14.5
13.5
12.5
16.5
11.5
10.5
Embryonic day
I
II / III
IV
V
VI
SVZ
SP
WM
VZ
PP
IZ
MZ
VZ
17.5


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1137
Figure 46–5  (Opposite) The migration of neurons within  
the embryonic cerebral cortex leads to layered cortical  
organization. (Adapted from Olsen and Walsh 2002.)
A. This temporal sequence of neurogenesis is for the mouse 
cerebral cortex. Neurons begin to accumulate in the corti-
cal plate during the last 5 days of embryonic development. 
Within the cortical plate, neurons populate the deep layers 
before settling in the superficial layers. (Abbreviations: IZ, 
intermediate zone; MZ, marginal zone; PP, preplate; SP,  
subplate; SVZ, subventricular zone; VZ, ventricular zone; 
WM, white matter.)
B. During normal cortical development, neurons use radial glial 
cells as migratory scaffolds as they enter the cortical plate. 
As they approach the pial surface, neurons stop migrating and 
detach from radial glial cells. This orderly inside-out pattern of 
neuronal migration results in the formation of six neuronal layers 
in the mature cerebral cortex, arranged between the white  
matter and subplate. (Abbreviation: CP, cortical plate.)
C. In the mouse mutant reeler, which lacks functional reelin 
protein, the layering of neurons in the cortical plate is severely 
disrupted and partially inverted. In addition, the entire cortical 
plate develops beneath the subplate. In doublecortin mutants, 
the cortex is thickened, neurons lose their characteristic lay-
ered identity, and some layers contain fewer neurons. A similar 
disruption is observed in Lis1 mutants, which underlies certain 
forms of human lissencephaly.
Once within the cortical plate, neurons become 
organized into well-defined layers. The layer in which 
a neuron settles is correlated precisely with the neu-
ron’s birthday, a term that refers to the time at which a 
dividing precursor cell undergoes its final round of cell 
division and gives rise to a postmitotic neuron. Cells 
that migrate from the ventricular and subventricular 
zones and leave the cell cycle at early stages give rise 
to neurons that settle in the deepest layers of the cor-
tex. Cells that exit the cell cycle at progressively later 
stages migrate over longer distances and pass earlier-
born neurons before settling in more superficial lay-
ers of the cortex. Thus, the layering of neurons in the 
cerebral cortex follows an inside-first, outside-last rule 
(Figure 46–5B).
Neurons Migrate Long Distances From Their 
Site of Origin to Their Final Position
The migration of neurons from the cortical ventricu-
lar zone to the cortical plate follows a process termed 
radial migration. In this mode, the neurons move along 
the long unbranched processes of radial glial cells to 
reach their destinations. In contrast, interneurons enter 
the cortex from subcortical sites by a process called  
tangential migration. We discuss these modes in turn and 
then describe a third migratory strategy, free migration, 
which predominates in the peripheral nervous system.
Excitatory Cortical Neurons Migrate Radially  
Along Glial Guides
Classical anatomical studies of cortical development 
in the 1970s provided evidence that neurons gener-
ated in the ventricular zone migrate to their settling 
position along a pathway of radial glial fibers. Radial 
glial cells serve as the primary scaffold for radial neu-
ronal migration. Their cell bodies are located close to 
the ventricular surface and give rise to elongated fibers 
that span the width of the developing cerebral wall. 
Each radial glial cell has one basal end-foot at the api-
cal surface of the ventricular zone and processes 
that terminate in multiple end-feet at the pial sur-
face (Figure 46–6). Radial glial scaffolds are especially 
important in the development of the primate cortex, 
where neurons are required to migrate over long dis-
tances as the cortex expands. A single radial glial cell 
scaffold can support the migration of up to 30 genera-
tions of cortical neurons before eventually differentiat-
ing into an astrocyte.
What forces and molecules power neuronal migra-
tion on radial glial cells? After a neuron leaves the cell 
cycle, its leading process wraps around the shaft of the 
radial glial cell and its nucleus translocates within the 
cytoplasm of the leading process. Although the lead-
ing process of the migrating neuron extends slowly 
and steadily, the nucleus moves in an intermittent, 
stepwise manner because of complex rearrangements 
of the cytoskeleton. A microtubular lattice forms a cage 
around the nucleus; movement of the nucleus depends 
on a centrosome-like structure, termed a basal body, 
from which a system of microtubules projects into 
the leading process, providing tracks along which the 
nucleus moves (Figure 46–7A).
Neuronal migration along radial glia also involves 
adhesive interactions between cells. Adhesive recep-
tors such as integrins promote neuronal extension on 
radial glial cells. The migration of neurons along glial 
fibers is nevertheless different from the extension of 
axons driven by growth cones (Chapter 47). In neu-
ronal migration, the leading process is devoid of the 
structured actin filaments that typify growth cones 
and more closely resembles an extending dendrite, an 
inference made first by Santiago Ramón y Cajal.
Disruption in the migratory and settling programs 
of cortical neurons underlies much human cortical 
pathology (Figure 46–5C). For example, in lissencephaly 


===== Page 7 =====
1138    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 46–6  Neurons migrate along radial glial cells. After 
their generation from radial glial cells, newly generated neurons 
in the embryonic cerebral cortex extend a leading process that 
wraps around the shaft of the radial glial cell, thus using the 
radial glial cells as scaffolds during their migration from the  
ventricular zone to the pial surface of cortex.
Outer surface
Inner surface
Radial glial
cell 
Ventricular
proliferative
zone 
Migrating
neuron
Leading
process
Process
of radial
glial cell 
Trailing
process 
Embryonic cortex
(Greek, smooth brain, referring to the characteristic 
smoothing of the cortical surface in patients with the 
disorder), neurons leave the ventricular zone but fail 
to complete their migration into the cortical plate. As a 
result, the mature cortex is typically reduced from six 
to four neuronal layers, and the arrangement of neu-
rons in each remaining layer is disordered. Occasion-
ally, lissencephaly is accompanied by the presence of 
an additional group of neurons in the subcortical white 
matter. Patients with lissencephalies from mutations 
in the Lis1 and doublecortin genes often suffer severe 
intellectual disability and intractable epilepsy. The 
Lis1 and doublecortin proteins have been localized 
to microtubules, suggesting that they are involved in 
microtubule-dependent nuclear movement, although 
their precise functions in neuronal migration remain 
unclear.
Mutations that disrupt the reelin signaling path-
way disrupt the final stage of neuronal migration 
through the cortical subplate. The reelin protein is 
secreted from the Cajal-Retzius cells, a class of neu-
rons found in the preplate and marginal zone. Signals 
from these cells are crucial for the migration of cortical 
neurons. In mice lacking functional reelin, neurons fail 
to detach from their radial glial scaffolds and pile up 
underneath the cortical plate, disobeying the inside-
out migratory rule. As a consequence, the normal lay-
ering of cell types is partially inverted and the marginal 
zone is lost. Reelin acts through cell-surface receptors 
that include the ApoE receptor 2 and the very-low-
density lipoprotein receptor. The binding of reelin to 
these receptors activates an intracellular protein, Dab1, 
which transduces reelin signals. Not surprisingly, the 
loss of proteins that transduce reelin signals produces 
similar migratory phenotypes.
Cortical Interneurons Arise Subcortically and 
Migrate Tangentially to Cortex
Progenitor cells in the cortical ventricular zone were ini-
tially believed to give rise to all cortical neurons. How-
ever, as better molecular labels for distinct neuronal 
types became available, it was found that interneurons 
arise in the ventricular zone of subcortical structures. 
Most of them originate in regions of the ventral telen-
cephalon called the ganglionic eminences (Figure 46–8).


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 46 / Differentiation and Survival of Nerve Cells    1139
Figure 46–7  Cytoskeletal proteins power the migration of 
neurons along radial glia.
A. The microtubular cytoskeleton has an important role in neu-
ronal migration. Microtubules envelop the nucleus in a cage-like 
structure. Migration along radial glial cells involves elongation 
of the leading process of the neuron in the direction of move-
ment, under the control of attractive and repellant extracellular 
guidance cues. These cues regulate the phosphorylation status 
of the microtubule-associated proteins Ndel1 and Lis1 (two 
components of the dynein motor complex) and of doublecortin 
(Dcx), which together stabilize the microtubule cytoskeleton. 
(Adapted from Gleeson and Walsh 2000.)
B. Microtubules are attached to the centrosome by a series of 
proteins that are targets for disruption in neuronal migration 
disorders.
Nuclear
translocation
Centrosome
Nucleus
Radial glial
cell 
A
B
Leading edge
extension
Retraction of 
lagging edge
Lis1
Ndel1
γ-Tub
Lis1
Dcx
Ndel1
Dynein
Lis1
Dcx
γ-Tub
The medial and central eminences generate most 
cortical interneurons, which migrate dorsally from 
their sites of origin to enter the cortex. Some enter 
through the intermediate zone, while others enter 
through the marginal zone (Figure 46–5A). Once they 
reach particular anterior-posterior and mediolateral 
positions, they switch to a radial mode of migration 
to travel the final distance to appropriate layers. 
Distinct populations of neurons generated in the 
ganglionic eminences migrate at different times and 
through different routes, contributing to the diver-
sity of the interneuronal population. Precise relation-
ships between time and place of origin, migratory 
route, and ultimate fate remain to be determined. 


===== Page 9 =====
1140    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Medial ganglionic eminence
Caudal ganglionic eminence
Lateral ganglionic eminence
Cortex
Striatum
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Cortex
Striatum
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Globus pallidus
Striatum
Olfactory bulb
Cortex
Globus
pallidus
Striatum
Cortex
Striatum
Striatum
Figure 46–8  Forebrain interneurons are generated in the 
ventral telencephalon and migrate tangentially to the cer-
ebral cortex. Neurons generated in the ganglionic eminences 
migrate to and settle in many regions of the forebrain, where 
they differentiate into interneurons. Cortical interneurons 
arise from medial and caudal ganglionic eminences. Other 
cells generated in these regions migrate in other directions, 
populating the hippocampus, striatum, globus pallidus, and 
amygdala with interneurons. The lateral ganglionic eminence 
generates cells that migrate to the striatum and the olfactory 
bulb. Cells migrating to the bulb use neighboring migrating 
cells as substrates for migration, a process called chain  
migration. (Adapted, with permission, from Bandler, Mayer, 
and Fishell 2017. Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd.)
Nonetheless, it is now clear that cortical neurons orig-
inate from two sources: excitatory neurons from the 
cortical ventricular zone and interneurons from the 
ganglionic eminences.
Interneurons in other forebrain structures also 
arise from the ganglionic eminences, as well as a few 
other subcortical sites such as the preoptic area. Cells 
migrating caudally from the medial and caudal emi-
nences populate the hippocampus, while cells migrat-
ing ventrolaterally from these regions populate the 
basal ganglia. In contrast, neurons generated in the 
lateral ganglionic eminence migrate rostrally and con-
tribute the periglomerular and granule interneurons 
of the olfactory bulb. In this rostral migratory stream, 
neurons use neighboring neurons as substrates for 
migration (chain migration). In the adult brain, neu-
rons that follow the rostral migratory stream originate 
instead in the subventricular zone of the striatum.
Transcription factors control the character of gan-
glionic eminence neurons. The homeodomain proteins 
Dlx1 and Dlx2 are expressed by cells in the ganglionic 
eminences. In mice lacking Dlx1 and Dlx2 activity, the 
resultant perturbation of neuronal migration leads to 
a profound reduction in the number of GABAergic 
interneurons in the cortex. Other transcription factors 
are responsible for differences among ganglionic emi-
nences. For example, Nkx2.1 is selectively expressed by 
cells in the medial ganglionic eminence. In its absence, 
interneurons generated in this region take on charac-
teristics of those normally generated in the lateral and 
caudal ganglionic eminences. Yet other transcription 
factors specify the distinct characteristics of subpopu-
lations of neurons within each ganglionic eminence.
One of the main features that these transcription 
factors specify is the migratory path that the newborn 
interneurons take. A host of soluble and cell surface 
factors produced by cells in and near the ganglionic 
eminences provide repulsive cues that lead to expul-
sion of cells from the ventricular zone, so-called moto-
genic (movement-promoting) cues that speed their 
migration and attractive cues that direct them to their 
targets. These factors include slits, semaphorins, and 
ephrins, all of which we will encounter in Chapter 47 
as molecules that guide axons to their targets.


