===== Page 1 =====
52    Part I / Overall Perspective
have seen dramatic progress, leading to the 
identification of dozens of definitive risk genes 
and chromosomal regions.
3.	 The maturation of the field of psychiatric genetics 
and genomics over the past decade has revealed 
the frailty of testing pre-specified candidate genes. 
These types of studies have now been supplanted 
by genome-wide scans of both common and rare 
alleles. Coupled with rigorous statistical frame-
works and consensus statistical thresholds, these 
are yielding highly reliable and reproducible 
results.
4.	 At present, the cumulative evidence suggests that 
the full range of genetic variations underlies com-
plex behavioral syndromes, including common 
and rare, transmitted and de novo, germline and 
somatic, and sequence and chromosomal struc-
tural variation. However, the relative contribu-
tions of these various types of genetic changes 
vary for a given disorder.
5.	 A striking finding from recent advances in the 
genetics of human behavior has been the over-
lap of genetic risks for syndromes with distinct 
symptoms and natural histories. Understanding 
how and why an identical mutation may lead to 
highly diverse phenotypic outcomes in differ-
ent individuals will be a major challenge for the 
future.
6.	 Findings across common psychiatric disorders 
point to extremely high rates of genetic hetero-
geneity. This, coupled with the biological pleiot-
ropy of the risk genes that have been identified to 
date, as well as the dynamism and complexity of 
human brain development, all point to important 
challenges ahead in moving from an understand-
ing of risk genes to an understanding of behav-
ior. Similarly, at present, an important distinction 
can be made between illuminating the biology of 
risk genes and unraveling the pathophysiology of 
behavioral syndromes.
Glossary1
Allele. Humans carry two sets of chromosomes, one 
from each parent. Equivalent genes in the two sets 
might be different, for example, because of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms. An allele is one of the two 
(or more) forms of a particular gene.
Centromere. Chromosomes contain a compact region 
known as a centromere, where sister chromatids (the 
two exact copies of each chromosome that are formed 
after replication) are joined.
Cloning. The process of generating sufficient copies of a 
particular piece of DNA to allow it to be sequenced or 
studied in some other way.
Complementary DNA (cDNA). A DNA sequence made 
from a messenger RNA molecule, using an enzyme 
called reverse transcriptase. cDNAs can be used experi-
mentally to determine the sequence of messenger 
RNAs after their introns (non–protein-coding sections) 
have been spliced out.
Conservation of genes. Genes that are present in two 
distinct species are said to be conserved, and the two 
genes from the different species are called orthologous 
genes. Conservation can be detected by measuring the 
similarity of the two sequences at the base (RNA or 
DNA) or amino acid (protein) level. The more simi-
larities there are, the more highly conserved the two 
sequences.
Copy number variation (CNV). A deletion or duplication 
of a limited genetic region that results in an individual 
having more or fewer than the usual two copies of 
some genes. Copy number variations are observed in 
some neurological and psychiatric disorders.
CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindro-
mic Repeats). An enzyme-RNA system in which the 
enzyme cleaves target sequences that match an RNA 
guide; the RNA guide can be engineered to recognize 
a desired gene or sequences within a cell for mutation.
Euchromatin. The gene-rich regions of a genome (see 
also heterochromatin).
Eukaryote. An organism with cells that have a com-
plex internal structure, including a nucleus. Animals, 
plants, and fungi are all eukaryotes.
Genome. The complete DNA sequence of an organism.
Genotype. The set of genes that an individual carries; 
usually refers to the particular pair of alleles (alterna-
tive forms of a gene) that a person has at a given region 
of the genome.
Haplotype. A particular combination of alleles (alter-
native forms of genes) or sequence variations that 
are closely linked—that is, are likely to be inherited 
together—on the same chromosome.
Heterochromatin. Compact, gene-poor regions of a 
genome, which are enriched in simple sequence repeats.
Introns and exons. Genes are transcribed as continuous 
sequences, but only some segments of the resulting mes-
senger RNA molecules contain information that encodes 
a protein product. These segments are called exons. The 
regions between exons are known as introns and are 
spliced from the RNA before the product is made.
1Based on Bork P, Copley R. 2001. Genome speak. Nature 409:815.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    53
Long and short arms. The regions on either side of the 
centromere are known as arms. As the centromere is 
not in the center of the chromosome, one arm is longer 
than the other.
Messenger RNA (mRNA). Proteins are not synthesized 
directly from genomic DNA. Instead, an RNA tem-
plate (a precursor mRNA) is constructed from the 
sequence of the gene. This RNA is then processed in 
various ways, including splicing. Spliced RNAs des-
tined to become templates for protein synthesis are 
known as mRNAs.
Mutation. An alteration in a genome compared to some 
reference state. Mutations do not always have harmful 
effects.
Phenotype. The observable properties and physical 
characteristics of an organism.
Polymorphism. A region of the genome that varies 
between individual members of a population. To be 
called a polymorphism, a variant should be present in 
a significant number of people in the population.
Prokaryote. A single-celled organism with a simple 
internal structure and no nucleus. Bacteria and archae-
bacteria are prokaryotes.
Proteome. The complete set of proteins encoded by the 
genome.
Recombination. The process by which DNA is exchanged 
between pairs of equivalent chromosomes during egg 
and sperm formation. Recombination has the effect 
of making the chromosomes of the offspring distinct 
from those of the parents.
Restriction endonuclease. An enzyme that cleaves DNA 
at a particular short sequence. Different types of restric-
tion endonuclease cleave at different sequences.
RNA interference (RNAi). A method for reducing the 
function of a specific gene by introducing into a cell 
small RNAs with complementarity to the targeted 
mRNA. Pairing of the mRNA with the small RNA 
leads to destruction of the endogenous mRNA.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). A polymorphism 
caused by the change of a single nucleotide. SNPs are 
often used in genetic mapping studies.
Splicing. The process that removes introns (noncod-
ing portions) from transcribed RNAs. Exons (protein-
coding portions) can also be removed. Depending on 
which exons are removed, different proteins can be 
made from the same initial RNA or gene. Different 
proteins created in this way are splice variants or alter-
natively spliced.
Transcription. The process of copying a gene into RNA. 
This is the first step in turning a gene into a protein, 
although not all transcripts lead to proteins.
Transcriptome. The complete set of RNAs transcribed 
from a genome.
Translation. The process of using a messenger RNA 
sequence to synthesize a protein. The messenger RNA 
serves as a template on which transfer RNA molecules, 
carrying amino acids, are lined up. The amino acids 
are then linked together to form a protein chain.
Matthew W. State 
Cornelia I. Bargmann 
T. Conrad Gilliam
Selected Reading
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 
2002. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th ed. New York: Gar-
land Publishing. Also searchable at http://www.ncbi 
.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=Books.
Allada R, Emery P, Takahashi JS, Rosbash M. 2001. Stopping 
time: the genetics of fly and mouse circadian clocks. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 24:1091–1119.
Bouchard TJ Jr, Lykken DT, McGue M, Segal NL, Tellegen 
A. 1990. Sources of human psychological differences: 
the Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart. Science 
250:222–228.
Cong L, Ran FA, Cox D, et al. 2013. Multiplex genome engi-
neering using CRISPR/Cas systems. Science 339:819–823.
Griffiths AJF, Gelbart WM, Miller JH, Lewontin RC. 1999. 
Modern Genetic Analysis. New York: Freeman. Also search-
able at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi? 
db=Books.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium. 2001. 
Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. 
Nature 409:860–921.
Jinek M, Chylinski K, Fonfara I, Hauer M, Doudna JA,  
Charpentier E. 2012. A programmable dual-RNA-guided 
DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity. Science 
337:816–821.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM. McKusick-
Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins 
University (Baltimore, MD) and National Center for Bio-
technology Information, National Library of Medicine 
(Bethesda, MD). http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.
Venter JG, Adams MD, Myers EW, et al. 2001. The sequence 
of the human genome. Science 291:1304–1351.
References
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P. 
1998. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed. New York: Gar-
land Publishing.


===== Page 3 =====
54    Part I / Overall Perspective
Amir RE, Van den Veyver IB, Wan M, Tran CQ, Francke U, 
Zoghbi HY. 1999. Rett syndrome is caused by mutations 
in X-linked MECP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding pro-
tein 2. Nat Genet 23:185–188.
Antoch MP, Song EJ, Chang AM, et al. 1997. Functional iden-
tification of the mouse circadian Clock gene by transgenic 
BAC rescue. Cell 89:655–667.
Arnold SE, Talbot K, Hahn CG. 2004. Neurodevelopment, 
neuroplasticity, and new genes for schizophrenia. Prog 
Brain Res 147:319–345.
Bear MF, Huber KM, Warren ST. 2004. The mGluR theory of 
fragile X syndrome. Trends Neurosci 27:370–377.
Bellugi U, Lichtenberger L, Jones W, Lai Z, St George M. 
2000. I. The neurocognitive profile of Williams Syndrome: 
a complex pattern of strengths and weaknesses. J Cogn 
Neurosci 12:7–29. Suppl.
Ben-Shahar Y, Robichon A, Sokolowski MB, Robinson GE. 
2002. Influence of gene action across different time scales 
on behavior. Science 296:741–744.
Caron H, van Schaik B, van der Mee M, et al. 2001. The 
human transcriptome map: clustering of highly expressed 
genes in chromosomal domains. Science 291:1289–1292.
De Bono M, Bargmann CI. 1998. Natural variation in a neuro-
peptide Y receptor homolog modifies social behavior and 
food responses in C. elegans. Cell 94:679–689.
De Rubeis S, He X, Goldberg AP, et al. 2014. Synaptic, tran-
scriptional and chromatin genes disrupted in autism. 
Nature 515:209–215.
Fromer M, Pocklington AJ, Kavanagh DH, et al. 2014. De 
novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic net-
works. Nature 506:179–184.
Genovese G, Fromer M, Stahl EA, et al. 2016. Increased 
burden of ultra-rare protein-altering variants among 
4,877 individuals with schizophrenia. Nat Neurosci 
19:1433–1441.
Gottesman II. 1991. Schizophrenia Genesis. The Origins of 
Madness. New York: Freeman.
Iossifov I, O’Roak BJ, Sanders SJ, et al. 2014. The contribution 
of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder. 
Nature 515:216–221.
Jamain S, Quach H, Betancur C, et al. 2003. Mutations of the 
X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 
are associated with autism. Nat Genet 34:27–29.
Kahler SG, Fahey MC. 2003. Metabolic disorders and men-
tal retardation. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 
117:31–41.
Khaitovich P, Muetzel B, She X, et al. 2004. Regional patterns 
of gene expression in human and chimpanzee brains. 
Genome Res 14:1462–1473.
Konopka RJ, Benzer S. 1971. Clock mutations of Drosophila 
melanogaster. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 68:2112–2116.
Lai CS, Fisher SE, Hurst JA, Vargha-Khadem F, Monaco AP. 
2001. A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe 
speech and language disorder. Nature 413:519–523.
Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, et al. 2001. Initial sequencing 
and analysis of the human genome. Nature 409:860-921.
Laumonnier F, Bonnet-Brilhault F, Gomot M, et al. 2004. 
X-linked mental retardation and autism are associated 
with a mutation in the NLGN4 gene, a member of the 
neuroligin family. Am J Hum Genet 74:552–557.
Lim MM, Wang Z, Olazabal DE, Ren X, Terwilliger EF, Young 
LJ. 2004. Enhanced partner preference in a promiscuous 
species by manipulating the expression of a single gene. 
Nature 429:754–757.
Mayford M, Bach ME, Huang Y-Y, Wang L, Hawkins RD, 
Kandel ER. 1996. Control of memory formation through 
regulated expression of a CaMKII transgene. Science 
274:1678-1683.
McGue M, Bouchard TH Jr. 1998. Genetic and environmen-
tal influences on human behavioral differences. Ann Rev 
Neurosci 21:1–24.
Mendel G. 1866. Versuche über Pflanzen-hybriden. Verh 
Naturforsch 4:2–47. Translated in: C Stern, ER Sherwood 
(eds). The Origin of Genetics: A Mendel Source Book, 1966. 
San Francisco: Freeman.
Neale BM, Kou Y, Liu L, et al. 2012. Patterns and rates of 
exonic de novo mutations in autism spectrum disorders. 
Nature 485:242–245.
O’Roak BJ, Vives L, Girirajan S, et al. 2012. Sporadic autism 
exomes reveal a highly interconnected protein network of 
de novo mutations. Nature 485:246–250.
Sanders SJ, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, et al. 2011. Multiple 
recurrent de novo CNVs, including duplications of the 
7q11.23 Williams syndrome region, are strongly associ-
ated with autism. Neuron 70:863–885.
Sanders SJ, He X, Willsey AJ, et al. 2015. Insights into autism 
spectrum disorder genomic architecture and biology from 
71 risk loci. Neuron 87:1215–1233.
Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, Gupta AR, et al. 2012. De novo muta-
tions revealed by whole exome sequencing are strongly 
associated with autism. Nature 485:237–241.
Satterstrom FK, Kosmicki JA, Wang J, et al. 2020. Large-scale 
exome sequencing study implicated both developmental 
and functional changes in the neurobiology of autism. 
Cell 180:568–594.
Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics 
Consortium. 2014. Biological insights from 108 schizophrenia-
associated genetic loci. Nature 511:421–427.
Sebat J, Lakshmi B, Malhotra D, et al. 2007. Strong association 
of de novo copy number variation with autism. Science 
316:445–449.
Sekar A, Bialas AR, de Rivera H, et al. 2016. Schizophrenia 
risk from complex variation of complement component 4. 
Nature 530:177–183.
Singh T, Kurki MI, Curtis D, et al. 2016. Rare loss-of-function 
variants in SETD1A are associated with schizophrenia 
and developmental disorders. Nat Neurosci 19:571–577.
Sokolowski MB. 1980. Foraging strategies of Drosophila 
melanogaster: a chromosomal analysis. Behav Genet 10: 
291–302.
Sokolowski MB. 2001. Drosophila: genetics meets behavior. 
Nat Rev Genet 2:879–890.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    55
Sztainberg Y, Zoghbi HY. 2016. Lessons learned from study-
ing syndromic autism spectrum disorders. Nat Neurosci 
19:1408–1417.
Takahashi JS, Pinto LH, Vitaterna MH. 1994. Forward and 
reverse genetic approaches to behavior in the mouse. 
Science 264:1724–1733.
Toh KL, Jones CR, He Y, et al. 2001. An hPer2 phosphoryla-
tion site mutation in familial advanced sleep phase syn-
drome. Science 291:1040–1043.
Tsien JZ, Huerta PT, Tonegawa S. 1996. The essential role of 
hippocampal CA1 NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic 
plasticity in spatial memory. Cell 87:1327–1338.
Walter J, Paulsen M. 2003. Imprinting and disease. Semin 
Cell Dev Biol 14:101–110.
Watson JD, Tooze J, Kurtz DT (eds). 1983. Recombinant DNA: 
A Short Course. New York: Scientific American.
Whitfield CW, Cziko AM, Robinson GE. 2003. Gene expres-
sion profiles in the brain predict behavior in individual 
honey bees. Science 302:296–299.
Young LJ, Lim MM, Gingrich B, Insel TR. 2001. Cellular mech-
anisms of social attachment. Horm Behav 40:132–138.
Zondervan KT, Cardon LR. 2004. The complex interplay 
among factors that influence allelic association. Nat Rev 
Genet 5:89–100.


===== Page 5 =====
3
Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior
to say, memory. It also ignores and discards informa-
tion judiciously, one hopes, and reports to other brains 
about some of these operations and their psychological 
manifestations. All this is accomplished by intercon-
nected nerve cells.
Individual nerve cells, or neurons, are the basic 
signaling units of the brain. The human brain contains 
a huge number of these cells, on the order of 86 billion 
neurons, that can be classified into at least a thousand 
different types. Yet this great variety of neurons is less 
of a factor in the complexity of human behavior than is 
their organization into anatomical circuits with precise 
functions. Indeed, one key organizational principle of 
the brain is that nerve cells with similar properties can 
produce different actions because of the way they are 
interconnected.
Because relatively few principles of organization 
of the nervous system give rise to considerable func-
tional complexity, it is possible to learn a great deal 
about how the nervous system produces behavior by 
focusing on five basic features of the nervous system:
1.	 The structural components of individual nerve 
cells;
2.	 The mechanisms by which neurons produce sig-
nals within themselves and between each other;
3.	 The patterns of connection between nerve cells 
and between nerve cells and their targets (muscle 
and gland effectors);
4.	 The relationship of different patterns of intercon-
nection to different types of behavior; and
5.	 How neurons and their connections are modified 
by experience.
The Nervous System Has Two Classes of Cells
Nerve Cells Are the Signaling Units of the Nervous 
System
Glial Cells Support Nerve Cells
Each Nerve Cell Is Part of a Circuit That Mediates Specific 
Behaviors
Signaling Is Organized in the Same Way in All Nerve Cells
The Input Component Produces Graded Local Signals
The Trigger Zone Makes the Decision to Generate an 
Action Potential
The Conductive Component Propagates an All-or-None 
Action Potential
The Output Component Releases Neurotransmitter
The Transformation of the Neural Signal From Sensory to 
Motor Is Illustrated by the Stretch-Reflex Pathway
Nerve Cells Differ Most at the Molecular Level
The Reflex Circuit Is a Starting Point for Understanding the 
Neural Architecture of Behavior
Neural Circuits Can Be Modified by Experience
Highlights
T
he remarkable range of human  behavior 
depends on a sophisticated array of sensory 
receptors connected to the brain, a highly flex-
ible neural organ that selects from among the stream of 
sensory signals those events in the environment and in 
the internal milieu of the body that are important for 
the individual. The brain actively organizes sensory 
information for perception, action, decision-making, 
aesthetic appreciation, and future reference—that is 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    57
Figure 3–1  (Right) The structure of a neuron. Most neurons 
in the vertebrate nervous system have several main features in 
common. The cell body contains the nucleus, the storehouse 
of genetic information, and gives rise to two types of cell 
processes: axons and dendrites. Axons are the transmitting 
element of neurons; they vary greatly in length, some extend-
ing more than 1 m within the body. Most axons in the central 
nervous system are very thin (between 0.2 μm and 20 μm in 
diameter) compared with the diameter of the cell body (50 μm 
or more). Many axons are insulated by a sheath of fatty myelin 
that is regularly interrupted at gaps called the nodes of Ranvier. 
The action potential, the cell’s conducting signal, is initiated  
at the initial segment of the axon and propagates to the 
synapse, the site at which signals flow from one neuron to 
another. Branches of the axon of the presynaptic neuron trans-
mit signals to the postsynaptic cell. The branches of a single 
axon may form synapses with as many as 1,000 postsynaptic 
neurons. The apical and basal dendrites together with the cell 
body are the input elements of the neuron, receiving signals 
from other neurons.
The parts of this book are organized around these 
five major topics. In this chapter, we introduce these 
topics in turn in an overview of the neural control of 
behavior. We first consider the structure and function 
of neurons and the glial cells that surround and support 
them. We then examine how individual cells organize 
and transmit signals and how signaling between a few 
interconnected nerve cells produces a simple behav-
ior, the knee-jerk reflex. We then extend these ideas to 
more complex behaviors, mediated by more complex 
and malleable circuits.
The Nervous System Has Two Classes of Cells
There are two main classes of cells in the nervous sys-
tem: nerve cells, or neurons, and glial cells, or glia.
Nerve Cells Are the Signaling Units of the  
Nervous System
A typical neuron has four morphologically defined 
regions: (1) the cell body, (2) dendrites, (3) an axon, 
and (4) presynaptic terminals (Figure 3–1). As we shall 
see, each region has a distinct role in generating signals 
and communicating with other nerve cells.
The cell body or soma is the metabolic center of the 
cell. It includes the nucleus, which contains the genes 
of the cell, and the endoplasmic reticulum, an exten-
sion of the nucleus where the cell’s proteins are syn-
thesized. The cell body usually gives rise to two kinds 
of processes: several short dendrites and one long, tubu-
lar axon. Dendrites branch out in tree-like fashion and 
are the main apparatus for receiving incoming signals 
Apical dendrites
Basal
dendrites
Axon
(initial
segment)
Axon
hillock
Node of Ranvier
Nucleus
Cell body
Axon
Postsynaptic
dendrite
Synapse
Presynaptic
terminal
Presynaptic 
cell
Postsynaptic 
cells
Myelin sheath


===== Page 7 =====
58    Part I / Overall Perspective
from other nerve cells. The axon typically extends 
some distance from the cell body before it branches, 
allowing it to carry signals to many target neurons. An 
axon can convey electrical signals over distances 
ranging from 0.1 mm to 1 m. These electrical signals, 
or action potentials, are initiated at a specialized trig-
ger region near the origin of the axon called the initial 
segment from which the action potentials propagate 
down the axon without failure or distortion at speeds 
of 1 to 100 m/s. The amplitude of an action potential 
traveling down the axon remains constant at 100 mV 
because the action potential is an all-or-none impulse 
that is regenerated at regular intervals along the axon 
(Figure 3–2).
Action potentials are the signals by which the brain 
receives, analyzes, and conveys information. These 
signals are highly stereotyped throughout the nerv-
ous system, even though they are initiated by a great 
variety of events in the environment that impinge on 
our bodies—from light to mechanical contact, from 
odorants to pressure waves. The physiological signals 
that convey information about vision are identical to 
those that carry information about odors. Here we see 
a key principle of brain function: the type of informa-
tion conveyed by an action potential is determined not 
by the form of the signal but by the pathway the signal 
travels in the brain. The brain thus analyzes and inter-
prets patterns of incoming electrical signals carried 
+40
–70
0
Figure 3–2  This historic tracing is the first published intra-
cellular recording of an action potential. It was recorded in 
1939 by Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley from a squid giant 
axon, using glass capillary electrodes filled with sea water. The 
timing pulses (bottom) are separated by 2 ms. The vertical scale 
indicates the potential of the internal electrode in millivolts, the 
sea water outside being taken as zero potential. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Hodgkin and Huxley 1939.)
over specific pathways, and in turn creates our sensa-
tions of sight, touch, taste, smell, and sound.
To increase the speed by which action poten-
tials are conducted, large axons are wrapped in an 
insulating sheath of a lipid substance, myelin. The 
sheath is interrupted at regular intervals by the nodes of  
Ranvier, uninsulated spots on the axon where the 
action potential is regenerated. (Myelination is dis-
cussed in detail in Chapters 7 and 8 and action poten-
tials in Chapter 10.)
Near its end, the axon divides into fine branches 
that contact other neurons at specialized zones of com-
munication known as synapses. The nerve cell trans-
mitting a signal is called the presynaptic cell; the cell 
receiving the signal is the postsynaptic cell. The presyn-
aptic cell transmits signals from specialized enlarged 
regions of its axon’s branches, called presynaptic termi-
nals or nerve terminals. The presynaptic and postsyn-
aptic cells are separated by a very narrow space, the 
synaptic cleft. Most presynaptic terminals end on the 
postsynaptic neuron’s dendrites, but some also termi-
nate on the cell body or, less often, at the beginning or 
end of the axon of the postsynaptic cell (see Figure 3–1). 
Some presynaptic neurons excite their postsynaptic 
target cells; other presynaptic neurons inhibit their tar-
get cells.
The neuron doctrine (Chapter 1) holds that each 
neuron is a discrete cell with distinctive processes aris-
ing from its cell body and that neurons are the sign-
aling units of the nervous system. In retrospect, it is 
hard to appreciate how difficult it was for scientists 
to accept this elementary idea when first proposed. 
Unlike other tissues, whose cells have simple shapes 
and fit into a single field of the light microscope, nerve 
cells have complex shapes. The elaborate patterns of 
dendrites and the seemingly endless course of some 
axons made it extremely difficult to establish a relation-
ship between these elements. Even after the anatomists 
Jacob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann put forward 
the cell theory in the early 1830s—and the idea that 
cells are the structural units of all living matter became 
a central dogma of biology—most anatomists did not 
accept that the cell theory applied to the brain, which 
they thought of as a continuous, web-like reticulum of 
very thin processes.
The coherent structure of the neuron did not 
become clear until late in the 19th century, when 
Ramón y Cajal began to use the silver-staining method 
introduced by Golgi. Still used today, this method has 
two advantages. First, in a random manner that is not 
understood, the silver solution stains only about 1% 
of the cells in any particular brain region, making it 
possible to examine a single neuron in isolation from 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 3 / Nerve Cells, Neural Circuitry, and Behavior    59
its neighbors. Second, the neurons that do take up the 
stain are delineated in their entirety, including the cell 
body, axon, and full dendritic tree. The stain reveals 
that there is no cytoplasmic continuity between neu-
rons, and Cajal concluded, prophetically and correctly, 
that there is no continuity even at synapses between 
two cells.
Ramón y Cajal applied Golgi’s method to the 
embryonic nervous systems of many animals as well 
as humans. By examining the structure of neurons in 
almost every region of the nervous system, he could 
describe classes of nerve cells and map the precise con-
nections between many of them. In this way, Ramón 
y Cajal deduced, in addition to the neuron doctrine, 
two other principles of neural organization that would 
prove particularly valuable in studying communica-
tion in the nervous system.
The first of these, the principle of dynamic polariza-
tion, states that electrical signals within a nerve cell 
flow in only one direction: from the postsynaptic sites 
of the neuron, usually the dendrites and cell body, to 
the trigger region at the axon. From there, the action 
potential is propagated along the entire length of the 
axon to its terminals. In most neurons studied to date, 
electrical signals in fact travel along the axon in one 
direction.
The second principle advanced by Ramón y Cajal, 
connectional specificity, states that nerve cells do not 
connect randomly with one another in the formation of 
networks but make specific connections—at particular 
contact points—with certain postsynaptic target cells 
and not with others. The principles of dynamic polari-
zation and connectional specificity are the basis of the 
modern cellular-connectionist approach to studying 
the brain.
Ramón y Cajal was also among the first to realize 
that the feature that most distinguishes one type of 
neuron from another is form, specifically the number 
of the processes arising from the cell body. Neurons are 
thus classified into three large groups: unipolar, bipo-
lar, and multipolar.
Unipolar neurons are the simplest because they have 
a single primary process, which usually gives rise to 
many branches. One branch serves as the axon; other 
branches function as receiving structures (Figure 3–3A). 
These cells predominate in the nervous systems of 
invertebrates; in vertebrates, they occur in the auto-
nomic nervous system.
Bipolar neurons have an oval soma that gives rise 
to two distinct processes: a dendritic structure that 
receives signals from other neurons and an axon that 
carries information toward the central nervous system 
(Figure 3–3B). Many sensory cells are bipolar, including 
those in the retina and olfactory epithelium of the nose. 
The receptor neurons that convey touch, pressure, and 
pain signals to the spinal cord develop initially as bipo-
lar cells, but the two cell processes fuse into a single 
continuous structure that emerges from a single point 
in the cell body, and the dendrite is endowed with the 
specializations that render it an axon. In these so-called 
pseudo-unipolar cells, one axon transmits information 
from the sensory receptors in the skin, joints, and mus-
cle toward the cell body, while the other carries this 
sensory information to the spinal cord (Figure 3–3C).
Multipolar neurons predominate in the nervous sys-
tem of vertebrates. They typically have a single axon 
and many dendritic structures emerging from various 
points around the cell body (Figure 3–3D). Multipolar 
cells vary greatly in shape, especially in the length of 
their axons and in the extent, dimensions, and intri-
cacy of their dendritic branching. Usually the extent 
of branching correlates with the number of synaptic 
contacts that other neurons make onto them. A spi-
nal motor neuron with a relatively modest number of 
dendrites receives about 10,000 contacts—1,000 on the 
cell body and 9,000 on dendrites. In Purkinje cells in 
the cerebellum, the dendritic tree is much larger and 
bushier, receiving as many as a million contacts!
Nerve cells are also classified into three major func-
tional categories: sensory neurons, motor neurons, and 
interneurons. Sensory neurons carry information from 
the body’s peripheral sensors into the nervous system 
for the purpose of both perception and motor coordina-
tion. Some primary sensory neurons are called afferent 
neurons, and the two terms are used interchangeably. 
The term afferent (carried toward the central nervous 
system) applies to all information reaching the central 
nervous system from the periphery, whether or not 
this information leads to sensation. The term sensory 
designates those afferent neurons that convey infor-
mation to the central nervous system from the sensory 
epithelia, from joint sensory receptors, or from muscle, 
but the concept has been expanded to include neurons 
in primary and secondary cortical areas that respond 
to changes in a sensory feature, such as displacement 
of an object in space, a shift in sound frequency, or the 
angular rotation of the head (via vestibular organs in 
the ear) or even something as complex as a face.
The term efferent applies to all information car-
ried from the central nervous system toward the 
motor organs, whether or not this information leads to 
action. Motor neurons carry commands from the brain 
or spinal cord to muscles and glands (efferent infor-
mation). The traditional definition of a motor neuron 
(or motoneuron) is a neuron that excites a muscle, but 
the designation of motor neuron now includes other 


===== Page 9 =====
60    Part I / Overall Perspective
A  Unipolar cell
C  Pseudo-unipolar cell
B  Bipolar cell
Invertebrate neuron
Ganglion cell of dorsal root
Bipolar cell of retina
Central 
axon
Single bifurcated 
process
Cell body
Peripheral axon
to skin and
muscle
Dendrites
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
D  Three types of multipolar cells
Basal
dendrite
Cell
body
Axon
Motor neuron of spinal cord
Pyramidal cell of hippocampus
Purkinje cell of cerebellum
Dendrites
Cell body
Axon
Apical
dendrite
Axon terminals
Dendrites
Axon
Axon
terminals
Cell body
Figure 3–3  Neurons are classified as unipolar, bipolar, or 
multipolar according to the number of processes that origi-
nate from the cell body.
A. Unipolar cells have a single process emanating from the cell. 
Different segments serve as receptive surfaces or releasing 
terminals. Unipolar cells are characteristic of the invertebrate 
nervous system.
B. Bipolar cells have two types of processes that are function-
ally specialized. The dendrite receives electrical signals and the 
axon transmits signals to other cells.
C. Pseudo-unipolar cells, which are variants of bipolar cells, 
carry somatosensory information to the spinal cord. During 
development, the two processes of the embryonic bipolar cell 
fuse and emerge from the cell body as a single process that 
has two functionally distinct segments. Both segments func-
tion as axons; one extends to peripheral skin or muscle, the 
other to the central spinal cord. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Ramón y Cajal 1933.)
D. Multipolar cells have a single axon and many dendrites. 
They are the most common type of neuron in the mammalian 
nervous system. Three examples illustrate the large diversity 
of these cells. Spinal motor neurons innervate skeletal muscle 
fibers. Pyramidal cells have a roughly triangular cell body; den-
drites emerge from both the apex (the apical dendrite) and the 
base (the basal dendrites). Pyramidal cells are found in the hip-
pocampus and throughout the cerebral cortex. Purkinje cells of 
the cerebellum are characterized by a rich and extensive dendritic 
tree that accommodates an enormous number of synaptic 
inputs. (Adapted, with permission, from Ramón y Cajal 1933.)


