===== Page 1 =====
772    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–8  The reflex actions of Ib sensory fibers from 
Golgi tendon organs are modulated during locomotion.
A. The Ib inhibitory interneuron receives input from tendon 
organs, muscle spindles (not shown), joint and cutaneous 
receptors, and descending pathways.
B. The action of Ib sensory fibers on extensor motor neurons 
is reversed from inhibition to excitation when walking is 
initiated. When the animal is resting, stimulation of Ib fibers 
from the ankle extensor muscle inhibits ankle extensor 
motor neurons through Ib inhibitory interneurons, as shown 
by the hyperpolarization in the record. During walking, the 
Ib inhibitory interneurons are inhibited while excitatory 
interneurons that receive input from Ib sensory fibers are 
facilitated by the command system for walking, thus open-
ing a Ib excitatory pathway from the Golgi tendon organs to 
motor neurons.
Extensor
muscle
Joint
receptor
Flexor
muscle
Golgi
tendon
organ
Ib afferent
Joint afferent
Cutaneous
afferent
Motor
neuron
Descending
pathways
4 mV
100 ms
Stimulate Ib afferents
at 200 Hz
Intracellular recording from
ankle extensor motor neuron
A  Convergence onto Ib interneurons
B  Reversal of action of Ib afferents
Resting
Locomotion
Cutaneous
receptor
Ib afferent
Ib afferent
Excitatory
interneuron
To extensor
muscle
To extensor
muscle
Ib inhibitory
interneuron
Ib inhibitory
interneuron
fast withdrawal only at the wrist and elbow, whereas 
touching a very hot stove invariably leads to a force-
ful contraction at all joints, leading to rapid with-
drawal of the entire limb. The duration of the reflex 
usually increases with stimulus intensity, and the con-
tractions produced in a flexion reflex always outlast  
the stimulus.
Because of the similarity of the flexion-withdrawal 
reflex to stepping, it was once thought that the flexion 
reflex is important in producing contractions of flexor 
muscles during walking. We now know, however, 
that a major component of the neural control system 
for walking is a set of intrinsic spinal circuits that do 
not require sensory stimuli (Chapter 33). Nevertheless, 
in mammals, the intrinsic spinal circuits that control 
walking share many of the interneurons involved in 
flexion reflexes.
Convergence of Sensory Inputs on Interneurons 
Increases the Flexibility of Reflex Contributions  
to Movement
The Ib inhibitory interneuron is not the only interneu-
ron that receives convergent input from many different 
sensory modalities. An enormous diversity of sensory 
information converges on interneurons in the spinal 
cord, enabling them to integrate information from 
muscle, joints, and skin.
Interneurons activated by groups I and II sensory 
fibers have received special attention. It was thought 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    773
for some time that excitatory and inhibitory interneu-
rons activated by group II fibers could be distinguished 
from those activated by group Ib afferents, but it is 
now believed that this distinction has to be abandoned 
and that groups I and II fibers converge on common 
populations of interneurons that integrate force and 
length information from the active muscle and thereby 
help coordinate muscle activity according to the length 
of the muscle, its activity level, and the external load.
Sensory Feedback and Descending Motor 
Commands Interact at Common Spinal 
Neurons to Produce Voluntary Movements
As pointed out by Michael Foster in his 1879 physiol-
ogy textbook, it must be an “economy to the body” that 
the will should make use of the networks in the spinal 
cord to generate coordinated movements “rather than 
it should have recourse to an apparatus of its own of 
a similar kind.” Research in the subsequent 140 years 
has confirmed this conjecture.
The first evidence came from intracellular record-
ings of synaptic potentials elicited in cat spinal motor 
neurons by combined and separate stimulation of sen-
sory fibers and descending pathways. When separate 
stimuli are reduced in intensity to just below threshold 
for evoking a synaptic potential, combining the stim-
ulations at appropriate intervals makes the synaptic 
potential reappear. This provides evidence of conver-
gence of the sensory fibers and the descending path-
ways onto common interneurons in the reflex pathway 
(see Figure 13–14). Direct recordings from spinal 
interneurons have confirmed this, as have noninvasive 
Hoffmann reflex tests in human subjects (Figure 32–9).
Direct evidence that sensory feedback helps to shape 
voluntary motor commands through spinal reflex net-
works in humans comes from experiments in which 
sensory activity in length- and force-sensitive afferents 
has suddenly been reduced or abolished. This can be 
done by suddenly unloading or shortening a muscle 
during a voluntary contraction. The short latency of 
the consequent reduction in muscle activity can only 
be explained by sensory activity through a reflex path-
way that directly contributes to the muscle activity.
Muscle Spindle Sensory Afferent Activity 
Reinforces Central Commands for Movements 
Through the Ia Monosynaptic Reflex Pathway
Stretch reflex pathways can contribute to the regula-
tion of motor neurons during voluntary movements 
and during maintenance of posture because they 
form closed feedback loops. For example, stretching a 
muscle increases activity in spindle sensory afferents, 
leading to muscle contraction and consequent short-
ening of the muscle. Muscle shortening in turn leads 
to decreased activity in spindle afferents, reduction of 
muscle contraction, and lengthening of the muscle.
The stretch reflex loop thus acts continuously—
the output of the system, a change in muscle length, 
becomes the input—tending to keep the muscle close 
to a desired or reference length. The stretch reflex path-
way is a negative feedback system, or servomechanism, 
because it tends to counteract or reduce deviations 
from the reference value of the regulated variable.
In 1963, Ragnar Granit proposed that the refer-
ence value in voluntary movements is set by descend-
ing signals that act on both alpha and gamma motor 
neurons. The rate of firing of alpha motor neurons is 
set to produce the desired shortening of the muscle, 
and the rate of firing of gamma motor neurons is set 
to produce an equivalent shortening of the intrafusal 
fibers of the muscle spindle. If the shortening of the 
whole muscle is less than what is required by a task, as 
when the load is greater than anticipated, the sensory 
fibers increase their firing rate because the contract-
ing intrafusal fibers are stretched (loaded) by the rela-
tively greater length of the whole muscle. If shortening 
is greater than necessary, the sensory fibers decrease 
their firing rate because the intrafusal fibers are rela-
tively slackened (unloaded) (Figure 32–10A).
In theory, this mechanism could permit the nerv-
ous system to produce movements of a given distance 
without having to know in advance the actual load or 
weight being moved. In practice, however, the stretch 
reflex pathways do not have sufficient control over 
motor neurons to overcome large unexpected loads. 
This is immediately obvious if we consider what hap-
pens when we attempt to lift a heavy suitcase that we 
believe to be empty. Automatic compensation for the 
greater-than-anticipated load does not occur. Instead, 
we have to pause briefly to plan a new movement with 
much greater muscle activation.
Strong evidence that alpha and gamma motor neu-
rons are co-activated during voluntary human move-
ment comes from direct measurements of the activity 
of the sensory fibers from muscle spindles. In the late 
1960s, Åke Vallbo and Karl-Erik Hagbarth developed 
microneurography, a technique for recording from the 
largest afferent fibers in peripheral nerves. Vallbo later 
found that during slow movements of the fingers the 
large-diameter Ia fibers from spindles in the contract-
ing muscles increase their rate of firing even when the 
muscle shortens as it contracts (Figure 32–10B). This 
occurs because the gamma motor neurons, which have 


===== Page 3 =====
774    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–9  The spatial summation technique demon-
strates how signals from descending inputs and spinal net-
works are integrated.  This technique was introduced originally 
for investigation of spinal circuits in the cat in the 1950s, but 
it is also the basis of later investigations of the human spinal 
mechanisms of motor control. It relies on the spatial summa-
tion of synaptic inputs (see Figure 13–14), as illustrated here 
using the reciprocal Ia inhibitory pathway and corticospinal tract 
(CST).
A. The diagram shows the experimental setups for testing for 
convergence of excitatory reciprocal Ia and corticospinal path-
ways onto Ia inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord.
B. In acute experiments on the cat spinal cord, supramaximal 
stimuli were applied separately to corticospinal fiber tracts (1) 
and Ia axons (3); each stimulus elicited an inhibitory postsyn-
aptic potential (IPSP) in the motor neuron. Next, the intensities 
of the two stimuli were reduced to just submaximal levels, at 
which point each pathway failed to elicit an IPSP in the motor 
neuron (2, 4). Then, when the two sets of submaximal stimuli 
were paired, they elicited an IPSP in the motor neuron (5), lead-
ing to the conclusion that the two input pathways converge on 
the same interneurons. This was confirmed by direct recording 
from a Ia inhibitory interneuron. (AP, action potential).
C. In humans, direct intracellular recording from interneurons 
and motor neurons is not possible, but recording of H-reflexes 
(Box 32–4, Figure 32–4) and transcutaneous stimulation of the 
corticospinal tract have provided indirect evidence for conver-
gence similar to that demonstrated in cats (see part B). The 
electromyogram (EMG) record of the H-reflex provides a meas-
ure of the excitability of the spinal motor neurons (1). When 
the CST and antagonist Ia fibers were stimulated separately at 
supramaximal levels, the H-reflex amplitude was diminished 
due to the compound IPSPs elicited in the motor neurons  
(2, 4). Next, the stimuli to these two excitatory pathways to 
the inhibitory interneurons were reduced until neither stimu-
lus alone elicited a reduction in amplitude of the H-reflex (3, 5). 
Then, the two submaximal stimuli were timed to produce 
synchronous subthreshold excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
(EPSPs) in the inhibitory interneurons (6). Because this protocol 
caused suppression of the H-reflex, one may conclude that 
the CST and Ia afferents converge on the same Ia inhibitory 
interneurons.
EPSP
AP
IPSP
1  CST supramaximal
2  CST submaximal
1  Control-only H-reﬂex
2  H + CST supramaximal
3  H + CST submaximal
4  H + Ia supramaximal
5  H + Ia submaximal
5  CST + Ia submaximal
6  H + CST + 
     Ia submaximal
3  Ia supramaximal
4  Ia submaximal
1
2
5
3
4
Stimulation of CST and Ia ﬁbers
H-reﬂex response
Motor neuron response
H-reﬂex
B
C
Stimulus
Corticospinal
tract
A
Intracellular
recording
EMG
recording
Intracellular
recording
Motor 
neuron
Ia afferents 
from 
antagonist
Ia agonist
Ia inhibitory 
interneuron
direct excitatory connections with spindles, are co-
activated with alpha motor neurons.
Furthermore, when subjects attempt to make slow 
movements at a constant velocity, the firing of the Ia 
fibers mirrors the small deviations in velocity in the 
trajectory of the movements (sometimes the muscle 
shortens quickly and at other times more slowly). 
When the velocity of flexion increases transiently, 
the rate of firing in the fibers decreases because the 
muscle is shortening more rapidly and therefore exerts 
less tension on the intrafusal fibers. When the veloc-
ity decreases, firing increases because the muscle is 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    775
Figure 32–10  Co-activation of alpha and gamma motor 
neurons.
A. Co-activation of alpha and gamma motor neurons by a  
cortical motor command allows feedback from muscle spin-
dles to reinforce activation in the alpha motor neurons. Any 
disturbance during a movement alters the length of the muscle 
and thus changes the activity in the sensory fibers from the 
spindles. The changed spindle input to the alpha motor neuron 
compensates for the disturbance.
B. The discharge rate in the Ia sensory fiber from a spindle 
increases during slow flexion of a finger. This increase depends 
on alpha-gamma co-activation. If the gamma motor neurons 
were not active, the spindle would slacken, and its discharge 
rate would decrease as the muscle shortened. (EMG, elec-
tromyogram; PPS, pulses/s) (Adapted, with permission, from 
Vallbo 1981.)
Spindle
Muscle
Alpha
motor
neuron
Gamma
motor
neuron
Load
B  Spindle activity increases during muscle shortening
Length
Force
0.2 mV
0
0
140°
135°
50 pps
5 s
+
+
+
+
–
+
+
EMG
Finger
angle
Ia 
sensory 
ﬁber
Discharge
rate
Ia sensory 
    ﬁber
A  Alpha-gamma co-activation reinforces alpha motor activity
Cortical 
motor 
command
+
shortening more slowly, and therefore, the relative ten-
sion on the intrafusal fibers increases. This information 
can be used by the nervous system to compensate for 
irregularities in the movement trajectory by exciting 
the alpha motor neurons.
Modulation of Ia inhibitory Interneurons and 
Renshaw Cells by Descending Inputs Coordinate 
Muscle Activity at Joints
Reciprocal innervation is useful not only in stretch 
reflexes but also in voluntary movements. Relaxation 
of the antagonist muscle during a movement enhances 
speed and efficiency because the muscles that act as 
prime movers are not working against the contraction 
of opposing muscles.
The Ia inhibitory interneurons receive inputs from 
collaterals of the axons of neurons in the motor cor-
tex that make direct excitatory connections with spinal 
motor neurons. This organizational feature simplifies 
the control of voluntary movements, because higher 
centers do not have to send separate commands to the 
opposing muscles.
It is sometimes advantageous to contract both the 
prime mover and the antagonist at the same time. 
Such co-contraction has the effect of stiffening the joint 
and is most useful when precision and joint stabiliza-
tion are critical. An example of this phenomenon is the 
co-contraction of flexor and extensor muscles of the 
elbow immediately before catching a ball. The Ia inhibi-
tory interneurons receive both excitatory and inhibitory 
signals from all of the major descending pathways 
(Figure 32–11A). By changing the balance of excitatory 
and inhibitory inputs onto these interneurons, supraspi-
nal centers can modulate reciprocal inhibition of muscles 
and enable co-contraction, thus controlling the relative 
amount of joint stiffness to meet the requirements of the 
motor act.
The activity of spinal motor neurons is also regu-
lated by another important class of inhibitory interneu-
rons, the Renshaw cells. Excited by collaterals of the 
axons of motor neurons and receiving significant synap-
tic input from descending pathways, Renshaw cells make 
inhibitory synaptic connections with several popula-
tions of motor neurons, including the motor neurons 
that excite them, as well as Ia inhibitory interneurons 
(Figure 32–11B). The connections with motor neurons 
form a negative feedback system that regulates the 
firing rate of the motor neurons, whereas the connec-
tions with the Ia inhibitory interneurons regulate the 
strength of inhibition of antagonistic motor neurons, 
for instance in relation to co-contraction of antago-
nists. The distribution of projections from Renshaw 


===== Page 5 =====
776    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–11  Inhibitory spinal interneurons coordinate 
reflex actions.
A. The Ia inhibitory interneuron regulates contraction in antago-
nist muscles in stretch reflex circuits through its divergent 
contacts with motor neurons. In addition, the interneuron 
receives excitatory and inhibitory inputs from corticospinal and 
other descending pathways. A change in the balance of these 
supraspinal signals allows the interneuron to coordinate co-
contractions in antagonist muscles at a joint.
B. The Renshaw cell produces recurrent inhibition of motor 
neurons. These interneurons are excited by collaterals from 
motor neurons and inhibit those same motor neurons. This 
negative feedback system regulates motor neuron excitability 
and stabilizes firing rates. Renshaw cells also send collater-
als to synergist motor neurons (not shown) and Ia inhibitory 
interneurons that synapse on antagonist motor neurons. Thus, 
descending inputs that modulate the excitability of the Ren-
shaw cells adjust the excitability of all the motor neurons that 
control movement around a joint.
Extensor
muscle
Extensor
muscle
Flexor
muscle
Flexor
muscle
Muscle
spindle
Motor
neurons
Motor
neurons
Ia afferent
ﬁber
A  Ia inhibitory interneuron
B  Renshaw cell
Ia inhibitory
interneuron
Other
descending
pathways
Corticospinal
pathway
Descending
pathways
Ia inhibitory
interneuron
Renshaw cell
(interneuron)
cells to different motor nuclei also facilitate that muscle 
activity is coordinated in functional synergies during 
movement.
Transmission in Reflex Pathways May Be Facilitated 
or Inhibited by Descending Motor Commands
As we have seen, in an animal at rest, the Ib sensory 
fibers from extensor muscles have an inhibitory effect 
on homonymous motor neurons. During locomotion, 
they produce an excitatory effect on those same motor 
neurons because transmission in the disynaptic inhibi-
tory pathway is depressed (Figure 32–8B), while at the 
same time transmission through excitatory interneu-
rons is facilitated.
This phenomenon, called state-dependent reflex 
reversal, illustrates how transmission in spinal circuit 
is regulated by descending motor commands to meet 
the changing requirements during movement. By 
favoring transmission through excitatory pathways 
from the load-sensitive Golgi tendon organs, the 
descending motor commands ensure that feedback 
from the active muscles automatically facilitates the 
activation of the muscles, thereby greatly simplifying 
the task for supraspinal centers.
State-dependent reflex reversal has also been dem-
onstrated in humans. Stimulation of skin and muscle 
afferents from the foot produces facilitation of mus-
cles that lift the foot early in the swing phase, but sup-
presses activity of the same muscles late in the swing 
phase. Both effects make good functional sense. Early 
in the swing phase, positive feedback from the foot 
will help to lift the foot over an obstacle, whereas sup-
pression of the same muscles in late swing will help to 
lower the foot quickly to the ground so that the obsta-
cle may be passed using the opposite leg first.


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    777
Descending Inputs Modulate Sensory Input to the 
Spinal Cord by Changing the Synaptic Efficiency of 
Primary Sensory Fibers
In the 1950s and early 1960s, John C. Eccles and his 
collaborators demonstrated that monosynaptic excita-
tory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) elicited in cat spi-
nal motor neurons by stimulation of Ia sensory fibers 
become smaller when other Ia fibers are stimulated. 
This led to the discovery in the spinal cord of several 
groups of GABAergic inhibitory interneurons that 
exert presynaptic inhibition of primary sensory neu-
rons (Figure 32–12). Some interneurons inhibit mainly 
Ia sensory axons, whereas others inhibit mainly Ib 
axons or sensory fibers from skin.
The principal mechanism responsible for sensory 
inhibition is a depolarization of the primary terminal 
caused by an inward Cl− current when GABAergic 
receptors on the terminal are activated. This depo-
larization inactivates some of the Na+ channels in 
the terminal, so the action potentials that reach the 
synapse are reduced in size. The effect of this is that 
release of neurotransmitter from the sensory afferent 
is diminished.
When tested by stimulation of peripheral affer-
ents, presynaptic inhibition is widespread in the spi-
nal cord and affects primary afferents from all muscles 
in a limb. However, similar to other interneurons, the 
neurons responsible for presynaptic inhibition are also 
controlled by descending pathways, making possi-
ble a much more focused modulation of presynaptic 
inhibition in relation to movement. Presynaptic inhibi-
tion at the synapse of Ia axons with motor neurons of 
the muscles that are activated as part of a movement 
is reduced at the onset of movement. In contrast, pre-
synaptic inhibition of Ia axons on motor neurons con-
nected to inactive muscles is increased. One example 
of this selective modulation is increased presynaptic 
inhibition of Ia axons at their synapse with antagonist 
motor neurons, which explains part of the reduction 
of stretch reflexes in antagonist muscles at the onset 
of agonist contraction. In this way, the nervous system 
takes advantage of the widespread connectivity of Ia 
axons, using presynaptic inhibition to shape activity in 
the Ia afferent network to facilitate activation of spe-
cific muscles.
Presynaptic inhibition provides a mechanism by 
which the nervous system can reduce sensory feed-
back predicted by the motor command, while allow-
ing unexpected feedback access to the spinal motor 
circuit and the rest of the nervous system. In line with 
this function, presynaptic inhibition of Ia sensory 
axons from muscle spindles generally increases during 
Ia afferent
ﬁbers
Alpha motor
neuron
(inhibited)
Alpha motor
neuron
(activated)
Descending 
inputs
Inhibitory
interneuron
(activated)
Soleus
muscle
Anterior
tibial
muscle
Figure 32–12  Selective modulation of primary sensory 
axon terminals by descending presynaptic inhibitory 
inputs contributes to generation of coordinated limb 
movements.  Inhibitory interneurons (blue) activated by 
descending inputs can have either pre- or postsynaptic effects. 
Some interneurons releasing the inhibitory neurotransmitter 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) form axo-axonic synapses with 
the primary sensory fibers. The principal inhibitory mechanism 
involves activation of GABAergic receptors on the terminals 
of the presynaptic Ia sensory axons, resulting in depolariza-
tion of the terminals and reduced transmitter release. Such 
presynaptic inhibition is widely distributed in the spinal cord. 
Stimulation of Ia sensory fibers from one flexor muscle may 
elicit presynaptic inhibition of both flexor and extensor Ia axon 
terminals on motor neurons innervating muscles throughout 
the limb. However, several different populations of interneurons 
mediating presynaptic inhibition exist, which allows a very spe-
cific regulation of presynaptic inhibition in relation to voluntary 
movements. Interaction of sensory inputs with descending 
motor commands in the corticospinal tract may thus decrease 
presynaptic inhibition of Ia axon terminals on agonist motor 
neurons (eg, anterior tibial motor neurons) and at the same 
time increase presynaptic inhibition of Ia terminals on antago-
nist motor neurons (eg, soleus motor neurons). Regulation of 
presynaptic inhibition may thus simultaneously facilitate the 
sensory feedback to the activation of agonist motor neurons 
and at the same time diminish the risk that stretch of the 
antagonist muscles will elicit a stretch reflex that would coun-
teract the movement.


===== Page 7 =====
778    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–13  Propriospinal neurons in spinal segments 
C3–C4 mediate part of the descending motor command to 
cervical motor neurons. Some corticospinal fibers (green) 
send collaterals to propriospinal neurons in the C3–C4 seg-
ments (blue). These C3–C4 propriospinal neurons project to 
motor neurons located in more caudal cervical segments. They 
also receive excitatory input from muscle afferents and send 
collaterals to the lateral reticular nucleus.
movements that are highly predictable, such as walk-
ing and running.
Finally, presynaptic inhibition may help stabilize 
the execution of movements by preventing excessive 
sensory feedback and associated self-reinforcing oscil-
latory activity.
Part of the Descending Command for Voluntary 
Movements Is Conveyed Through Spinal 
Interneurons
In cats as well as most other vertebrates, the corti-
cospinal tract has no direct connections to spinal 
motor neurons; all the descending commands have 
to be channeled through spinal interneurons that 
are also part of reflex pathways. Humans and Old 
World monkeys are the only species in which corti-
cospinal neurons make direct connections with the 
spinal motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spi-
nal cord. Even in these species, a considerable frac-
tion of the corticospinal tract fibers terminate in the 
intermediate nucleus on spinal interneurons, and the 
corticospinal fibers that terminate on motor neurons 
also have collaterals that synapse on interneurons. A 
considerable part of each descending command for 
movement in the corticospinal tract therefore has to 
be conveyed through spinal interneurons—and inte-
grated with sensory activity—before reaching the 
motor neurons.
Propriospinal Neurons in the C3–C4 Segments 
Mediate Part of the Corticospinal Command for 
Movement of the Upper Limb
In the 1970s, Anders Lundberg and his collaborators 
demonstrated that a group of neurons in the C3–C4 
spinal segments of the cat spinal cord send their axons 
to motor neurons located in more caudal cervical seg-
ments (Figure 32–13). Since the neurons in the C3–C4 
segments project to motor neurons that innervate a 
range of forelimb muscles controlling different joints, 
and receive input from both skin and muscles through-
out the forelimb, they are named propriospinal neurons. 
In addition to sensory input from skin and muscle 
afferents, the C3–C4 propriospinal neurons are acti-
vated by collaterals from the corticospinal tract and 
thereby relay disynaptic excitation from the motor cor-
tex to the spinal motor neurons.
Subsequent experiments by Bror Alstermark in 
Sweden and Tadashi Isa in Japan have confirmed that 
similar propriospinal neurons also exist in the C3–C4 
Motor
neuron
Ia afferent
ﬁber
C6 - T1
C3 - C4
Propriospinal
neuron
To lateral
reticular
nucleus
C1 - C2
Corticospinal 
pathways
segments of the monkey spinal cord and are involved 
in mediating at least part of the motor command for 
reaching. Noninvasive experiments have also pro-
vided indirect evidence of the existence of C3–C4 pro-
priospinal neurons in the human spinal cord. With the 
evolution of direct monosynaptic corticomotor con-
nections in monkeys and humans, the corticospinal 
transmission through this disynaptic pathway may 
have become less important.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    779
Lumbar interneurons that receive input from 
groups I and II sensory axons from muscle also receive 
significant input from descending motor tracts and 
provide excitatory projections to spinal motor neurons. 
These interneurons thus convey part of the indirect 
motor command for voluntary movements to the spi-
nal motor neurons that control leg muscles and may be 
a lumbar equivalent of the C3–C4 propriospinal neu-
rons in the cervical spinal cord.
Neurons in Spinal Reflex Pathways Are Activated 
Prior to Movement
Synaptic transmission in spinal reflex pathways may 
change in response to the intention to move, independ-
ent of movement. Intracellular recordings from active 
monkeys have demonstrated that the intention to 
make a movement modifies activity in interneurons in 
the spinal cord and alters transmission in spinal reflex 
pathways. Similarly, in human subjects who have 
been prevented from contracting a muscle (by injec-
tion of lidocaine into the peripheral nerve supplying 
the muscle), the voluntary effort to contract the muscle 
still changes transmission in reflex pathways as if the 
movement had actually taken place.
In both humans and monkeys, spinal interneu-
rons also change their activity well in advance of the 
actual movement. For example, in human subjects, 
Hoffmann reflexes elicited in a muscle that is about 
to be activated are facilitated fully 50 ms prior to the 
onset of contraction and remain facilitated throughout 
the movement. Conversely, reflexes in the antagonist 
muscles are suppressed. The suppression of stretch 
reflexes in the antagonist muscle prior to the onset 
of movement is an efficient way of preventing the 
antagonist from being reflexively activated when it is 
stretched at the onset of the agonist contraction.
Transmission in spinal reflex pathways can also be 
modified in connection with higher cognitive functions. 
Two examples are (1) an increase in the tendon jerk reflex 
in the soleus muscle of a human subject imagining press-
ing a foot pedal and (2) modulation of the Hoffmann 
reflex in arm and leg muscles while a subject observes 
grasping and walking movements, respectively.
Proprioceptive Reflexes Play an Important  
Role in Regulating Both Voluntary and 
Automatic Movements
All movements activate receptors in muscles, joints, 
and skin. Sensory signals generated by the body’s own 
movements were termed proprioceptive by Sherrington, 
who proposed that they control important aspects of 
normal movements. A good example is the Hering-
Breuer reflex, which regulates the amplitude of inspira-
tion. Stretch receptors in the lungs are activated during 
inspiration, and the Hering-Breuer reflex eventually 
triggers the transition from inspiration to expiration 
when the lungs are expanded.
A similar situation exists in the walking systems 
of many animals; sensory signals generated near the 
end of the stance phase initiate the onset of the swing 
phase (Chapter 33). Proprioceptive signals can also 
contribute to the regulation of motor activity during 
voluntary movements, as shown in studies of indi-
viduals with sensory neuropathy of the arms. These 
patients display abnormal reaching movements and 
have difficulty in positioning the limb accurately 
because the lack of proprioception results in a failure 
to compensate for the complex inertial properties of 
the human arm.
Therefore, a primary function of propriocep-
tive reflexes in regulating voluntary movements is to 
adjust the motor output according to the changing bio-
mechanical state of the body and limbs. This adjust-
ment ensures a coordinated pattern of motor activity 
during an evolving movement and compensates for 
the intrinsic variability of motor output.
Spinal Reflex Pathways Undergo  
Long-Term Changes
Transmission in spinal reflex pathways is modulated 
not only to suit the immediate requirements of the 
movement but also to adapt the motor command to 
the motor experience of the individual. For example, 
transmission in the reciprocal Ia inhibitory pathway 
shows a gradual change when subjects improve their 
ability in coordinating agonist and antagonist con-
traction. Inactivity following long periods of bedrest 
or immobilization also results in changes in stretch 
reflexes and H-reflexes. Conversely, the soleus stretch 
reflex is low in highly trained ballet dancers and varies 
among different kinds of athletes.
Extensive studies of humans, monkeys, and rats 
by Jonathan Wolpaw and his colleagues have found 
that stretch reflexes can be operantly conditioned to 
either increase or decrease. The mechanisms underly-
ing these changes are complex and involve alterations 
at multiple sites including changes in the properties 
of motor neurons. A general prerequisite for these 
changes is that corticospinal control of the spinal motor 
circuits must be intact.


===== Page 9 =====
780    Part V / Movement
Damage to the Central Nervous System 
Produces Characteristic Alterations in  
Reflex Responses
Stretch reflexes are routinely used in clinical examina-
tions of patients with neurological disorders. They are 
typically elicited by sharply tapping the tendon of a 
muscle with a reflex hammer. Although the responses 
are often called tendon reflexes or tendon jerks, the 
receptor that is stimulated, the muscle spindle, actu-
ally lies in the muscle rather than the tendon. Only 
the primary sensory fibers in the spindle participate 
in the tendon reflex, for these are selectively activated 
by a rapid stretch of the muscle produced by the  
tendon tap.
Measuring alterations in the strength of the stretch 
reflex can assist in the diagnosis of certain conditions 
and in localizing injury or disease in the central nerv-
ous system. Absent or hypoactive stretch reflexes often 
indicate a disorder of one or more of the components 
of the peripheral reflex pathway: sensory or motor 
axons, the cell bodies of motor neurons, or the mus-
cle itself (Chapter 57). Nevertheless, because the excit-
ability of motor neurons is dependent on descending 
excitatory and inhibitory signals, absent or hypoactive 
stretch reflexes can also result from lesions of the cen-
tral nervous system. Hyperactive stretch reflexes, con-
versely, always indicate that the lesion is in the central 
nervous system.
Interruption of Descending Pathways to the Spinal 
Cord Frequently Produces Spasticity
The force with which a muscle resists being length-
ened depends on the muscle’s intrinsic elasticity, or 
stiffness. Because a muscle has elastic elements in 
series and parallel that resist lengthening, it behaves 
like a spring (Chapter 31). In addition, connective tis-
sue in and around the muscle may also contribute to 
its stiffness. These elastic elements may be pathologi-
cally altered following brain and spinal cord injury 
and thereby cause contractures and abnormal joint 
positions. However, there is also a neural contribution 
to the resistance of a muscle to stretch; the feedback 
loop inherent in the stretch reflex pathway acts to resist 
lengthening of the muscle.
Spasticity is characterized by hyperactive tendon 
jerks and an increase in resistance to rapid stretching 
of the muscle. Slow movement of a joint elicits only 
passive resistance, which is caused by the elastic prop-
erties of the joint, tendon, muscle, and connective tis-
sues. As the speed of the stretch is increased, resistance 
to the stretch rises progressively. This phasic relation 
is what characterizes spasticity; an active reflex con-
traction occurs only during a rapid stretch, and when 
the muscle is held in a lengthened position, the reflex 
contraction subsides.
Spasticity is seen following lesion of descending 
motor pathways caused by stroke, injuries of the brain 
or spinal cord, and degenerative diseases such as mul-
tiple sclerosis. It is also seen in individuals with brain 
damage that occurs before, during, or shortly after 
birth, resulting in cerebral palsy.
Spasticity is not seen immediately following 
lesions of descending pathways, but develops over 
days, weeks, and even months. This parallels plastic 
changes at multiple sites in the stretch reflex circuitry. 
Sensory group Ia axons release more transmitter sub-
stance when active, and the alpha motor neurons 
change their intrinsic properties and their morphology 
(dendritic sprouting and denervation hypersensitivity) 
so that they become more excitable. Changes in excita-
tory and inhibitory interneurons that project to the 
motor neurons also take place and probably contribute 
to the increased excitability.
Whatever the precise mechanisms that produce 
spasticity, the effect is a strong facilitation of transmis-
sion in the monosynaptic reflex pathway. It is not the 
only reflex pathway affected by lesions of descend-
ing motor pathways. Pathways involving group I/II 
interneurons and sensory fibers from skin are also 
affected and exhibit the symptomatology observed in 
patients with central motor lesions. In the clinic, spas-
ticity is therefore used in a broader sense and does not 
only relate to stretch reflex hyperexcitability. It is still 
debated whether reflex hyperexcitability contributes to 
the movement disorder following lesion of descending 
pathways or whether it may be a pertinent adaptation 
that helps to activate the muscles when descending 
input is diminished.
Lesion of the Spinal Cord in Humans Leads to a 
Period of Spinal Shock Followed by Hyperreflexia
Damage to the spinal cord can cause large changes 
in the strength of spinal reflexes. Each year, approxi-
mately 11,000 Americans sustain spinal cord injuries, 
and many more suffer from strokes. More than half of 
these injuries produce permanent disability, including 
impairment of motor and sensory functions and loss of 
voluntary bowel and bladder control. Approximately 
250,000 people in the United States today have some 
permanent disability from spinal cord injury.
When the spinal cord is completely transected, 
there is usually a period immediately after the 
injury when all spinal reflexes below the level of the 


