===== Page 1 =====
1044    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Romanovsky AA. 2014. Skin temperature: its role in ther-
moregulation. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 210:498–507.
Rossi J, Balthasar N, Olson D, et al. 2011. Melanocortin-4 
receptors expressed by cholinergic neurons regulate 
energy balance and glucose homeostasis. Cell Metab 
13:195–204.
Saper CB. 2002. The central autonomic nervous system: con-
scious visceral perception and autonomic pattern genera-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 25:433–469.
Saper CB, Romanovsky AA, Scammell TE. 2012. Neural cir-
cuitry engaged by prostaglandins during the sickness 
syndrome. Nat Neurosci 15:1088–1095.
Shah BP, Vong L, Olson DP, et al. 2014. MC4R-expressing 
glutamatergic neurons in the paraventricular hypothala-
mus regulate feeding and are synaptically connected 
to the parabrachial nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
111:13193–13198.
Song K, Wang H, Kamm GB, et al. 2016. The TRPM2 channel 
is a hypothalamic heat sensor that limits fever and can 
drive hypothermia. Science 353:1393–1398.
Speakman JR, Levitsky DA, Allison DB, et al. 2011. Set points, 
settling points and some alternative models: theoreti-
cal options to understand how genes and environments 
combine to regulate body adiposity. Dis Model Mech 
4:733–745.
Stricker EM, Hoffmann ML. 2007. Presystemic signals in the 
control of thirst, salt appetite, and vasopressin secretion. 
Physiol Behav 91:404–412.
Swanson LW. 2000. Cerebral hemisphere regulation of moti-
vated behavior. Brain Res 886:113–164.
Tan CH, McNaughton PA. 2016. The TRPM2 ion channel is 
required for sensitivity to warmth. Nature 536:460–463.
Tan CL, Cooke EK, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Warm-sensitive neu-
rons that control body temperature. Cell 167:47–59 e15.
Tanaka M, Owens NC, Nagashima K, Kanosue K, McAllen 
RM. 2006. Reflex activation of rat fusimotor neurons by 
body surface cooling, and its dependence on the medul-
lary raphe. J Physiol 572:569–583.
Toates F 1986. Motivational Systems. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Williams EK, Chang RB, Strochlic DE, Umans BD, Lowell BB, 
Liberles SD. 2016. Sensory neurons that detect stretch and 
nutrients in the digestive system. Cell 166:209–221.
Wong LC, Wang L, D’Amour JA, et al. 2016. Effective mod-
ulation of male aggression through lateral septum to 
medial hypothalamus projection. Curr Biol 26:593–604.
Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 
2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern 
parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimor-
phic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus gov-
ern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell 
153:896–909.
Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, Barone M, Leopold L,  
Friedman JM. 1994. Positional cloning of the mouse obese 
gene and its human homologue. Nature 372:425–432.
Zimmerman CA, Lin YC, Leib DE, et al. 2016. Thirst neurons 
anticipate the homeostatic consequences of eating and 
drinking. Nature 537:680–684.


===== Page 2 =====
42
Emotion
and is mounting an adaptive response, such as high 
arousal and freezing.
Emotions are often represented along two dimen-
sions: valence (ie, pleasantness to unpleasantness) and 
intensity (ie, low to high arousal), called “core affect” in 
many psychological theories. However, emotions can also 
be grouped into categories, such as categories of basic 
emotions (happiness, fear, anger, disgust, sadness) and 
categories of more complex emotions that help regulate 
social or moral behaviors (eg, shame, guilt, embarrass-
ment, pride, jealousy). There is considerable debate about 
whether all the categories that are in common usage (like 
the ones just mentioned) will correspond to scientifically 
useful categories in a future neuroscience of emotion.
Within experimental contexts, the term emotion 
is used in several different ways, often related to the 
ways in which emotion is measured (Box 42–1). 
In everyday conversation, most people use the term 
“emotion” synonymously with “conscious experience 
of emotion” or “feeling,” and most psychological stud-
ies in humans have focused on this sense of “emotion” 
as well. Most research in animals has focused instead 
on specific behavioral or physiological responses, in 
good part because it is impossible to obtain verbal 
reports in animal studies. Yet emotions have been con-
served throughout the evolution of species, as Charles 
Darwin first observed in his seminal book, The Expres-
sion of the Emotions in Man and Animals. The empirical 
approach we describe in this chapter thus considers 
emotions as central brain states that can be studied in 
humans as well as many other animals, provided that 
we distinguish between emotions and feelings.
Emotion states typically cause a broad range of 
physiological responses that occur when the brain 
The Modern Search for the Neural Circuitry of Emotion 
Began in the Late 19th Century
The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Both Learned and 
Innate Fear
The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in  
Innate Fear in Animals
The Amygdala Is Important for Fear in Humans
The Amygdala’s Role Extends to Positive Emotions
Emotional Responses Can Be Updated Through Extinction 
and Regulation
Emotion Can Influence Cognitive Processes
Many Other Brain Areas Contribute to Emotional Processing
Functional Neuroimaging Is Contributing to Our 
Understanding of Emotion in Humans
Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural  
Correlates of Feelings
Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis
Highlights
E
lation, compassion, sadness, fear, and anger 
are commonly considered examples of emotions. 
These states have an enormous impact on our 
behavior and well-being. But what exactly is an emo-
tion? Distinguishing different emotion states is dif-
ficult and requires an account of the environmentally 
or internally generated challenge an organism faces 
as well as its physiological responses. For example, 
before we can conclude that a rat is in a state of fear, 
we need to know that the rat is evaluating a specific 
threatening stimulus (a predator in its environment) 


===== Page 3 =====
1046    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Measures Commonly Used in Humans
Psychophysiology. Psychophysiology uses several meas-
ures to assay the physiological parameters associated 
with emotional states. These measures include auto-
nomic responses (Chapter 41) as well as some somatic 
responses. The most commonly used measure is the gal-
vanic skin response (also known as the skin conductance 
response), a measure of sympathetic autonomic arousal 
derived from the sweatiness of the palms of the hands. 
Other measures include heart rate, heart rate variabil-
ity, blood pressure, respiration, pupil dilation, facial 
electromyography (EMG), and the startle response (see 
below). Some of these measures mostly correlate with 
basic dimensions of emotion, such as valence (eg, the 
Box 42–1  Ways of Measuring Emotion
Table 42–1  Common Questionnaires Used to Assess Fear in Human Emotion Studies
Questionnaire
Type of fear questions
Fear Survey Schedule II
Probes an individual’s level of fear across a range of different objects  
and situations that commonly evoke fear
Fear of Negative  
Evaluation Scale
Measures fear of being evaluated negatively by others
Social Avoidance and  
Distress Scale
Measures fear of social situations
Anxiety Sensitivity Index
Measures fear of experiencing different bodily sensations and feelings
Beck Anxiety Inventory
Measures fear and panic-related symptoms experienced over the prior week
Albany Panic and Phobia 
Questionnaire
Has the subject estimate the amount of fear they would experience  
in different situations
Fear Questionnaire
Measures the degree of avoidance due to fear
PANAS-X Fear (general)
Measures how much, in general, a person feels fear-related affective states
PANAS-X Fear (moment)
Measures how much, during the present moment, a person feels fear-related 
affective states
PANAS, Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.
detects certain environmental situations. These physi-
ological responses are relatively automatic, yet depend 
on context, and occur within the brain as well as 
throughout the body. In the brain, they involve changes 
in arousal levels and in cognitive functions such as 
attention, memory processing, and decision making. 
Somatic responses involve endocrine, autonomic, and 
musculoskeletal systems (Chapter 41). In sum, emo-
tions are neurobiological states that cause coordinated 
behavioral and cognitive responses triggered by the 
brain. This can occur when an individual detects a 
significant stimulus (positively or negatively charged) 
or has a specific thought or memory that leads to an 
endogenously generated emotion state.
Some stimuli—objects, animals, or situations—
trigger emotions without the organism having to learn 
anything about those stimuli. Such stimuli have innately 
reinforcing qualities and are called unconditioned 
stimuli; examples are a painful shock or a disgusting 
taste. However, the vast majority of stimuli acquire their 
emotional significance through associative learning.
When an individual detects an emotionally sig-
nificant stimulus, three physiological systems are 
engaged: the endocrine glands, the autonomic motor 
system, and the musculoskeletal system (Figure 42–1). 
The endocrine system is responsible for the secretion 
and regulation of hormones into the bloodstream that 
affect bodily tissues and the brain. The autonomic 
system mediates changes in the various physiological 
control systems of the body: the cardiovascular system, 
the visceral organs, and the tissues in the body cav-
ity (Chapter 41). The skeletal motor system mediates 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1047
magnitude of the startle response) or arousal (eg, the 
galvanic skin response), whereas others (eg, facial EMG) 
can provide more fine-grained information about emo-
tions. Facial expression has been used extensively but 
has no simple relationship to specific emotions.
Subjective ratings. Subjective ratings are often used in 
human studies and include categorical and continuous 
ratings  (Table 42–1). These ratings can range along emo-
tion dimensions, such as valence (pleasantness/unpleas-
antness), or the intensity of specific emotions. Subjective 
ratings necessarily depend on culture-specific words and 
concepts for emotions.
Experience sampling. Psychologists use experience sam-
pling to quantify the emotions that people actually expe-
rience in everyday life. Participants might have their cell 
phone sound an alarm every few hours, and they then 
have to stop whatever activity they are doing and fill 
out a brief questionnaire about what they are feeling at 
the moment. In this way, a plot of the data can character-
ize how people’s emotions change throughout the day 
or over longer periods. It turns out that we are actually 
fairly good at predicting what emotion people will feel 
next, from knowing how they currently feel.
Hormonal measures. Hormonal responses to emotional 
states are typically slower than psychophysiological 
measures. Emotion researchers measure a variety of 
hormones to assay emotional states over these lengthy 
periods. Relatively undifferentiated arousal responses 
are used to evaluate stress. The stress hormone cortisol 
(Chapter 61) is easily measured from people’s saliva.
Specific experimental probes. Several specific behavioral 
and physiological assays are used to probe emotions 
with specific stimuli. These assays generally fall within 
the field of psychophysiology. A common measure is 
the amplitude of a subject’s eyeblink (or other startle 
reflexes) when a loud sound is presented. This is poten-
tiated when the subject is in a negatively valenced emo-
tional state. Potentiation of the startle reflex is often used 
to assay the level of anxiety in people, and the same 
measure has also been validated in animals.
Measures Commonly Used in  
Nonhuman Animals
Innate behavioral responses. Animals often exhibit ste-
reotyped behaviors as a consequence of certain emo-
tional states. Observing and scoring the behavior is 
one method of measuring emotional behaviors. Such 
behaviors can include approaching a stimulus that is 
rewarding or that promises reward in the future (a 
positively valenced emotional state), as well as avoid-
ing or defending against threatening stimuli (a nega-
tively valenced emotional state). In addition, analysis 
of facial expressions can be utilized in many animal 
model systems, and has even been used for mice.
Psychophysiology and specific experimental probes. As in 
the case of humans, animal studies can use several 
psychophysiological measures (eg, heart rate, respira-
tory rate, galvanic skin response, pupil diameter, star-
tle). In addition, specific behavioral assays have been 
developed in animals, often derived from initial obser-
vations of their innate behavioral responses. Behaviors 
such as freezing, attacking, exploring, approaching, 
and hiding can be measured in response to well-
controlled experimental stimuli that are designed to 
induce certain emotional states. The correspondence 
between human and animal behaviors, which Charles 
Darwin originally noted in his 1872 book The Expres-
sion of the Emotions in Man and Animals, provides pow-
erful animal models for investigating human emotions 
and their pathology.
overt behaviors such as freezing, fight-or-flight, and 
particular facial expressions. Together, these three sys-
tems control the physiological expression of emotion 
states in the body.
We begin this chapter with a discussion of the 
historical antecedents of modern research on the neu-
roscience of emotion. We then describe the neural cir-
cuits and cellular mechanisms that underlie the most 
thoroughly studied emotion, fear, and in so doing, we 
will focus on the amygdala. However, it is important 
to note that there does not appear to be any single 
brain structure that participates in only one emotion. 
For instance, the amygdala, which has been known to 
participate in negatively valenced emotions, also plays 
a central role in positively valenced emotions: Distinct 
populations of neurons within the amygdala process 
positively valenced versus negatively valenced stimuli. 
We briefly review how emotion states can be changed 
through extinction and regulation and how emotion 
interacts with other cognitive processes. We conclude 
with a survey on the relevance of emotion research to 
understanding psychiatric disorders.
The Modern Search for the Neural Circuitry of 
Emotion Began in the Late 19th Century
The modern attempt to understand emotions began in 
1890 when William James, the founder of American psy-
chology, asked: What is the nature of fear? Do we run 
from the bear because we are afraid, or are we afraid 
because we run? James proposed that the conscious 


===== Page 5 =====
1048    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
feeling of fear is a consequence of the bodily changes 
that occur during the act of running away—we feel 
afraid because we run. James’s peripheral feedback 
theory drew on the knowledge of the brain at the time, 
namely, that the cortex had areas devoted to movement 
and sensation (Figure 42–2). Little was known at that 
time about specific areas of the brain responsible for 
emotion and feeling, but James’s view is still debated 
to this day.
At the turn of the 20th century, researchers found 
that animals were still capable of emotional responses 
after the complete removal of the cerebral hemi-
spheres, demonstrating that some aspects of emotion 
are mediated by subcortical regions. The fact that 
electrical stimulation of the hypothalamus could elicit 
autonomic responses similar to those that occur dur-
ing emotional responses in an intact animal suggested 
to Walter B. Cannon that the hypothalamus might be 
a key region in the control of fight-or-flight responses 
and other emotions.
In the 1920s, Cannon showed that transection of 
the brain above the level of the hypothalamus (by 
means of a cut that separates the cortex, thalamus, and 
anterior hypothalamus from the posterior hypothala-
mus and lower brain areas) left an animal still capa-
ble of showing rage. By contrast, a transection below 
the hypothalamus, which left only the brain stem and 
the spinal cord, eliminated the coordinated reactions 
of natural rage. This clearly implicated the hypothala-
mus in organizing emotional reactions. Cannon called 
the hypothalamically mediated reactions “sham rage” 
because these animals lacked input from cortical areas, 
which he assumed were critical for the emotional expe-
rience of “real” rage (Figure 42–3).
Cannon and his student Phillip Bard proposed an 
influential theory of emotion centered on the hypo-
thalamus and thalamus. According to their theory, 
sensory information processed in the thalamus is sent 
both to the hypothalamus and to the cerebral cortex. 
The projections to the hypothalamus were thought to 
produce emotional responses (through connections to 
the brain stem and spinal cord), while the projections 
to the cerebral cortex were thought to produce con-
scious feelings (Figure 42–2). This theory implied that 
the hypothalamus is responsible for the brain’s evalu-
ation of the emotional significance of external stimuli 
and that emotional reactions depend on this appraisal.
In 1937, James Papez extended the Cannon-Bard 
theory. Like Cannon and Bard, Papez proposed that sen-
sory information from the thalamus is sent to both the 
hypothalamus and the cerebral cortex. The descending 
connections to the brain stem and spinal cord give rise 
to emotional responses, and the ascending connections 
to the cerebral cortex give rise to feelings. But Papez 
Figure 42–1  Neural control of emotional responses to 
external stimuli. External stimuli processed by sensory sys-
tems converge on “emotion systems” (eg, the amygdala). If 
the stimuli are emotionally salient, the emotion systems are 
activated, and their outputs are relayed to hypothalamic and 
brain stem regions that control physiological responses, includ-
ing skeletomuscular action, autonomic nervous system activity, 
and hormonal release. The figure shows some responses asso-
ciated with fear. It omits many of the complexities of emotion 
(eg, the effects of emotion states on cognition).
Emotional
responses
Emotion
systems
Emotional 
stimuli
Hypothalamus
and brain stem
Sensory 
systems
Spinal cord and
autonomic ganglia
Blood
vessel
Somatic
motor nerve 
Autonomic
nerve
Autonomic 
activity
(rise in blood
pressure)
Skeletal
muscle
Behavior
(freezing)
Effector cells
Endocrine gland
Hormone
Pituitary
Hormonal 
release
(stress
hormones)
Smooth or cardiac
muscle


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1049
Figure 42–2  Early theories of the emotional brain.  (Adapted, 
with permission, from LeDoux 1996.)
   William James’s peripheral feedback theory. James proposed 
that information about emotionally competent stimuli is pro-
cessed in sensory systems and transmitted to the motor cortex 
to produce responses in the body. Feedback signals to the cor-
tex convey sensory information about the body responses. The 
cortical processing of this sensory feedback is the “feeling,” 
according to James.
  The Cannon-Bard central theory. Walter Cannon and Philip 
Bard proposed that emotions are explained by processes within 
the central nervous system. In their model, sensory information 
is transmitted to the thalamus where it is then relayed to both 
the hypothalamus and the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus 
evaluates the emotional qualities of the stimulus, and its 
descending connections to the brain stem and spinal cord give 
rise to somatic responses, while the thalamocortical pathways 
give rise to conscious feelings.
   The Papez circuit. James Papez refined the Cannon-Bard theory 
by adding additional anatomical specificity. He proposed that the 
cingulate cortex is the cortical region that receives hypothalamic 
output in the creation of feelings. The outputs of the hypothalamus 
reach the cingulate via the anterior thalamus, and the outputs of 
the cingulate reach the hypothalamus via the hippocampus.
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Anterior
thalamus
Feeling
Feeling
Feeling
Emotional
stimulus
Emotional
stimulus
Emotional
stimulus
Bodily
response
Peripheral feedback theory
Central theory
Papez circuit
Bodily
response
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Thalamus
Bodily
response
Cerebral cortex
Sensory
cortex
Motor
cortex
Sensory
cortex
Cingulate
cortex
went on to expand the neural circuitry of feelings con-
siderably beyond the Cannon-Bard theory by interpos-
ing a new set of structures between the hypothalamus 
and the cerebral cortex. He argued that signals from 
the hypothalamus go first to the anterior thalamus 
and then to the cingulate cortex, where signals from 
the hypothalamus and sensory cortex converge. This 
convergence accounts for the conscious experience of 
feeling in Papez’s theory. The sensory cortex then pro-
jects to both the cingulate cortex and the hippocampus, 
which in turn makes connections with the mammillary 
bodies of the hypothalamus, thus completing the loop 
(Figure 42–2).
The hypothalamus is currently receiving intense 
interest in studies of emotion in animals, particularly 
in experiments using optogenetics to manipulate the 
activity of precise cell populations. These studies have 
shown that specific populations in the mouse ventro-
medial hypothalamus are necessary and sufficient for 
defensive emotion states. Thus the hypothalamus does 
not merely orchestrate emotional behaviors, but is part 
of the neural circuitry that constitutes the emotion state 
itself. The role of the hypothalamus in emotion is much 
less studied in humans, in part because functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) does not have the 
spatial resolution to investigate specific hypothalamic 
nuclei, let alone neuronal subpopulations within them.
In the late 1930s, Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy 
removed the temporal lobes of monkeys bilaterally, 
thus lesioning all temporal cortex as well as subcortical 
structures like the amygdala and hippocampus, and 
found a variety of psychological disturbances, includ-
ing alterations in feeding habits (the monkeys put ined-
ible objects in their mouth) and sexual behavior (they 
attempted to have sex with inappropriate partners, like 
members of other species). In addition, the monkeys 
had a striking lack of concern for previously feared 
objects (eg, humans and snakes). This remarkable set 
of findings came to be known as the Klüver-Bucy syn-
drome and already suggested that the amygdala might 
be important for emotion (although it was not the only 
structure lesioned in these experiments).
Building on the Cannon-Bard and Papez models 
and the findings of Klüver and Bucy, Paul MacLean 
suggested in 1950 that emotion is the product of the 
“visceral brain.” According to MacLean, the visceral 
brain includes the various cortical areas that had long 
been referred to as the limbic lobe, so named by Paul 


===== Page 7 =====
1050    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Broca because these areas form a rim (Latin limbus) 
in the medial wall of the hemispheres. The visceral 
brain was later renamed the limbic system. The limbic 
system includes the various cortical areas that make 
up Broca’s limbic lobe (especially medial areas of the 
temporal and frontal lobes) and the subcortical regions 
connected with these cortical areas, such as the amyg-
dala and hypothalamus (Figure 42–4).
MacLean intended his theory to be an elaboration 
of Papez’s ideas. Indeed, many areas of MacLean’s 
limbic system are parts of the Papez circuit. However, 
MacLean did not share Papez’s view that the cingu-
late cortex was the seat of feelings. Instead, he thought 
of the hippocampus as the part of the brain where 
the external world (represented in sensory regions of 
the lateral cortex) converged with the internal world 
(represented in the medial cortex and hypothalamus), 
allowing internal signals to give emotional weight to 
external stimuli and thereby to conscious feelings. For 
MacLean, the hippocampus was involved both in the 
expression of emotional responses in the body and in 
the conscious experience of feelings.
Subsequent 
findings 
raised 
problems 
for 
MacLean’s limbic system theory. In 1957, it was found 
that damage to the hippocampus, the keystone of the 
limbic system, produced deficits in converting short- 
to long-term memory, a function that is distinct from 
emotions. In addition, animals with damage to the hip-
pocampus are able to express emotions, and humans 
with hippocampal lesions appear to express and feel 
emotions normally. In general, damage to areas of the 
limbic system did not have the expected effects on 
emotional behavior.
Several of MacLean’s other ideas on emotion are 
nevertheless still relevant. MacLean thought that emo-
tional responses are essential for survival and there-
fore involve relatively primitive circuits that have been 
conserved in evolution, an idea already proposed by 
Charles Darwin almost a century earlier. This notion 
is key to an evolutionary perspective of emotion. It is 
now clear that emotions are processed by many sub-
cortical and cortical regions and that the limbic system 
is by no means the primary system for emotion. None-
theless, one component of the original limbic system, 
the amygdala, has received the most attention in stud-
ies of both humans and animals. Today, the role of the 
amygdala in learned fear is probably the best worked-
out example of emotion processing in a specific brain 
structure, and therefore, we consider it next.
The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Both 
Learned and Innate Fear
In Pavlovian fear conditioning, an association is 
learned between an unconditioned stimulus (US) (eg, 
electric shock) and a conditioned stimulus (CS) (eg, a 
tone) that predicts the US. For example, if an animal 
is presented with an emotionally neutral CS (a tone) 
for several seconds and then shocked during the final 
second of the CS, especially if this pairing of tone and 
shock is repeated several times, presentation of the 
tone alone will elicit defensive freezing and associated 
changes in autonomic and endocrine activity. In addi-
tion, many defensive reflexes, such as eyeblink and 
startle, will be facilitated by the tone alone.
Figure 42–3  Sham rage. An animal exhibits sham rage follow-
ing transection of the forebrain and the disconnection of eve-
rything above the transection (top) or transection at the level 
of the anterior hypothalamus and the disconnection of eve-
rything above it (middle). Only isolated elements of rage can 
be elicited if the posterior hypothalamus also is disconnected 
(bottom). This work derives from historical lesion studies in 
animals. More recent work suggests a more complex picture, 
in which the hypothalamus is intimately involved in creating the 
emotion state itself, not merely its behavioral expression.
Mammillary body
Coordinated
rage response
Coordinated
rage response
No coordinated
rage response
Posterior hypothalamus
Posterior hypothalamus
Anterior hypothalamus
Anterior hypothalamus


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1051
Figure 42–4  The limbic system consists 
of the limbic lobe and deep-lying struc-
tures.  (Adapted, with permission, from 
Nieuwenhuys et al. 1988.)
A. This medial view of the brain shows the 
prefrontal limbic cortex and the limbic lobe. 
The limbic lobe consists of primitive cortical 
tissue (blue) that encircles the upper brain 
stem as well as underlying cortical struc-
tures (hippocampus and amygdala).
B. Interconnections of the deep-lying struc-
tures included in the limbic system. The 
arrows indicate the predominant direction 
of neural activity in each tract, although 
these tracts are typically bidirectional.
Fornix
A
B
Fornix
Stria terminalis
Cingulum
Anterior thalamic nuclei
Medial dorsal
nucleus of thalamus
Dorsal
longitudinal
fasciculus
Medial
forebrain
bundle
Mammillary
body
Mammillothalamic
tract
Anterior
commissure
Olfactory bulb
Cingulate gyrus
Frontal lobe
Amygdala
Temporal lobe
Occipital lobe
Hippocampus
Hippocampus
Parahippocampal gyrus
Amygdala
Ventral
amygdalofugal
pathway
Research in many laboratories has established that 
the amygdala is necessary for Pavlovian fear condi-
tioning: Animals with amygdala damage fail to learn 
the association between the CS and the US and thus do 
not express fear when the CS is later presented alone.
The amygdala consists of approximately 12 nuclei, 
but the lateral and central nuclei are especially impor-
tant in fear conditioning (Figure 42–5). Damage to either 
nucleus, but not to other regions, prevents fear condi-
tioning. The lateral nucleus of the amygdala receives 
most sensory input (but the medial nucleus receives 
olfactory input), including sensory information about 
the CS (eg, a tone) from both the thalamus and the cor-
tex. The cellular and molecular mechanisms within 
the amygdala that underlie learned fear, especially 
in the lateral nucleus, have been elucidated in great 
detail. The findings support the view that the lateral 
nucleus is a site of memory storage in fear condition-
ing. Neurons in the central nucleus, by contrast, medi-
ate outputs to brain stem areas involved in the control 
of defensive behaviors and associated autonomic and 
humoral responses (Chapter 41). The lateral and cen-
tral nuclei are connected by way of several local cir-
cuits within the amygdala, including connections with 
the basal and intercalated masses. The actual circuitry 
for Pavlovian learning is thus considerably more com-
plex than what is indicated by Figure 42–5, involving 
multiple relays among amygdala regions.
Sensory inputs reach the lateral nucleus from 
the thalamus both directly and indirectly. Much as 


===== Page 9 =====
1052    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 42–5  Neural circuits engaged during fear condition-
ing.  The conditioned stimulus (CS) and unconditioned stimulus 
(US) are relayed to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala from 
the auditory and somatosensory regions of the thalamus and 
cerebral cortex. Convergence of the CS and US pathways in 
the lateral nucleus is believed to underlie the synaptic changes 
that mediate learning. The lateral nucleus communicates with 
the central nucleus both directly and through intra-amygdala 
pathways (not shown) involving the basal and intercalated 
nuclei. The central nucleus relays these signals to regions 
that control various motor responses, including the central 
gray region (CG), which controls freezing behavior; the lateral 
hypothalamus (LH), which controls autonomic responses; and 
the paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH), which controls stress 
hormone secretion by the pituitary–adrenal axis. (Adapted from 
Medina et al. 2002.)
Amygdala
Lateral 
nucleus
Central 
nucleus
Auditory
thalamus
Somatosensory
thalamus
Auditory  
cortex
Somatosensory  
cortex
CS (sound)
US (shock)
Freezing
Autonomic 
nervous
system
Hormones
LH
CG
PVH
predicted by the Cannon-Bard hypothesis, sensory sig-
nals from thalamic relay nuclei are conveyed to sen-
sory areas of cerebral cortex. As a result, the amygdala 
and cortex are activated simultaneously. However, 
the amygdala is able to respond to an auditory dan-
ger cue before the cortex can fully process the stimulus 
information. This scheme is well worked out only for 
auditory fear conditioning in rodents, and it remains 
unclear how it applies to other cases, such as visually 
evoked fear in humans.
The lateral nucleus is thought to be a site of syn-
aptic change during fear conditioning. The CS and 
US signals converge on neurons in the lateral nucleus; 
when the CS and US are paired, the effectiveness of 
the CS in eliciting action potentials is enhanced. This 
basic mechanism for a form of associative learning is 
similar to cellular mechanisms that underlie declara-
tive memory in the hippocampus as well (Chapter 54). 
In particular, the synaptic plasticity found in the hip-
pocampus has also been demonstrated in specific cen-
tral amygdala circuits. The central amygdala thus does 
not simply drive motor outputs but is also part of the 
circuitry through which fear associations are formed 
and stored, very likely by transmitting information 
about the CS and US from the lateral nucleus. Neural 
plasticity likely also occurs in the basal and accessory 
basal nuclei during fear learning. As with the hypo-
thalamus, recent work in rodents using tools such as 
optogenetics to manipulate specific subpopulations of 
amygdala neurons has begun to dissect this circuitry 
in further detail.
The emotional charge of a stimulus is evaluated 
by the amygdala together with other brain structures, 
such as the prefrontal cortex. If this system detects 
danger, it orchestrates the expression of behavioral and 
physiological responses by way of connections from 
the central amygdala and parts of prefrontal cortex to 
the hypothalamus and brain stem. For example, freez-
ing behavior is mediated by connections from the cen-
tral nucleus to the ventral periaqueductal gray region. 
In addition, the basal and accessory basal nuclei of 
the amygdala send projections to many parts of the 
cerebral cortex, including the prefrontal, rhinal, and 
sensory cortices; these pathways provide a means for 
neural representations in the amygdala to influence 
cognitive functions. For example, through its wide-
spread projections to cortical areas, the amygdala can 
modulate attention, perception, memory, and decision 
making. Its connections with the modulatory dopa-
minergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, and choliner-
gic nuclei that project to cortical areas also influence 
cognitive processing (Chapter 40). Given these very 
widespread connections and functional effects, the 
amygdala is well situated to implement one of the key 
features of an emotion: its coordinated and multicom-
ponent responses.
The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Innate Fear 
in Animals
Although the majority of stimuli acquire their emo-
tional significance through learning, especially in 


