===== Page 1 =====
396    Part IV / Perception
sensory system differ in their sensory thresholds or in 
their affinity for particular molecules.
Most sensory systems have low- and high-threshold 
receptors. When stimulus intensity changes from weak 
to strong, low-threshold receptors are first recruited, 
followed by high-threshold receptors. For example, 
rod cells in the retina are activated by very low light 
levels and reach their maximal receptor potentials and 
firing rates in dim daylight. Cone cells do not respond 
in very dim light but do report differences in daylight 
brightness. The combination of the two types of pho-
toreceptors allows us to perceive light intensity over 
several orders of magnitude. Parallel processing by 
low- and high-threshold receptors thus extends the 
dynamic range of a sensory system.
Distributed patterning of firing in neural ensem-
bles allows the use of vector algebra to quantify how 
stimulus properties are distributed across populations 
of active neurons. For example, although humans pos-
sess only three types of cone cells in the retina, we 
can clearly identify colors across the entire spectrum 
of visible light. In Figure 17–5B, we see that the color 
yellow can be synthesized in the mind by specific com-
binations of activity in red, green, and blue cone cells 
(Figure 17–5B). Likewise, the color magenta results 
from other combinations of the same photoreceptor 
classes. Mathematically, the perceived hue can be rep-
resented in a three-dimensional vector space in which 
the strengths of activation of each receptor class are 
combined to yield a unique sensation.
High-dimensional multineuronal representation of 
stimuli across large populations of neurons is beginning 
to be analyzed as new techniques are developed for 
simultaneous recording and imaging of activity in neu-
ral ensembles. Ideally, the firing rates of each neuron in 
a population can be plotted in a coordinate system with 
multiple axes such as modality, location, intensity, and 
time. The neural components along these axes combine 
to form a vector that represents the population’s activ-
ity. The vector interpretation is useful because it makes 
available powerful analytic techniques.
The possibilities for information coding through 
temporal patterning within and between neurons in a 
population are enormous. For example, the timing of 
action potentials in a presynaptic neuron can deter-
mine whether the postsynaptic cell fires. Two action 
potentials that arrive near synchronously will alter the 
postsynaptic neuron’s probability of firing more than 
would action potentials arriving at different times. The 
relative timing of action potentials between neurons 
also has a profound effect on mechanisms of learning 
and synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentia-
tion and depression at synapses (Chapter 54).
Sequences of Action Potentials Signal the Temporal 
Dynamics of Stimuli
The instantaneous firing patterns of sensory neurons 
are as important to sensory perception as the total num-
ber of spikes fired over long periods. Steady rhythmic 
firing in nerves innervating the hand is perceived as 
steady pressure or vibration depending upon which 
touch receptors are activated (Chapter 19). Bursting 
patterns may be perceived as motion. The patterning 
of spike trains plays an important role in encoding 
temporal fluctuations of the stimulus, such as the fre-
quency of vibration or auditory tones, or changes in 
rate of movement. Humans can report changes in sen-
sory experience that correspond to alterations within 
a few milliseconds in the firing patterns of sensory 
neurons.
Sensory systems detect contrasts, changes in the 
temporal and spatial patterns of stimulation. If a stim-
ulus persists unchanged for several minutes without a 
change in position or amplitude, the neural response 
and corresponding sensation diminishes, a condi-
tion called receptor adaptation. Receptor adaptation is 
thought to be an important neural basis of perceptual 
adaptation, whereby a constant stimulus fades from 
consciousness. Receptors that respond to prolonged 
and constant stimulation—known as slowly adapting 
receptors—encode stimulus duration by generating 
action potentials throughout the period of stimulation 
(Figure 17–7A). In contrast, rapidly adapting receptors 
respond only at the beginning and end of a stimulus; 
they cease firing in response to constant amplitude stim-
ulation and are active only when the stimulus intensity 
increases or decreases (Figure 17–7B). Rapidly and slowly 
adapting sensors illustrate another important princi-
ple of sensory coding: Neurons signal important prop-
erties of stimuli not only when they fire but also when 
they slow or stop firing.
The temporal properties of a changing stimulus 
are encoded as changes in the firing pattern, including 
the interspike intervals, of sensory neurons. For exam-
ple, the touch receptors illustrated in Figure 17–7 fire 
at higher rates when a probe initially contacts the skin 
than when the pressure is maintained. The time inter-
val between spikes is shorter when the skin is indented 
rapidly than when pressure is applied gradually. The 
firing rate of these neurons is proportional to both 
the speed at which the skin is indented and the total 
amount of pressure applied. During steady pressure, 
the firing rate slows to a level proportional to skin 
indentation (Figure 17–7A) or ceases entirely (Figure 
17–7B). Firing of both neurons stops after the probe is 
retracted.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    397
Figure 17–7  Firing patterns of sensory neurons  
convey information about the stimulus intensity and time 
course. These records illustrate responses of two different 
classes of touch receptors to a probe pressed into the skin. The 
stimulus amplitude and time course are shown in the lower 
trace of each pair; the upper trace shows the action potentials 
recorded from the sensory nerve fiber in response to the 
stimulus.
A. A slowly adapting mechanoreceptor responds as long as 
pressure is applied to the skin. The total number of action 
potentials discharged during the stimulus is proportional to the 
amount of pressure applied to the skin. The firing rate is higher 
at the beginning of skin contact than during steady pressure, 
as this receptor also detects how rapidly pressure is applied to 
the skin. When the probe is removed from the skin, the spike 
activity ceases. (Adapted, with permission, from Mountcastle, 
Talbot, and Kornhuber 1966.)
B. A rapidly adapting mechanoreceptor responds at the begin-
ning and end of the stimulus, signaling the rate at which the 
probe is applied and removed; it is silent when pressure is 
maintained at a fixed amplitude. Rapid motion evokes a brief 
burst of high-frequency spikes, whereas slow motion evokes a 
longer-lasting, low-frequency spike train. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Talbot et al. 1968.)
26
mm/s
µm
5
0.97
0.36
270
570
690
1290
990
A  Slowly adapting receptor
B  Rapidly adapting receptor
The Receptive Fields of Sensory Neurons Provide 
Spatial Information About Stimulus Location
The position of a sensory neuron’s input terminals in 
the sense organ is a major component of the specific 
information conveyed by that neuron. The skin area, 
location in the body, retinal area, or tonal domain in 
which stimuli can activate a sensory neuron is called 
its receptive field (Figure 17–8). The region from which 
a sensation is perceived to arise is called the neuron’s 
perceptive field. The two usually coincide.
The dimensions of receptive fields play an impor-
tant role in the ability of a sensory system to encode 
detailed spatial information. The objects that we see 
with our eyes or hold in our hands are much larger than 
the receptive field of an individual sensory neuron, 
and therefore stimulate groups of adjacent receptors. 
The size of the stimulus therefore determines the total 
number of receptors that are activated. In this manner, 
the spatial distribution of active and silent receptors 
provides a neural image of the size and contours of the 
stimulus.
The spatial resolution of a sensory system depends 
on the total number of receptor neurons and the dis-
tribution of receptive fields across the area covered. 
The projection neurons for regions of the body with 
a high density of receptors, such as the retinal gan-
glion cells representing the central retina (the fovea), 
have small receptive fields because they receive inputs 
from a small number of bipolar cells, each of which 
receives input from a few closely packed photorecep-
tors. Because of the high density of receptors in the 


===== Page 3 =====
398    Part IV / Perception
Receptive 
ﬁeld
Figure 17–8  The receptive field of a 
sensory neuron. The receptive field of 
a touch-sensitive neuron denotes the 
region of skin where gentle tactile stimuli 
evoke action potentials in that neuron. It 
encompasses all of the receptive endings 
and terminal branches of the sensory 
nerve fiber. If the fiber is stimulated elec-
trically with a microelectrode, the subject 
experiences touch localized on the skin. 
The area from which the sensation is 
perceived to arise is called the percep-
tive field. A patch of skin contains many 
overlapping receptive fields, allowing sen-
sations to shift smoothly from one sen-
sory neuron to the next in a continuous 
sweep. The axon terminals of sensory 
neurons in the central nervous system 
are arranged somatotopically, providing 
an orderly map of the innervated region 
of the body.
fovea, the population of neurons transmits a very 
detailed representation of the visual scene. Ganglion 
cells in the periphery of the retina have larger recep-
tive fields because the receptor density is much lower. 
The dendrites of these ganglion cells receive informa-
tion from a wider area of the retina, and thus integrate 
light intensity over a greater portion of the visual field. 
This arrangement yields a less detailed image of the 
visual scene (Figure 17–9). Similarly, the region of the 
body most often used to touch objects is the hand. Not 
surprisingly, mechanoreceptors for touch are concen-
trated in the fingertips, and the receptive fields on the 
hand are smaller than those on the arm or trunk.
Central Nervous System Circuits Refine 
Sensory Information
The central connections of a sensory neuron deter-
mine how that neuron’s signals influence our sensory 
experience. Action potentials in nerve fibers of the 
cochlea, for example, evoke the sensation of a tone 
whether they are initiated by sound waves acting on 
hair cells or by electrical stimulation with a neural 
prosthesis.
The parcellation of a stimulus into its components, 
each encoded by an individual type of sensory recep-
tor or projection neuron, is an initial step in sensory 
processing. These components are integrated into a 
representation of an object or scene by neural networks 
in the brain. This process allows the brain to select cer-
tain abstract features of an object, person, scene, or 
external event from the detailed input of many recep-
tors. As a result, the representation formed in the brain 
may enhance the saliency of features that are impor-
tant at the moment while ignoring others. In this sense, 
our percepts are not merely reflections of environmen-
tal events, but also constructs of the mind.
How we experience the sensations reported by pri-
mary receptors is also subject to modification or learn-
ing. Initially aversive odors and tastes, for example, 
can become attractive over time because of familiar-
ity or changes in context or association. The pleasure 
elicited by photos of a respected baseball player can be 
converted to disdain should he subsequently appear in 
the uniform of a rival team.
In the early stages of sensory information process-
ing in the central nervous system, each class of periph-
eral receptors provides input to clusters of neurons in 
relay nuclei that are dedicated to one sensory modal-
ity. That is, each sensory modality is represented by 
an ensemble of central neurons connected to a specific 
class of receptors. Such ensembles are referred to as 
sensory systems, and include the somatosensory, visual, 
auditory, vestibular, olfactory, and gustatory systems 
(see Table 17–1).


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    399
Figure 17–9  The visual resolution of scenes and objects 
depends on the density of photoreceptors that mediate the 
image. The resolution of detail is inversely correlated with the 
area of the receptive field of individual neurons. Each square 
or pixel in these images represents a receptive field. The gray 
scale in each pixel is proportional to the average light intensity 
in the corresponding receptive field. If there are a small number 
of neurons, and each spans a large area of the image, the 
result is a very schematic representation of the scene (A). As 
the density of neurons increases, and the size of each recep-
tive field decreases, the spatial detail becomes clearer (B, C). 
The increased spatial resolution comes at the cost of the larger 
number of neurons required to transmit the information. (Photo-
graphs reproduced, with permission, from Daniel Gardner.)
A  20 × 20  pixels
B  60 × 60 pixels
C  400 × 400 pixels
The brain has evolved to process and respond to 
this rich ensemble of sensory information. The acti-
vation of sensory, cognitive, and motor systems in 
the human brain can be visualized in real time with 
fMRI techniques. Maurizio Corbetta, Marcus Raichle, 
and colleagues discovered coherent fluctuations 
in low-frequency (0.01–0.1 Hz) components of the 
blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) signal dur-
ing the “resting” state in brain areas that are anatomi-
cally connected and activated together during specific 
behaviors. Figure 17–10 highlights three functionally 
specialized networks of brain areas that respond to 
auditory (in red), somatomotor (in green), and visual 
(in blue) inputs. Other areas are multisensory, inte-
grating information from several different modalities. 
Spontaneous correlation of firing of these networks in 
the absence of direct sensory stimuli or performance 
of motor tasks suggests that excitability within resting 
state sensory or motor networks may signal readiness 
to process information for future sensation or action. 
Deficits in sensory, cognitive, or motor function following 
local brain injury may result not just from impairment of 
one specific area, or node, but rather disruption of the cir-
cuit or circuits that include that node.
Synapses in sensory pathways provide an opportu-
nity to modify the signals from receptors. Most neurons 
in relay nuclei receive convergent excitatory inputs from 
many presynaptic neurons (Figure 17–11A), integrate 
those inputs, combine them with inhibitory and top-
down signals, and transmit the processed information 
to higher brain areas. Horace Barlow proposed that 
sensory systems demonstrate efficient coding, which 
includes sensory relays recoding sensory messages so 
that their redundancy is reduced, but comparatively 
little information is lost. Likewise, each receptor neu-
ron excites multiple postsynaptic relay neurons.
Convergent excitatory networks provide a mech-
anism for spatial summation of inputs, strengthen-
ing signals of functional importance. One example of 
how such circuits are used is detection of synchronous 
inputs from multiple nearby locations but not others, 
thereby providing the first step toward orientation tuning of 
central neurons. Relay neurons are also interconnected 
with their neighbors, forming recurrent excitatory con-
nections that amplify sensory signals. Such recurrent 
networks are also a feature of some deep learning algo-
rithms used by artificial neural networks to classify 
sensory patterns.
A relay neuron’s receptive field is also shaped by 
inhibitory input. The inhibitory region of a receptive 
field provides an important mechanism for enhanc-
ing the contrast between stimuli, giving the sensory 
system additional power to resolve spatial detail. 
Inhibitory interneurons modulate the excitability of 
neurons in relay nuclei, thereby regulating the amount 
of sensory information transmitted to higher levels of 


===== Page 5 =====
400    Part IV / Perception
A  Inﬂated maps, left hemisphere
B  Inﬂated maps, right hemisphere
C  Flattened maps, both hemispheres
RSC
44
V1
V1
POS2
POS2
SFL
SFL
55b
55b
44
LIPv
LIPv
PSL
PSL
MT
MT
RSC
A1
A1
Auditory
Somatomotor
Visual
Figure 17–10  Distinct regions of the human brain process 
information for individual sensory modalities, multisensory 
systems, motor activity, or cognitive function. The human 
cerebral cortex has been divided into 180 functional areas by 
the Human Connectome Project based largely on a variety of 
fMRI techniques and neuroanatomy. Early auditory areas (red), 
somatosensory and motor areas (green), and visual areas 
(blue) are shaded in primary colors. Mixed colors indicate mul-
tisensory areas: visual and somatosensory/motor (blue-green, 
LIPv, MT); or visual and auditory (pink to purple, POS2, RSC). 
Language networks include areas 55b, 44, SFL, and PSL in 
both hemispheres. Gray-scaled regions serve cognitive func-
tions; they comprise the anticorrelated “task-positive” (light 
shading) and “default mode” (dark shading) networks. The 
maps show brain regions located on the surface gyri and within 
adjacent cortical sulci. Note the similarity of brain organization 
between the two hemispheres. Data available at https://balsa.
wustl.edu/study/RVVG. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Glasser et al. 2016. Copyright © 2016 Springer Nature.)
A. Inflated maps of the left hemisphere. The top map is a lateral 
view and the bottom map is a medial view.
B. Similar maps of the right hemisphere.
C. Flattened maps show the functional organization of both 
hemispheres (left at top, right at bottom).
(Abbreviations: A1, primary auditory cortex; LIPv, lateral intra-
parietal area, ventral portion; MT, middle temporal area; POS2, 
parieto-occipital sulcus area 2; PSL, perisylvian language area; 
RSC, retrosplenial complex; SFL, superior frontal language 
area; V1, primary visual cortex; Area 55b, newly identified  
language area; Area 44, part of Broca’s area.)
a network (Figure 17–11B). Inhibitory circuits are also 
useful for suppressing irrelevant information during 
goal-directed behaviors, thereby focusing attention on 
specific task-related inputs. Additionally, inhibitory 
networks allow the context of a stimulus to modify 
the strength of excitation evoked by that stimulus, an 
important process called normalization.
The responses of central neurons to sensory stim-
uli are more variable from trial to trial than those of 
peripheral receptors. Central sensory neurons also fire 
irregularly before and after stimulation and during 
periods when no stimuli are present. The variability of 
the evoked central responses is a result of several fac-
tors: the subject’s state of alertness, whether attention 
is engaged (Figure 17–12), previous experience of 
that stimulus, and recent activation of the pathway 
by similar stimuli. Similarly, the context of stimulus 
presentation, subjective intentions, motor plans that 
may require feedback, or intrinsic oscillations of the 
neuron’s membrane potential can all modify incoming 
sensory information.
The Receptor Surface Is Represented Topographically 
in the Early Stages of Each Sensory System
The axons of sensory projection neurons terminate in 
the brain in an orderly manner that retains their spatial 
arrangement in the receptor sheet. Sensory neurons for 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    401
Figure 17–11  Relay neurons in sensory systems integrate a 
variety of inputs that shape stimulus information.
A. Sensory information is transmitted in the central nervous 
system through hierarchical processing networks. Neural sign-
aling initiated by a stimulus to the skin reaches a large group of 
postsynaptic neurons in relay nuclei in the brain stem and thala-
mus and is most strong in neurons in the center of the array 
of postsynaptic cells (red neuron). (Adapted, with permission, 
from Dudel 1983.)
B. Inhibition (gray areas) mediated by local interneurons (gray) 
confines excitation (orange area) to the central zone in the 
array of relay neurons where stimulation is strongest. This pat-
tern of inhibition within the relay nucleus enhances the contrast 
between strongly and weakly stimulated relay neurons.
C. Inhibitory interneurons in a relay nucleus are activated by 
three distinct excitatory pathways. 1. Feed-forward inhibition 
is initiated by the afferent fibers of sensory neurons that 
terminate on the inhibitory interneurons. 2. Feedback inhibi-
tion is initiated by recurrent collateral axons of neurons in 
the output pathway from the nucleus that project back to 
interneurons in the source nucleus. The interneurons in turn 
inhibit nearby output neurons, creating sharply defined zones 
of excitatory and inhibitory activity in the relay nucleus. In this 
way, the most active relay neurons reduce the output of adja-
cent, less active neurons, thus ensuring that only one of two 
or more active neurons will send out signals. 3. Descending 
inhibition is initiated by neurons in other brain regions such as 
the cerebral cortex. The descending commands allow cortical 
neurons to control the afferent relay of sensory information, 
providing a mechanism by which attention can select sensory 
inputs.
A  Typical neural circuit for sensory processing
C  Types of inhibition in relay nuclei
B  Spatial distribution of excitation and inhibition among
 relay neurons
Stimulus
Frequency
Receptors
Relay neurons
Stimulus
To spinal cord
Sensory
neuron
Somatosensory 
cortex
Neurons
in relay 
nucleus
Skin
Sensory
neurons
Output to thalamus
3 Descending
1 Feed forward
2 Feedback
touch in adjacent regions of the skin project to neigh-
boring neurons in the central nervous system, and 
this topographic arrangement of receptive fields is 
preserved throughout the early somatosensory path-
ways. Each primary sensory area in the brain thus 
contains a topographic, spatially organized map of the 
sense organ. This topography extends to all levels of 
a sensory system. Within these maps, specificity—the 
qualities to which neurons are most narrowly tuned—
provides clues to the functional organization of that 
region of the brain.
In the first and subsequent relay nuclei of the 
somatosensory, visual, and auditory systems, adja-
cent neurons represent adjacent areas of the body, 


===== Page 7 =====
402    Part IV / Perception
Figure 17–12  Attention to a visual stimulus alters responses 
of neurons in visual cortical areas. When we pay attention to 
a stimulus, we select certain sensory inputs for cognitive pro-
cessing and ignore or suppress other information. Functional 
MRI is used in this study to measure the effects of attention 
to visual stimuli on neural responses in human primary visual 
(V1) cortex (white dashed lines on the brain anatomical sec-
tion, lower panel). Moving grating stimuli (upper panel) were 
presented simultaneously to the right and left visual fields 
while subjects stared at a central fixation point (black dot). The 
subjects performed a motion discrimination task, attending 
(without moving their eyes) to one of the two oriented grat-
ings. When stimuli were attended in the right visual field, neural 
activity (red) increased significantly in the left hemisphere, but 
not in the right hemisphere, even though the stimuli were pre-
sented to both eyes. When the subject attended to the grating 
in the left visual field, a similar focus of activity occurred in the 
right V1 cortex, and activity dropped in the left hemisphere (not 
shown). (Adapted from Gandhi, Heeger, and Boynton, 1999.)
retina, and cochlea, respectively. The organization of 
these nuclei is thus said to be somatotopic, retinotopic, 
or tonotopic. Nuclei in the auditory system are tono-
topic because the cochlear hair cells of the inner ear are 
arranged to create an orderly shift in frequency sen-
sitivity from cell to cell (Figure 26–2). Neurons in the 
primary sensory areas of the cerebral cortex maintain 
these location-specific features of a stimulus, and the 
functional maps of these early cortical areas are like-
wise somatotopic, retinotopic, or tonotopic.
Sensory information flows serially through hier-
archical pathways, including multiple levels of the 
cerebral cortex, before ending in brain regions that are 
concerned with cognition and action. Forming the per-
cepts that inform these regions requires integration of 
lower-level inputs that report only information from 
small areas of the sense organ. Neurons in the cerebral 
cortex are specialized to integrate and so detect spe-
cific features of stimuli beyond merely their location 
in the sense organ. Such neurons are said to be tuned to 
combined stimulus features represented by ensembles 
of sensory receptors. These neurons respond preferen-
tially to stimulus properties such as the orientation of 
edges (eg, simultaneous activation of specific groups 
of receptors), direction of motion, or tonal sequences 
of frequencies (temporal pattern of receptor activa-
tion). Central auditory neurons are less selective for 
frequency and more selective for certain kinds of 
sound. For example, some neurons are specific for 
vocalizations by members of the same species. In each 
successive stage of cortical processing, the spatial 
organization of stimuli is progressively lost as neurons 
become less concerned with the descriptive features of 
stimuli and more concerned with properties of behav-
ioral importance. Details of these central sensory trans-
formations are presented in succeeding chapters that 
describe specific sensory systems.
Sensory Information Is Processed in Parallel 
Pathways in the Cerebral Cortex
Distributed spatial coding is ubiquitous in sensory sys-
tems for two reasons. First, it takes advantage of the 
parallel architecture of the nervous system. There are 
approximately 100 million neurons in each primary 
sensory area of the cerebral cortex, and the possible 
number of combinatorial patterns of neural activity far 
exceeds the number of atoms in the universe. Second, each 
neuron codes the intensity and timing of a stimulus as 
well as its location in the receptor sheet. It fires only 
when many of its excitatory synapses receive action 
potentials and most of the inhibitory synapses do not, 
firing in response to specific patterns of stimulation 
but not to others. Since many cortical neurons receive 
input from 1,000 to 10,000 synapses, the information 
coding potential is enormous.
One of the most important insights into feature 
detection in the cortex arose from combined physi-
ological and anatomical studies of the cortical visual 
pathways by Mortimer Mishkin and Leslie Ungerlei-
der in the early 1980s. They discovered that sensory 
information arriving in the primary visual areas is 
divided in two parallel pathways.
One pathway carries information needed for clas-
sification of images, while the other conveys informa-
tion needed for immediate action. Visual features that 
identify what an object is are transmitted in a ventral 
pathway to the temporal lobe and eventually to the hip-
pocampus and entorhinal cortex. Visual information 
Attention 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 17 / Sensory Coding    403
about where an object is located, its size and shape, and 
how it might be acquired and used is transmitted in a 
more dorsal pathway to the parietal lobe and eventually 
to the motor areas of frontal cortex (Figure 17–13).
Ventral and dorsal streams are evident in other sen-
sory systems as well. In the auditory system, acoustic 
information from speech is transmitted to Wernicke’s 
area in the temporal lobe, which has a strong role in 
language comprehension, and to Broca’s area in the 
frontal cortex, which is involved in speech production. 
In the somatosensory system, information about an 
object’s size and shape is transmitted to ventral areas 
of parietal cortex for object recognition. Tactile infor-
mation about object size, weight, and texture is also 
communicated to posterior parietal and frontal motor 
areas, where it is needed to plan the handling of the 
object.
Ventral and dorsal streams of sensory informa-
tion also contribute to two major forms of memory: 
semantic (also called explicit) memory, which we use 
to talk about objects or persons, and procedural (also 
called implicit) memory, which we use to interact with 
objects, persons, or the immediate environment.
Ventral stream information generates nouns that 
we use to identify and classify persons, places, and 
objects, such as spheres, bricks, and cars. Dorsal stream 
information motivates verbs enabling the actions per-
formed based on sensory inputs and subjective inten-
tions, such as grasping, lifting, or driving.
Feedback Pathways From the Brain Regulate 
Sensory Coding Mechanisms
Sensory systems are not simply automated assembly 
lines that reassemble fragmented neural representa-
tions of environmental events (eg, light, sound, odor) 
into more coherent percepts. We have enormous con-
trol over our own experience of sensation and percep-
tion, and even our conscious attention.
We can to some extent control which sensations reach 
our consciousness. We may, for example, watch television 
to take our minds off the pain of a sprained ankle. 
Figure 17–13  Visual stimuli are processed by serial and 
parallel networks in the cerebral cortex. When you read 
this text, the spatial pattern of the letters is sent to the cere-
bral cortex through successive synaptic links comprising pho-
toreceptors, bipolar cells of the retina, retinal ganglion cells, 
cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus, 
and neurons of the primary visual cortex (V1). Within the 
cortex, there is a gradual divergence to successive process-
ing areas called ventral and dorsal streams that are neither 
wholly serial nor parallel. The ventral stream in the temporal 
lobe (red shading) analyzes and encodes information about 
the form and structure of the visual scene and objects within 
it, delivering this information to the parahippocampal cortex 
(not shown) and prefrontal cortex (PF). The dorsal stream 
in the parietal lobe (blue shading) analyzes and represents 
information about stimulus location and motion and  
delivers this information to motor areas of the frontal  
cortex that control movements of the eyes, hand, and arm. 
The anatomical connections between these areas are  
reciprocal, involving both feedforward and feedback circuits. 
The zone of overlap (purple) shows that both pathways  
originate from the same source in V1. Connections to  
subcortical structures in the thalamus and midbrain are 
defined in Figure 21–7B. (Abbreviations: V1, V2, V3, and V4, 
occipital visual areas; MT, middle temporal; MST, medial 
superior temporal; AIP, VIP, LIP, and MIP, anterior, ventral, 
lateral, and medial intraparietal; TEO, temporal-occipital;  
IT, inferior temporal; PMd and PMv, dorsal and ventral  
premotor; FEF, frontal eye fields.) (Adapted from Albright  
and Stoner 2002.)
Feed-forward 
Feedback 
PMd
PMv
PF
FEF
AIP
MT/
MST
MD
PL
LGN
TEO
IT
SC
VIP
V1
V3
V2
V4
Dorsal
pathway
Ventral
pathway
MIP
LIP


===== Page 9 =====
404    Part IV / Perception
Direct, volitional control of the sensory information 
that reaches consciousness can be readily demon-
strated by suddenly directing your attention to a body 
part, such as the fingers of your left hand, to which you 
were initially oblivious as you were attending to this 
text. Sensations from the fingers flood consciousness 
until attention is redirected to the text. Neural record-
ings in somatosensory and visual cortex confirm that 
neurons change their sensitivity, as reflected in their 
firing rates, much more so than their selectivity for 
particular stimuli. At a more abstract level, for exam-
ple, we can switch our attention from the subject mat-
ter of a painting to the artist’s technique.
Each primary sensory area of cortex has exten-
sive projections back to its principal afferent relay 
nucleus in the thalamus. In fact, the number of feed-
back axons exceeds the number of afferent axons 
from the thalamus to the cortex. These projections 
have an important function that is not yet clear. One 
possibility is that they modulate the activity of cer-
tain neurons when attention and vigilance change or 
during motor tasks.
Centers in the brain are also able to modulate the 
responsiveness of sensory receptors. For example, 
neurons in the motor cortex can alter the sensitivity of 
sensory receptors in skeletal muscle that signal muscle 
length. Activation of gamma motor neurons by cor-
ticospinal pathways enhances the sensory responses 
of muscle spindle afferents to stretch. Neurons in the 
brain stem can directly modulate the frequency sen-
sitivity of hair cells in the cochlea. Thus, information 
about a stimulus sent from peripheral sensory neurons 
to the brain is conditioned by the entire organism.
Top-Down Learning Mechanisms Influence  
Sensory Processing
What we perceive is always some combination of the 
sensory stimulus itself and the memories it both evokes 
and builds upon. The relationship between perception 
and memory was originally developed by empiricists, 
particularly the associationist philosophers James 
and John Stuart Mill. Their idea was that sensory 
and perceptual experiences that occur together or in 
close succession, particularly those that do so repeat-
edly, become associated so that thereafter the one trig-
gers the other. Association is a powerful mechanism, 
and much of learning consists of forging associations 
through repetition.
Contemporary neuroscientists using multineu-
ronal recordings discovered that sensory events evoke 
sequences of neuronal activation. These patterns of neu-
ral activity are believed to trigger memories of previous 
experiences of such stimulation patterns. For example, 
as we hear a work of music over and over again, the 
circuits of our auditory system are modified by the 
experience, and we learn to anticipate what comes next, 
completing the phrase before it occurs. Familiarity with 
the phrasing and harmonies used by a composer allows 
us to distinguish the operas of Verdi from those of 
Mozart, and the symphonies of Bruckner from those of 
Brahms. Likewise, when we drive to an unknown des-
tination, our visual system is initially overwhelmed by 
new landmarks, as we assess which are important and 
which are not. With repeated trips, the journey becomes 
second nature and seems to take less time.
Percepts are uniquely subjective. When we look at 
a work of art, we superimpose our personal experience 
on the view; what we see is not just the image projected 
on the retina, but its contextual meaning to us as indi-
viduals. For example, when we view a historic photo-
graph of important events in our lives, or persons we 
admired or detested, we recall not only the event in the 
image but also the words spoken and our emotional 
reactions in the past. The emotional response is muted 
or absent if we did not experience a direct connection 
to the event or person illustrated.
How can a network of neurons “recognize” a spe-
cific pattern of inputs from a population of presynaptic 
neurons? One potential mechanism is called template 
matching. Each neuron in the target population has a 
pattern of excitatory and inhibitory presynaptic con-
nections. If the pattern of arriving action potentials 
fits the postsynaptic neuron’s pattern of synaptic con-
nections even approximately—activating many of its 
excitatory synapses but mostly avoiding activating 
its inhibitory synapses—the target neuron fires. The 
codes may also be combinatorial: the overall activity 
of a region remains the same with different stimuli, but 
the specific subset of neurons that are active when a 
particular input is presented constitute a “tag” specify-
ing that input.
Charles F. Stevens has identified these in very dif-
ferent sensory systems and noted that such maximum 
entropy codes are highly efficient, able to represent 
many different stimuli for a set number of neurons. 
Refining our understanding of efficient coding, the 
Carandini and Harris labs have recently shown that 
the neural code in mouse visual cortex is indeed effi-
cient and preserves fine detail, but in a manner that 
retains the ability to generalize by responding similarly 
to closely related visual stimuli. Such computational or 
algorithmic views have great promise for our under-
standing of sensory systems. Artificial neural networks, 
simulated using computers, can be trained on images 
and taught to “see.” Daniel L. Yamins and James J. 


