===== Page 1 =====
1180    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Jung H, Gkogkas CG, Sonenberg N, Holt CE. 2014. Remote 
control of gene function by local translation. Cell 
157:26–40. 
Lai Wing Sun K, Correia JP, Kennedy TE. 2011. Netrins: ver-
satile extracellular cues with diverse functions. Develop-
ment 138:2153–2169.
Lefebvre JL, Sanes JR, Kay JN. 2015. Development of dendritic 
form and function. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 31:741–777. 
Tojima T, Hines JH, Henley JR, Kamiguchi H. 2011. Second 
messengers and membrane trafficking direct and organ-
ize growth cone steering. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:191–203.
Zhang C, Kolodkin AL, Wong RO, James RE. 2017. Establish-
ing wiring specificity in visual system circuits: from the 
retina to the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci 40:395–424.
Zipursky SL, Grueber WB. 2013. The molecular basis of self-
avoidance. Annu Rev Neurosci 36:547–568.
References
Barnes AP, Lilley BN, Pan YA, et al. 2007. LKB1 and SAD 
kinases define a pathway required for the polarization of 
cortical neurons. Cell 129:549–563.
Bridgman PC, Dailey ME. 1989. The organization of myosin 
and actin in rapid frozen nerve growth cones. J Cell Biol 
108:95–109.
Campbell DS, Holt CE. 2001. Chemotropic responses of reti-
nal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthe-
sis and degradation. Neuron 32:1013–1026.
Fazeli A, Dickinson SL, Hermiston ML, et al. 1997. Pheno-
type of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal can-
cer (Dcc) gene. Nature 386:796–804.
Forscher P, Smith SJ. 1988. Actions of cytochalasins on the 
organization of actin filaments and microtubules in a neu-
ronal growth cone. J Cell Biol 107:1505–1516.
Frisen J, Yates PA, McLaughlin T, Friedman GC, O’Leary DD, 
Barbacid M. 1998. Ephrin-A5 (AL-1/RAGS) is essential for 
proper retinal axon guidance and topographic mapping 
in the mammalian visual system. Neuron 20:235–243.
Godement P, Wang LC, Mason CA. 1994. Retinal axon diver-
gence in the optic chiasm: dynamics of growth cone 
behavior at the midline. J Neurosci 14:7024–7039.
Grueber WB, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2003. Different levels of the 
homeodomain protein cut regulate distinct dendrite 
branching patterns of Drosophila multidendritic neurons. 
Cell 112:805–818.
Harrison RG. 1959. The outgrowth of the nerve fiber as a 
mode of protoplasmic movement. J Exp Zool 142:5–73.
Heidemann SR. 1996. Cytoplasmic mechanisms of axonal and 
dendritic growth in neurons. Int Rev Cytol 165:235–296.
Kaech S, Banker G. 2006. Culturing hippocampal neurons. 
Nat Protoc 1:2406–2415.
Kalil K, Dent EW. 2014. Branch management: mechanisms 
of axon branching in the developing vertebrate CNS. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 15:7–18.
Kapfhammer JP, Grunewald BE, Raper JA. 1986. The selec-
tive inhibition of growth cone extension by specific neur-
ites in culture. J Neurosci 6:2527–2534.
Keino-Masu K, Hinck L, Leonardo ED, Chan SS, Culotti 
JG, Tessier-Lavigne M. 1996. Deleted in colorectal cancer 
(DCC) encodes a netrin receptor. Cell 87:75–85.
Kidd T, Brose K, Mitchell KJ, et al. 1998. Roundabout controls 
axon crossing of the CNS midline and defines a novel sub-
family of evolutionarily conserved guidance receptors. 
Cell 92:205–215.
Kishi M, Pan YA, Crump JG, Sanes JR. 2005. Mammalian 
SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization. 
Science 307:929–932.
Lefebvre JL, Kostadinov D, Chen WV, Maniatis T, Sanes JR. 
2012. Protocadherins mediate dendritic self-avoidance in 
the mammalian nervous system. Nature 488:517–521.
Letourneau PC. 1979. Cell-substratum adhesion of neurite 
growth cones, and its role in neurite elongation. Exp Cell 
Res 124:127–138.
Leung K-M, van Horck FPG, Lin AC, Allison R, Standart N, 
Holt CE. 2006. Asymmetrical beta-actin mRNA translation 
in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin-1. 
Nat Neurosci 9:1247–1256.
Ming GL, Song HJ, Berninger B, Holt CE, Tessier-Lavigne M, 
Poo MM. 1997. cAMP-dependent growth cone guidance 
by netrin-1. Neuron 19:1225–1235.
Polleux F, Morrow T, Ghosh A. 2000. Semaphorin 3A is a 
chemoattractant for cortical apical dendrites. Nature 
404:567–573.
Serafini T, Colamarino SA, Leonardo ED, et al. 1996. Netrin-1 
is required for commissural axon guidance in the devel-
oping vertebrate nervous system. Cell 87:1001–1014.
Shigeoka T, Jung H, Jung J, et al. 2016. Dynamic axonal translation 
in developing and mature visual circuits. Cell 166:181–192.
Sperry RW. 1943. Visuomotor coordination in the newt 
(Triturus viridescens) after regeneration of the optic nerve.  
J Compar Neurol 79:33–55.
Sperry RW. 1945. Restoration of vision after crossing of optic 
nerves and after contralateral transplantation of eye.  
J Neurophysiol 8:17–28.
Thu CA, Chen WV, Rubinstein R, et al. 2014. Single-cell iden-
tity generated by combinatorial homophilic interactions 
between α, β, and γ protocadherins. Cell 158:1045–1059.
Walter J, Henke-Fahle S, Bonhoeffer F. 1987. Avoidance of 
posterior tectal membranes by temporal retinal axons. 
Development 101:909–913.
Wang L, Marquardt T. 2013. What axons tell each other: 
axon-axon signaling in nerve and circuit assembly. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol 23:974–982.
Weiss P. 1941. Nerve patterns: the mechanics of nerve growth. 
Growth 5:163–203. Suppl.
Zhang XH, Poo MM. 2002. Localized synaptic potentiation 
by BDNF requires local protein synthesis in the developing 
axon. Neuron 36:675–688.


===== Page 2 =====
48
Formation and Elimination of Synapses
the generation and differentiation of neurons and glia, 
and the growth and guidance of axons. One additional 
step must occur before the brain becomes functional: 
the formation of synapses. Only when synapses are 
formed and functional can the brain go about the busi-
ness of processing information.
Three key processes drive synapse formation. 
First, axons make choices among many potential post-
synaptic partners. By forming synaptic connections 
only on particular target cells, neurons assemble func-
tional circuits that can process information. In many 
cases, synapses are even formed at specific sites on the 
postsynaptic cell; some types of axons form synapses 
on dendrites, others on cell bodies, and yet others on 
axons or nerve terminals. Although cellular and sub-
cellular specificity are evident throughout the brain, 
the general features of synapse formation can be illus-
trated with a few well-studied examples.
Second, after cell–cell contacts have formed, the 
portion of the axon that contacts the target cell dif-
ferentiates into a presynaptic nerve terminal, and the 
domain of the target cell contacted by the axon dif-
ferentiates into a specialized postsynaptic apparatus. 
Precise coordination of pre- and postsynaptic differ-
entiation depends on interactions between the axon 
and its target cell. Much of what we know about these 
interactions comes from studies of the neuromuscu-
lar junction, the synapse between motor neurons and 
skeletal muscle fibers. The simplicity of this synapse 
made it a favorable system to probe the structural and 
electrophysiological principles of chemical synapses 
(Chapter 12), and this simplicity has also helped in 
the analysis of developing synapses. We will use the 
neuromuscular synapse to illustrate key features of 
Neurons Recognize Specific Synaptic Targets
Recognition Molecules Promote Selective Synapse 
Formation in the Visual System
Sensory Receptors Promote Targeting of Olfactory Neurons
Different Synaptic Inputs Are Directed to Discrete 
Domains of the Postsynaptic Cell
Neural Activity Sharpens Synaptic Specificity
Principles of Synaptic Differentiation Are Revealed at the 
Neuromuscular Junction
Differentiation of Motor Nerve Terminals Is Organized 
by Muscle Fibers
Differentiation of the Postsynaptic Muscle Membrane Is 
Organized by the Motor Nerve
The Nerve Regulates Transcription of Acetylcholine 
Receptor Genes
The Neuromuscular Junction Matures in a Series of Steps
Central Synapses and Neuromuscular Junctions  
Develop in Similar Ways
Neurotransmitter Receptors Become Localized  
at Central Synapses
Synaptic Organizing Molecules Pattern Central  
Nerve Terminals
Some Synapses Are Eliminated After Birth
Glial Cells Regulate Both Formation and  
Elimination of Synapses
Highlights
S
o far, we have examined three stages  in the 
development of the mammalian nervous system: 
the formation and patterning of the neural tube, 


===== Page 3 =====
1182    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
synaptic development and then apply insights from 
this peripheral synapse to examine synapses that form 
in the brain.
Finally, once formed, synapses mature, often 
undergoing major rearrangements. One striking aspect 
of the rearrangement is that as some synapses grow 
and strengthen, many others are eliminated. Like neu-
ronal cell death (Chapter 46), synapse elimination at 
first glance is a puzzling and seemingly wasteful step 
in neural development. It is increasingly clear, how-
ever, that it plays a key role in refining initial patterns 
of connectivity. We will discuss the main features of 
synaptic rearrangement at the neuromuscular junc-
tion, where it has been studied intensively, as well as at 
synapses between neurons, where it also is prominent.
Synapse formation stands at an interesting cross-
roads in the sequence of events that assemble the nerv-
ous system. The initial steps in this process appear to be 
largely “hardwired” by molecular programs. However, 
as soon as synapses form, the nervous system begins 
to function, and the activity of neural circuits plays a 
critical role in subsequent development. Indeed, the 
information-processing capacity of the nervous system 
is refined through its use, most dramatically in early 
postnatal life but also into adulthood. In this sense, the 
nervous system continues to develop throughout life. 
We will consider this interplay of molecular programs 
and neural activity as we describe synapse formation 
and rearrangement. This discussion will be a useful 
prelude to Chapter 49, in which we discuss how genes 
and the environment—nature and nurture—interact to 
customize nervous systems early in postnatal life.
Neurons Recognize Specific Synaptic Targets
Once axons reach their designated target areas, they 
must choose appropriate synaptic partners from the 
many potential targets within easy reach. Although 
synapse formation is a highly selective process at both 
cellular and subcellular levels, few of the molecules 
that confer synaptic specificity have been identified.
The specificity of synaptic connections is particu-
larly evident when intertwined axons select subsets of 
target cells. In these cases, axon guidance and selec-
tive synapse formation can be distinguished. The first 
report of such specificity came more than 100 years ago 
when J. N. Langley, studying the autonomic nervous 
system, proposed the first version of a chemospecific-
ity hypothesis (see Chapter 46). Langley observed that 
autonomic preganglionic neurons are generated at dis-
tinct rostrocaudal levels of the spinal cord. Their axons 
enter sympathetic ganglia together but form synapses 
with different postsynaptic neurons that innervate 
distinct targets. Using behavioral assays as a guide, 
Langley inferred that the axons of preganglionic neu-
rons located in the rostral spinal cord form synapses on 
ganglion neurons that project their axons to relatively 
rostral targets such as the eye, whereas neurons that 
derive from more caudal regions of the spinal cord syn-
apse on ganglion neurons that project to caudal targets 
such as the ear (Figure 48–1A). He then showed that 
similar patterns were reestablished after the pregan-
glionic axons were severed and allowed to regenerate, 
leading him to postulate that some sort of molecular 
recognition was responsible (Figure 48–1B).
Electrophysiological studies later confirmed 
Langley’s intuition about the specificity of synaptic 
connections in these ganglia. Moreover, this selectiv-
ity is apparent from early stages of innervation, even 
though specific types of postsynaptic neurons are 
interspersed within the ganglion. The reestablishment 
of selectivity in adults after nerve damage shows that 
specificity does not emerge through peculiarities of 
embryonic timing or neuronal positioning.
Recognition Molecules Promote Selective Synapse 
Formation in the Visual System
To illustrate the idea of target specificity in more detail, 
we will first consider retinal ganglion cells. These neu-
rons differ in their response properties—some gan-
glion neurons respond to increases in light level (ON 
cells), others to decreases (OFF cells), others to mov-
ing objects, and still others to light of a particular color. 
The axons of all ganglion cells run through the optic 
nerve, forming parallel axonal pathways from the ret-
ina to the brain.
The response properties of each class of ganglion 
cell depend on the synaptic inputs they receive from 
amacrine and bipolar interneurons, which in turn 
receive synapses from light-sensitive photoreceptors. 
All of the synapses from bipolar and amacrine cells 
onto ganglion cell dendrites occur in a narrow zone of 
the retina called the inner plexiform layer. Axons and 
dendrites therefore have the daunting task of recogniz-
ing their correct partners within a large crowd of inap-
propriate bystanders.
One important contributor to synaptic matchmak-
ing in the inner plexiform layer is its division into 
sublayers. The processes of each amacrine and bipolar 
cell type, as well as the dendrites of each functionally 
distinct ganglion cell type, branch and synapse in just 
one or a few of approximately 10 sublayers. For exam-
ple, the dendrites of ON and OFF cells are restricted 
to inner and outer portions of the plexiform layer, 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1183
Figure 48–1  Preganglionic motor neurons regenerate  
selective connections with their sympathetic neuronal 
targets.
A. Preganglionic motor neurons arise from different levels of the 
thoracic spinal cord. Axons that arise from rostrally located tho-
racic neurons innervate superior cervical ganglion neurons that 
project to rostral targets, including the intrinsic eye muscles. 
Axons that arise from neurons at caudal levels of the thoracic 
spinal cord innervate ganglion neurons that project to more 
caudal targets, such as the blood vessels of the ear. These two 
classes of ganglion neurons are intermingled in the ganglion, 
which suggested to J. N. Langley that preganglionic axons from 
different thoracic levels selectively form synapses with ganglion 
neurons that terminate in specific peripheral targets.
B. After nerve damage in adults, similar segment-specific pat-
terns of connectivity form during reinnervation, supporting the 
notion that synapse formation is selective. (Adapted from Njå 
and Purves 1977.)
T2
T4
Superior 
cervical 
ganglion
Rostral
Caudal
B  
C8
T1
T2
T3
T5
T6
T4
Normal
Reinnervated
Pupil
dilation
Ear
vasoconstriction
A
Pupil
dilation
Ear
vasocon-
striction
Normal
Segmental origin
Denervated
Reinnervated
respectively, and therefore receive synapses from dif-
ferent interneurons; particular types of ON and OFF 
cells have narrower restrictions within these zones 
(Figure 48–2). This layer-specific arborization of pre- 
and postsynaptic processes restricts the choice of syn-
aptic partners to which they have ready access. Similar 
lamina-specific connections are found in many other 
regions of the brain and spinal cord. For example, in 
the cerebral cortex, distinct populations of axons con-
fine their dendritic arbors and synapses to just one or 
two of the six main layers.
Laminar specificity does not, however, completely 
account for the wiring of the retina. As the number of 
retinal cell types—currently estimated at around 130 in 
mice—greatly exceeds the number of plexiform sublay-
ers, the processes of many cell types arborize within 
each sublayer. Anatomical and physiological studies 
have shown that connectivity is specific even within 
individual sublayers. Moreover, patterns of con-
nectivity appear to be largely, although not entirely, 
“hardwired,” occurring before visual experience has 
a chance to affect circuitry. Thus, there must be mol-
ecules that restrict axons and dendrites to specific sub-
layers, as well as molecules that distinguish synaptic 
partners within a sublayer.
One clue to the basis of both laminar and intrala-
minar synaptic specificity in the retina comes from 
the finding that specific types of interneurons and 
ganglion neurons express different classes of recogni-
tion molecules of the immunoglobulin and cadherin 
families (Chapter 47). Thus, the processes of cells that 
express a particular recognition molecule are confined 


===== Page 5 =====
1184    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Retina
Inner 
plexiform 
layer
DscamL
Sdk1
Sdk2
Dscam
Dscam
DscamL
Sdk1
Sdk2
Retinal ganglion cell
Optic nerve
Optic 
tectum
Spike
rate
Spike
rate
On layer
Off layer
A
B
Light
Retinal 
input
layers
Figure 48–2  Retinal ganglion neurons form layer-specific 
synapses. (Reproduced, with permission, from Sanes and 
Yamagata 2009.)
A. The dendrites of retinal ganglion neurons receive input from 
the processes of retinal interneurons (amacrine and bipolar 
cells) in the inner plexiform layer, which is subdivided into at 
least 10 sublaminae. Specific subsets of interneurons and 
ganglion cells often arborize and synapse in just one layer. 
These lamina-specific connections determine which aspects of 
visual stimuli (their onset or offset) activate each type of retinal 
ganglion cell. The responses of OFF and ON retinal ganglion 
cells are shown on the right.
B. Immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion molecules  
(Sdk1, Sdk2, Dscam, and DscamL) are expressed by  
different subsets of amacrine and retinal ganglion neurons in 
the developing chick embryo. Amacrine neurons that express 
one of these four proteins form synapses with retinal gan-
glion cells that express the same protein. Manipulating Sdk 
or Dscam expression alters these patterns of lamina-specific 
arborization.
to one or a few plexiform sublayers (Figure 48–2B). 
Many of these proteins promote homophilic interac-
tions; that is, they bind to the same protein on other 
cell surfaces. The roles of several recognition mol-
ecules have now been assessed in chick and mouse 
retina, either by removing them during development 
or by implanting them into neurons that do not nor-
mally express them. Results of these so-called “loss-of-
function” and “gain-of-function” experiments hint at 
the existence of a complex code of recognition mol-
ecules that promotes specific connectivity within a 
target region. In mice, for example, two cadherins 
direct bipolar interneurons to appropriate sublayers, 
while Sidekick 2, a member of the immunoglobulin 
superfamily, is required for interneurons to choose 
among ganglion cells with dendrites in one particular 
sublayer.
Sensory Receptors Promote Targeting of  
Olfactory Neurons
A different type of specificity is evident in the olfac-
tory system. Each olfactory sensory neuron in the nasal 
epithelium expresses just one of approximately 1,000 
types of odorant receptors. Neurons expressing one 
receptor are randomly distributed across a large sector 
of the epithelium, yet all of their axons converge on the 
dendrites of just a few target neurons in the olfactory 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1185
Figure 48–3  (Right) Odorant receptors influence the targeting 
of sensory axons to discrete glomeruli in the olfactory bulb.  
(Adapted, with permission, from Sanes and Yamagata 2009.)
A. Each olfactory receptor neuron expresses one of approxi-
mately 1,000 possible odorant receptors. Neurons expressing 
the same receptor are distributed sparsely throughout the 
olfactory epithelium of the nose. The axons of these neurons 
form synapses with target neurons in a single glomerulus in 
the olfactory bulb.
B. In mouse mutants in which an odorant receptor gene has 
been deleted, the sensory neurons that would have expressed 
the gene send their axons to other glomeruli, in part because 
these neurons now express other receptors.
C. When one odorant receptor gene replaces another in a set 
of sensory neurons, their axons project improperly.
bulb, forming synapse-rich glomeruli (Figure 48–3A). 
When an individual olfactory receptor is deleted, the 
axons that normally express the receptor reach the 
olfactory bulb but fail to converge into specific glo-
meruli or to terminate on the appropriate postsynap-
tic cells (Figure 48–3B). Conversely, when neurons are 
forced to express a different odorant receptor, their 
axons form glomeruli at a different position within the 
olfactory bulb (Figure 48–3C).
Together, these experiments suggest that olfactory 
receptors not only determine a neuron’s responsive-
ness to specific odorants but also help the axon to form 
appropriate synapses on target neurons. Initially, it 
was suspected that specific olfactory receptors served 
not only as odor detectors but also as recognition mol-
ecules. More recent studies provide evidence for a dif-
ferent mechanism: that second messengers generated 
from activation of the olfactory receptors influence the 
expression of recognition molecules that match olfac-
tory axons with appropriate targets in the olfactory 
bulb.
The matching occurs in two steps. First, intrinsic 
differences in the abilities of olfactory receptors to 
stimulate formation of the second messenger cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate lead to differential expres-
sion of guidance molecules in embryos, generating a 
coarse matching of olfactory neurons and olfactory 
bulb targets along the anterior-posterior axis. Second, 
selective expression of recognition molecules by four 
groups of olfactory sensory neurons targets them to 
corresponding domains along the dorsoventral axis of 
the olfactory bulb.
Thus, an early phase of molecular recognition 
generates a coarse map of nose-to-brain connectivity 
by activity-independent mechanisms (Figure 48–4A). 
Then, postnatally, odorant receptors are activated by 
odorants, and because of developmental changes in 
Olfactory bulb
Glomeruli
A  Wild type
Olfactory receptor cells
Olfactory
epithelium
C  Receptor swap
B  Receptor deletion
Receptors


===== Page 7 =====
1186    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–4  Odorant receptors promote specific connec-
tions in the olfactory bulb by controlling expression of 
guidance and recognition molecules. Activation of olfactory 
receptors in olfactory sensory neurons leads to activation of 
adenylyl cyclase and production of the second messenger 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP).
A. Prenatally, prior to olfaction, the receptors are spontane-
ously active. Different receptor types exhibit different levels of 
spontaneous activity and therefore generate different levels of 
cAMP, which in turn induce distinct, graded levels of axon guid-
ance molecules such as neuropilins and semaphorins. These 
guidance molecules mediate interactions among axons that 
guide them to appropriate regions of the olfactory bulb.  
(Abbreviations: CREB, cAMP response element-binding  
protein; Nrp1, neuropilin1; PKA, protein kinase A.)
B. Postnatally, olfactory receptors are activated by odorant mole-
cules. This olfactory activity also generates distinct levels of cAMP 
in each type of odorant receptor neuron, but now the second mes-
senger acts through ion channels to induce new sets of guidance 
molecules such as kirrels and ephrins. These molecules mediate 
interactions that segregate axonal terminals into glomeruli. Thus, 
successive phases of receptor activity, the first spontaneous and 
the second evoked by odorants, act together to map olfactory sen-
sory axons of different types onto different glomeruli.
A  Immature olfactory sensory neurons
B  Mature olfactory sensory neurons
cAMP
Ca2+
Na+
Cl–
Odorant 
receptor
Golf
Cl–
channel
cAMP
PKA
CREB
Odorant
receptor
Adenylyl
cyclase III
Adenylyl
cyclase III
Low
High
Gs
Nrp1
Cyclic nucleotide-
gated channel
Odorant
cAMP
EphA5
ephrin-A5
Kirrel2
Kirrel3
Low
High
Kirrel2
Kirrel3
EphA
ephrin-A
Neuronal activity
Glomerular segregation
Homophilic adhesion
Olfactory
sensory 
neurons
Olfactory
sensory 
neuron
Axon
Glomeruli
Posterior
Anterior
Contact-induced repulsion
Regional guidance
intracellular signaling, this activation leads to induc-
tion of a second set of recognition molecules. These 
molecules lead to convergence of axons onto glomeruli, 
thus refining the projection by an activity-dependent 
mechanism (Figure 48–4B). Segregation of axons first 
to particular regions and then to particular glomeruli 
occurs via both adhesive and repulsive interactions.
Different Synaptic Inputs Are Directed to Discrete 
Domains of the Postsynaptic Cell
Nerve terminals not only discriminate among candi-
date targets but also terminate on a specific portion of 
the target neuron. In the cerebral cortex and hippocam-
pus, for example, axons arriving in layered structures 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 48 / Formation and Elimination of Synapses    1187
Figure 48–5  The axons of inhibitory 
interneurons in the cerebellum terminate 
on a distinct region of the cerebellar 
Purkinje cell. Many neurons form synapses 
on cerebellar Purkinje neurons, each select-
ing a distinct domain on the Purkinje cell. The 
axons of inhibitory basket cells form most of 
their synapses on the axon hillock and initial 
segment. Basket cells select these domains 
by recognizing neurofascin, a cell surface 
immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion mole-
cule that is anchored to the initial segment of 
the axon by ankyrin G. When the localization 
of neurofascin is perturbed, basket cell axons 
fail to restrict synapse formation to the initial 
segment. (Adapted from Huang 2006.)
often confine their terminals to one layer, even if the 
dendritic tree of the postsynaptic cell traverses numer-
ous layers. In the cerebellum, the axons of different 
types of neurons terminate on distinct domains of the 
Purkinje neurons. Granule cell axons contact distal 
dendritic spines, climbing fiber axons contact proximal 
dendritic shafts, and basket cell axons contact the axon 
hillock and initial segment (Figure 48–5).
Such specificity presumably relies on molecular 
cues on the postsynaptic cell surface. For Purkinje neu-
rons of the cerebellum, one such cue is neurofascin, an 
adhesion molecule of the immunoglobulin superfam-
ily. Neurofascin is present at high levels on the axonal 
initial segment, thus directing basket cells to form 
axons selectively on this axonal domain. Adhesion 
molecules can therefore also serve as recognition mol-
ecules for particular domains of a neuron. Since indi-
vidual neurons can form synapses with several classes 
of pre- and postsynaptic cells, it follows that each neu-
ronal subtype must express a variety of synaptic recog-
nition molecules.
Neural Activity Sharpens Synaptic Specificity
So far, we have emphasized the role of recognition 
molecules in the initial formation of synapses. Once 
Basket cell
Neurofascin
Receptor
Ankyrin G
Climbing 
ﬁber
synapses form, however, neural activity within the cir-
cuit plays a critical role in refining synaptic patterns. 
For example, as described above, guidance of olfactory 
neurons to the olfactory bulb includes an initial activity-
independent crude mapping followed by an activity-
dependent phase in which the projection is refined.
A similar biphasic pattern has been studied in 
detail in the visual system. Retinal ganglion cells pro-
ject to the optic tectum (superior colliculus), where 
interactions between ephrins and Eph kinases result in 
formation of a crude retinotopic map of retinal axons 
on the tectal surface (Chapter 47). Activity-dependent 
processes then sculpt the axonal arbors of retinal 
ganglion cells. The axons initially form broad diffuse 
arbors, which gradually become denser but more 
focused, sharpening the tectal map (Figure 48–6). This 
refinement is inhibited when the activity of synapses 
is blocked. The molecular mechanisms of this activity-
dependent refinement are largely unknown. As in the 
olfactory system, an attractive idea is that the level and 
pattern of neuronal activity regulate the expression of 
recognition molecules.
These examples from the olfactory and visual sys-
tems illustrate a widespread phenomenon: Molecu-
lar cues initially control synapse specificity, but once 
the circuit begins to function, specificity is sharpened 


===== Page 9 =====
1188    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 48–6  Electrical activity refines the specificity of 
synaptic connections of retinal ganglion cells. Some retinal 
ganglion cells initially form dendritic arbors that are limited to 
specific sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer of the retina, 
whereas others initially form diffuse arbors that are later 
pruned to form large specific patterns. Similarly, the axonal 
arbors of retinal ganglion cells initially innervate a large region 
of their target fields in the superior colliculus. This expan-
sive axonal arbor is then refined so as to concentrate many 
branches in a small region. Abolishing electrical activity in reti-
nal ganglion cells decreases the remodeling of dendritic and 
axonal arbors.
Retinal 
ganglion cells
Circuit
activity
Light
Retina
Optic 
tectum
On layer
Off layer
through neural activity. In the visual system, sharpen-
ing involves loss of synapses. We will return to this 
process of synapse elimination at the end of this 
chapter and consider its consequences for behavior in 
the next chapter.
In a few cases, neural activity promotes specific-
ity in a different way, by turning an inappropriate tar-
get into an appropriate one. This mechanism has been 
most clearly demonstrated in skeletal muscle, where 
mammalian muscle fibers can be divided into several 
categories according to their contractile characteristics 
(Chapter 31). Muscle fibers of particular types express 
genes for distinctive isoforms of the main contractile 
proteins, such as myosins and troponins.
Few muscles are composed exclusively of a single type 
of fiber; most have fibers of all types. Yet the branches 
of an individual motor axon innervate muscle fibers of 
a single type, even in “mixed” muscles in which fibers 
of different types are intermingled (Figure 48–7A). 
This pattern implies a remarkable degree of synaptic 
specificity. However, matching does not always come 
about through recognition in the motor axon of the 
appropriate type of muscle fiber. The motor axon can 
also convert the target muscle fiber to an appropriate 
type. When a muscle is denervated at birth, before the 
properties of its fibers are fixed, a nerve that normally 
innervates a slow muscle can be redirected to inner-
vate a muscle destined to become fast, and vice versa. 
Under these conditions, the contractile properties of 
the muscle are partially transformed in a direction 
imposed by the firing properties of the motor nerve 
(Figure 48–7B,C).
Different patterns of neural activity in fast and 
slow motor neurons are responsible for the switch in 
muscle properties. Most strikingly, direct electrical 
stimulation of a muscle with patterns normally evoked 
by slow or fast nerves leads to changes that are nearly 
as dramatic as those produced by cross-innervation 
(Figure 48–7D). Although activity-based conversion 
of the type observed at the neuromuscular junction is 
unlikely to be a major contributor to synaptic specific-
ity in the central nervous system, it is likely that central 
axons modify the properties of their synaptic targets, 
contributing to the diversification of neuronal sub-
types and refining connectivity imposed by recogni-
tion molecules.


