===== Page 1 =====
948    Part V / Movement
critical selection threshold (Figure 38–9B). However, a 
further important point when thinking about selection 
malfunctions is to appreciate that output inhibition 
and disinhibition are likely to be continuously variable 
rather than discrete on/off states. In that case, the dif-
ference between the disinhibited and inhibited channels 
would determine how “hard” or “soft” the selection is. 
When the difference is large (Figure 38–9D), competing 
options are likely to find the current selection is resist-
ant to interruption—a larger than normal input salience 
would be required to cause the system to switch selec-
tions. Conversely, when the difference is small (Figure 
38–9C), it would be comparatively easy for a competing 
option to initiate a selection switch.
Support for these ideas comes from behavioral 
observations showing that at the beginning of task 
learning there is frequently easy switching between 
strategies. However, as the task becomes well learned, 
the system becomes increasingly resistant to alterna-
tive strategies. Appreciation of the concepts of hard 
and soft selection could therefore play an important 
role when thinking about how a selection mechanism 
might become dysfunctional in the context of basal 
ganglia diseases.
Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a 
Failure to Select Sensorimotor Options
The cardinal symptoms of Parkinson disease are akine-
sia (difficulties in initiating movement), bradykinesia 
(initiated movements are slow), and rigidity (stiffness 
and resistance to passive movement). Tremor is often 
but not always present. The principal neurological 
deficit responsible for the motor symptoms of Parkin-
son disease is thought to be the progressive degenera-
tion of dopaminergic neurotransmission in the basal  
ganglia.
A consequence of this loss of dopamine is increased 
tonic and oscillatory activity in the recordings from 
basal ganglia output nuclei. Since the output of the 
basal ganglia is GABAergic and inhibitory, in Par-
kinson disease, targeted structures are receiving high 
and uneven levels of inhibitory input. This condition 
impairs the normal selective (disinhibitory) function 
of the basal ganglia; movements are difficult to select 
and, when possible, are slow to execute.
Parkinson disease is, however, more nuanced than 
this. Over much of this progressive condition, the loss of 
dopaminergic transmission differentially affects the sen-
sorimotor territories of the basal ganglia, leaving the lim-
bic and associative territories comparatively unaffected. 
As discussed in the section on goal-directed and habitual 
control, the sensorimotor territories of the basal ganglia 
play an essential role in selecting habitual actions. Per-
haps, therefore, it is not surprising that many of the 
motor features of Parkinson disease can be interpreted 
in terms of a loss of automatic habits. While patients 
can do things, they are trapped in the slower, serial, and 
voluntary mode of goal-directed control. In the future, 
it will be interesting to see if subtle losses of habitual 
control can be detected before clinical symptoms appear, 
thereby acting as an early marker for the condition.
Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional 
Imbalance Between the Direct and  
Indirect Pathways
Huntington disease is a genetically transmitted disor-
der, the initial symptoms of which are subtle changes 
in mood, personality, cognition, and physical skills. 
The abnormal movements are characterized by jerky, 
random, and uncontrollable movements called chorea. 
The disease is associated with neuronal degeneration. 
Damage in the early stage is most evident in the stri-
atal medium spiny neurons, but later spreads to other 
regions of the nervous system.
Observations that neuronal degeneration is evi-
dent in limbic, associative, and sensorimotor terri-
tories of the striatum would explain why the disease 
is characterized by disturbances of affect, cognition, 
and sensorimotor function. Also noteworthy is that 
the most vulnerable neurons are those in the striatum 
that project to the external globus pallidus (the indirect 
pathway) rather than the neurons that project directly 
to the basal ganglia output nuclei. At the level of the 
output nuclei, this disturbance would tip the balance 
in favor of the striatal projection responsible for disin-
hibition. Consequently, the symptoms of Huntington 
disease could reflect interference with expression of the 
selected affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor behav-
iors by competitors not being sufficiently suppressed.
Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General 
Failure to Suppress Nonselected Options
Schizophrenic psychosis is a condition in which there 
are also disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensori-
motor function. Typical symptoms include delusions 
(false beliefs not based in reality), hallucinations (hear-
ing or seeing things that do not exist), disorganized 
thinking (inferred from disorganized speech), and 
abnormal motor behavior (unpredictable agitation, 
stereotypy, and failure to concentrate on the matter in 
hand). The disease is progressive, and in later stages, 
negative symptoms characterized by flattened affect, 
social withdrawal, absence of thought, and reduced 
motor behavior become evident (Chapter 60).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    949
Understanding the neurobiological basis of schizo-
phrenia has been complicated by many inconsistent 
experimental procedures, high variability in symptoms, 
the side effects of medications, substance abuse, and 
variability in response to treatments. There is, however, 
a consistent link between schizophrenia and the basal 
ganglia insofar as a major class of antipsychotic drugs 
acts to suppress dopaminergic neurotransmission. In 
terms of simple regional density of axon terminals 
and postsynaptic dopamine receptors, dopaminergic 
transmission within the basal ganglia is likely to be 
influenced most profoundly by dopamine-related phar-
macological therapies. Moreover, there is evidence that 
dopamine dysregulation in the basal ganglia is intrinsic 
to the pathology of schizophrenia rather than a medi-
cation side effect; predates the psychosis; and is a risk 
factor for the illness. The implication here is that schizo-
phrenia is associated with a net excess of dopaminergic 
transmission in the basal ganglia.
So how might dysregulation of this form distort 
the normal functions of selection and reinforcement? 
First, the observation that schizophrenia is character-
ized by disturbances of affect, cognition, and sensori-
motor behavior again suggests that the neurobiological 
substrate will be present in each of the basal ganglia’s 
functional territories. Second, a recurrent theme is that 
with the positive symptoms there seems to be too much 
of everything—intense emotional intrusions, too many 
ideas out of control, spontaneous sensory experiences, 
too many distracting stimuli, and unpredictable motor 
agitation. One way of unifying this confusing array of 
symptoms is to assume that they represent a similar 
basic fault playing out in different functional territo-
ries of the basal ganglia. Here, the basic fault could be 
a failure on the part of the mechanism responsible for 
suppressing the impact of competing but nonselected 
options. Consequently, in all functional territories, 
the currently selected option would be pathologically 
vulnerable to interruption (Figure 38–9C).
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and 
Tourette Syndrome May Also Be Characterized by 
Intrusions of Nonselected Options
Further examples of hyperactive conditions that have 
been linked to basal ganglia dysfunction may also be 
due to a faulty selection mechanism where the system 
in each case is vulnerable to intrusions. Attention defi-
cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), like schizophrenia, 
could in part be the result of a failure in the mecha-
nism responsible for suppressing nonselected sensory 
options, thereby making it difficult to maintain a focus 
of attention. Alternatively, the impulsive aspects of 
the condition could reflect a malfunction in the neural 
systems that generate behavioral options based on the 
value of likely consequences. In this situation, options 
driven by immediately desired sensory events would 
take precedence over competing representations of 
disadvantageous longer-term consequences.
In the case of Tourette syndrome, converging evi-
dence indicates that the involuntary behavioral intru-
sions (verbal and motor tics) are associated with aberrant 
activity in the cortical–basal ganglia–thalamic loops. In 
animal models, similar motor tics can be evoked by 
blocking inhibitory neurotransmission in local areas of 
the sensorimotor striatum. Were the disease state also 
to cause a similar failure of inhibition or inappropri-
ate excitation in parts of the striatum not engaged by 
the current selection, disruptive motor intrusions might 
be expected. Furthermore, were the locus of the exces-
sive excitation to remain constant and the motor char-
acteristics of the intrusion to be repeated, it is likely that 
the mechanism for establishing automatic habits would 
be engaged, thereby further enhancing the automatic 
involuntary nature of the intrusion.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Reflects the 
Presence of Pathologically Dominant Options
Persons with obsessive-compulsive disorder compul-
sively repeat specific actions (hand washing, counting 
things, checking things) or have particular thoughts 
repeatedly come to mind uninvited (obsessions). Stud-
ies using functional neuroimaging when the symptoms 
are present consistently report abnormal activation at 
various locations within the cortical-striatum-thalamus-
cortical loops.
In terms of a selection mechanism dysfunction, the 
symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder would be 
expected when, for whatever reason, the input salience 
of relevant functional channels would be abnormally 
dominant, thereby making it difficult for competing 
options to interrupt or cause behavioral or attentional 
switching (hard selection). The fact that the obses-
sional and compulsive options are dominant behaviors 
that have been learned suggests that the fault responsi-
ble for obsessive-compulsive disorder may lie with the 
reinforcement mechanism capable of adjusting input 
salience. Of course, such a fault could be of genetic 
and/or environmental origin.
Addictions Are Associated With Disorders of 
Reinforcement Mechanisms and Habitual Goals
Addiction to drugs and other behaviors (eg, gambling, 
sex, eating) represents a dramatic dysregulation of 


===== Page 3 =====
950    Part V / Movement
motivational selections. This is caused by an exagger-
ated salience of addiction-related stimuli, binge indul-
gence, and withdrawal anxiety. When addictions are 
being acquired, changes in dopaminergic and opioid 
peptide transmission in the basal ganglia have been 
reported.
Insofar as these transmission systems have been 
linked with fundamental mechanisms of reinforce-
ment, it might be expected that the selective rein-
forcement of addiction-related stimuli would lead to 
observed increases in the ability of these stimuli to cap-
ture behavior. Alternatively, the increases in negative 
emotional states and stress-like responses experienced 
during withdrawal have been associated with reduc-
tions in dopamine function. In the limbic territories of 
the basal ganglia, such reductions are typically associ-
ated with negative reinforcement.
A final point to note is that if addiction-associated 
stimuli can automatically trigger the motivation/goal 
to indulge (ie, an automatic stimulus–goal association), 
a similar kind of mechanism may be operating in the 
limbic territories as is currently assigned to stimulus–
response habits in the sensorimotor territories. Thus, if 
in the case of drug addiction the goal of drug acquisi-
tion may be correctly described as a stimulus-driven 
habit, the practicalities of obtaining the drug can be 
highly goal directed (eg, robbing a convenience store, 
phoning the dealer) and not at all habitual.
From the above sections, it can be seen that inter-
preting disorders of the basal ganglia in terms of dys-
regulations of selection and reinforcement does not 
require implausible intellectual contortions. Indeed, 
this could be regarded as further support for the view 
that the systems-level function of the basal ganglia is 
to operate as a generic selection mechanism. Moreover, 
having an overriding conceptual framework based on 
potential disorders of normal function has an impor-
tant advantage for guiding future research. Instead 
of fishing in the brains of patients and animal models 
for clues of what might have gone wrong, one is hunt-
ing within a specified network for a malfunction that 
would be expected to produce the observed disorder.
Highlights
  1.  The basal ganglia are an interconnected group 
of nuclei located at the base of the forebrain and 
midbrain. There are three major input structures 
(the striatum, the subthalamic nucleus, and the 
dopamine cells of substantia nigra) and two 
major output structures (the internal globus pal-
lidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata).
  2.  Input structures receive projections from most 
regions of the cerebral cortex, limbic system, 
and brain stem, many via relays in the thalamus. 
Inputs to the striatum and subthalamus are topo-
graphically organized.
  3.  The spatial topography is maintained through-
out the intrinsic basal ganglia connections, as 
well as in projections back to the cortex, lim-
bic system, and brain stem structures. Thus, an 
essential feature of systems-level basal ganglia 
architecture can be viewed as a series of reen-
trant loops.
  4.  The striatum was thought to be connected to the 
output nuclei via direct and indirect pathways. 
However, recent anatomical evidence suggests a 
more complex internal architecture.
  5.  Phasic excitatory input to the basal ganglia is 
mediated by the neurotransmitter glutamate. 
Tonic inhibitory output from the basal ganglia 
is mediated by the neurotransmitter GABA. The 
reentrant loops keep afferent structures under 
strong inhibitory control. For any task, the tonic 
inhibitory firing of some output neurons pauses, 
while for others, it is maintained or increased.
  6.  Basal ganglia architecture appeared at the outset 
of vertebrate evolution and has been highly con-
served throughout. This suggests that the com-
putational problems they solve are likely to be 
problems faced by all vertebrate species.
  7.  The internal microarchitecture of the intrinsic 
basal ganglia nuclei is largely the same through-
out their motivational, affective, cognitive, and 
sensorimotor territories. This suggests that the 
same basal ganglia algorithm is applied to all 
general classes of brain function.
  8.  A recurring theme within the basal ganglia litera-
ture is their involvement in action selection and 
reinforcement learning.
  9.  The selection hypothesis is supported by the fol-
lowing: (1) Selection is a generic problem faced 
by all vertebrates. (2) A selection algorithm com-
mon to all basal ganglia territories could resolve 
competitions between incompatible motiva-
tional, affective, cognitive, and sensorimotor 
options. (3) Many intrinsic processes could sup-
port a selection function. (4) Selective removal 
of output inhibition within a multiple reentrant 
looped architecture is necessarily a selection pro-
cess. (5) Computational models of basal ganglia 
architecture effectively select the actions of mul-
tifunctional robots.
10.  Abundant evidence indicates that the basal gan-
glia are an essential substrate for reinforcement 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 38 / The Basal Ganglia    951
learning where selections are biased by the 
valence/value of past outcomes.
11.  The multidimensional aspects of action (what, 
where, when, and how to do something) can be 
independently modified by reinforcement learn-
ing. It will be important to determine whether 
these different aspects of action are learned 
within the same or different functional territories 
of the basal ganglia.
12.  Recent optogenetic investigations have con-
firmed that phasic dopamine signaling can act as 
a training signal for reinforcement learning.
13.  Within the reentrant looped architecture, future 
selections can be biased not only within the 
basal ganglia by dopamine but also at synapses 
in external afferent structures and the thalamic 
relays.
14.  Reinforcement learning can bias selections on 
the basis of outcome value (goal-directed), or by 
operating on an acquired automatic stimulus–
response association (habit). Goal-directed and 
habitual selections are made in different func-
tional territories of the basal ganglia.
15.  Insofar as diseases of the basal ganglia in humans 
can be interpreted as selection malfunctions, 
additional support is provided for the idea that 
the basal ganglia operate as a generic selection 
module.
 Peter Redgrave 
  Rui M. Costa 
Suggested Reading
Cui G, Jun SB, Jin X, et al. 2013. Concurrent activation of stri-
atal direct and indirect pathways during action initiation. 
Nature 494:238–242.
da Silva JA, Tecuapetla F, Paixão V, Costa RM. 2018. Dopa-
mine neuron activity before action initiation gates and 
invigorates future movements. Nature 554:244–248.
Grillner S, Robertson B, Stephenson-Jones M. 2013. The evo-
lutionary origin of the vertebrate basal ganglia and its role 
in action selection. J Physiol 591:5425–5431.
Hikosaka O, Ghazizadeh A, Griggs W, Amita H. 2018. Par-
allel basal ganglia circuits for decision making. J Neural 
Transm (Vienna) 125:515–529.
Kravitz AV, Freeze BS, Parker PR, et al. 2010. Regulation of 
parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control of 
basal ganglia circuitry. Nature 466:622–626.
Redgrave P, Prescott T, Gurney KN. 1999. The basal ganglia: 
a vertebrate solution to the selection problem? Neurosci-
ence 89:1009–1023.
Redgrave P, Rodriguez M, Smith Y, et al. 2010. Goal-directed 
and habitual control in the basal ganglia: implications for 
Parkinson’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 11:760–772.
Saunders A, Oldenburg IA, Berezovskii VK, et al. 2015. A 
direct GABAergic output from the basal ganglia to frontal 
cortex. Nature 521:85–89.
Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in 
habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:464–476.
Yttri EA, Dudman JT. 2016. Opponent and bidirectional con-
trol of movement velocity in the basal ganglia. Nature 
533:402–406.
References
Albin RL, Mink JW. 2006. Recent advances in Tourette syn-
drome research. Trends Neurosci 29:175–182.
Albin RL, Young AB, Penney JB. 1989. The functional anatomy 
of basal ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci 12:366–375.
Alexander GE, Crutcher MD, Delong MR. 1990. Functional 
architecture of basal ganglia circuits: neural substrates of 
parallel processing. Trends Neurosci 13:226–271.
Arbuthnott GW, Wickens J. 2007. Space, time and dopamine. 
Trends Neurosci 30:62–69.
Carmona S, Proal E, Hoekzema EA, et al. 2009. Ventro-striatal 
reductions underpin symptoms of hyperactivity and 
impulsivity in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. 
Biol Psychiatry 66:972–977.
Chevalier G, Deniau JM. 1990. Disinhibition as a basic pro-
cess in the expression of striatal functions. Trends Neurosci 
13:277–281.
DeLong MR, Wichmann T. 2007. Circuits and circuit disorders 
of the basal ganglia. Arch Neurol 64:20–24.
Deniau JM, Mailly P, Maurice N, Charpier S. 2007. The pars 
reticulata of the substantia nigra: a window to basal ganglia 
output. In: JM Tepper. ED Abercrombie, JP Bolam (eds). 
Gaba and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules to Systems. Prog 
Brain Res 160:151–172.
Desmurget M, Turner RS. 2010. Motor sequences and the basal 
ganglia: kinematics, not habits. J Neurosci 30:7685–7690.
Draganski B, Kherif F, Klöppel S, et al. 2008. Evidence for 
segregated and integrative connectivity patterns in the 
human basal ganglia. J Neurosci 28:7138–7152.
Fan D, Rossi MA, Yin HH. 2012. Mechanisms of action selec-
tion and timing in substantia nigra neurons. J Neurosci 
32:5534–5548.
Gerfen CR, Surmeier DJ. 2011. Modulation of striatal projec-
tion systems by dopamine. Ann Rev Neurosci 34:441–466.
Gerfen CR, Wilson CJ. 1996. The basal ganglia. In: LW Swanson, 
A Bjorklund, T Hokfelt (eds). Handbook of Chemical Neuro-
anatomy, Vol 12: Integrated Systems of the CNS, Part III, pp. 
371–468. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Graybiel AM. 2008. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. 
Ann Rev Neurosci 31:359–387.
Hikosaka O. 2007. Basal ganglia mechanisms of reward-
oriented eye movement. Ann NY Acad Sci 1104:229–249.


===== Page 5 =====
952    Part V / Movement
Howes OD, Kapur S. 2009. The dopamine hypothesis of 
schizophrenia: version III—the final common pathway. 
Schizophr Bull 353:549–562.
Humphries MD, Stewart RD, Gurney KN. 2006. A physiolog-
ically plausible model of action selection and oscillatory 
activity in the basal ganglia. J Neurosci 26:12921–12942.
Kelly RM, Strick PL. 2004. Macro-architecture of basal gan-
glia loops with the cerebral cortex: use of rabies virus 
to reveal multisynaptic circuits. Prog Brain Res 143: 
449–459.
Klaus A, Martins GJ, Paixao VB, Zhou P, Paninski L, Costa 
RM. 2017. The spatiotemporal organization of the stria-
tum encodes action space. Neuron 95:1171–1180.
Koob GF, Volkow ND. 2016. Neurobiology of addiction: a 
neurocircuitry analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 38:760–773.
MacDonald AW, Schulz SC. 2009. What we know: findings 
that every theory of schizophrenia should explain. Schiz-
ophr Bull 3:493–508.
Matsuda W, Furuta T, Nakamura KC, et al. 2009. Single 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons form widely spread 
and highly dense axonal arborizations in the neostriatum. 
J Neurosci 29:444–453.
Matsumoto M, Takada M. 2013. Distinct representations of 
cognitive and motivational signals in midbrain dopamine 
neurons. Neuron 79:1–14.
McHaffie JG, Stanford TR, Stein BE, Coizet V, Redgrave P. 
2005. Subcortical loops through the basal ganglia. Trends 
Neurosci 28:401–407.
Mink JW. 1996. The basal ganglia: focused selection and 
inhibition of competing motor programs. Prog Neurobiol 
50:381–425.
Minski M. 1986. The Society of Mind. London: Heinemann Ltd.
Nambu A. 2011. Somatotopic organization of the primate 
basal ganglia. Front Neuroanat 5:26.
Nambu A, Tokuno H, Takada M. 2002. Functional signifi-
cance of the cortico-subthalamo-pallidal ‘hyperdirect’ 
pathway. Neurosci Res 43:111–117.
Nasser HM, Calu DJ, Schoenbaum G, Sharpe MJ. 2017. The 
dopamine prediction error: contributions to associative 
models of reward learning. Front Psychol 8:244.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. 1981. The Human 
Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 2nd ed. 
Berlin: Springer.
Piron C, Kase D, Topalidou M, et al. 2016. The globus pallidus 
pars interna in goal-oriented and routine behaviors: resolv-
ing a long-standing paradox. Mov Disord 31:1146–1154.
Plotkin JL, Surmeier DJ. 2015. Corticostriatal synaptic adap-
tations in Huntington’s disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
33:53–62.
Redgrave P, Gurney KN. 2006. The short-latency dopamine 
signal: a role in discovering novel actions? Nat Rev Neurosci 
7:967–975.
Reiner AJ. 2010. The conservative evolution of the vertebrate 
basal ganglia. In: H Steiner, KY Tseng (eds). Handbook of 
Basal Ganglia Structure and Function, pp. 29–62. Burlington, 
MA: Academic Press
Reiner A, Jiao Y, DelMar N, Laverghetta AV, Lei WL. 2003. 
Differential morphology of pyramidal tract-type and 
intratelencephalically projecting-type corticostriatal neu-
rons and their intrastriatal terminals in rats. J Comp Neurol 
457:420–440.
Schultz W. 2007. Multiple dopamine functions at different 
time courses. Annu Rev Neurosci 30:259–288.
Silberberg G, Bolam JP. 2015. Local and afferent synaptic path-
ways in the striatal microcircuitry. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
33:182–187.
Smith Y, Galvan A, Ellender TJ, et al. 2014. The thalamos-
triatal system in normal and diseased states. Front Syst 
Neurosci 8:5.
Surmeier DJ, Plotkin J, Shen W. 2009. Dopamine and synaptic 
plasticity in dorsal striatal circuits controlling action selec-
tion. Curr Opin Neurobiol 19:621–628.
Tecuapetla F, Jin X, Lima SQ, Costa RM. 2016. Complemen-
tary contributions of striatal projection pathways to action 
initiation and execution. Cell 166:703–715.
Thorndike EL. 1911. Animal Intelligence. New York: Macmillan.
van den Heuvel OA, van Wingen G, Soriano-Mas C, et al. 
2016. Brain circuitry of compulsivity. Eur Neuropsy-
chopharmacol 26:810–827.
Watabe-Uchida M, Zhu LS, Ogawa SK, Vamanrao A, Uchida 
N. 2012. Whole-brain mapping of direct inputs to mid-
brain dopamine neurons. Neuron 74:858–873.
Yael D, Vinner E, Bar-Gad I. 2015. Pathophysiology of tic dis-
orders. Mov Disord 30:1171–1178.
Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. 2006. The role of the basal ganglia in 
habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:464–476.


===== Page 6 =====
39
Brain–Machine Interfaces
U
nderstanding the normal function  of 
the nervous system is central to understand-
ing dysfunction caused by disease or injury 
and designing therapies. Such treatments include 
pharmacological agents, surgical interventions, and, 
increasingly, electronic medical devices. These medi-
cal devices fill an important gap between largely 
molecularly targeted and systemic medications and 
largely anatomically targeted and focal surgical 
lesions.
In this chapter, we focus on medical devices that 
measure or alter electrophysiological activity at the 
level of populations of neurons. These devices are 
referred to as brain–machine interfaces (BMIs), brain–
computer interfaces, or neural prostheses. We use the 
term BMI to refer to all such devices because there 
is no standard distinction among them. BMIs can 
be organized into four broad categories: those that 
restore lost sensory capabilities, those that restore lost 
motor capabilities, those that regulate pathological 
neural activity, and those that restore lost brain pro-
cessing capabilities.
BMIs can help people perform “activities of daily 
living,” such as feeding oneself, physically dressing 
and grooming oneself, maintaining continence, and 
walking. A type of BMI that we will discuss extensively 
in this chapter converts electrical activity from neurons 
in the brain into signals that control prosthetic devices 
to help people with paralysis. By understanding how 
neuroscience and neuroengineering work together to 
create current BMIs, we can more clearly envision how 
many neurological diseases and injuries can be treated 
with medical devices.
BMIs Measure and Modulate Neural Activity to Help Restore 
Lost Capabilities
Cochlear Implants and Retinal Prostheses Can Restore 
Lost Sensory Capabilities
Motor and Communication BMIs Can Restore Lost 
Motor Capabilities
Pathological Neural Activity Can Be Regulated by Deep 
Brain Stimulation and Antiseizure BMIs
Replacement Part BMIs Can Restore Lost Brain 
Processing Capabilities
Measuring and Modulating Neural Activity Rely on 
Advanced Neurotechnology
BMIs Leverage the Activity of Many Neurons to Decode 
Movements
Decoding Algorithms Estimate Intended Movements 
From Neural Activity
Discrete Decoders Estimate Movement Goals
Continuous Decoders Estimate Moment-by-Moment 
Details of Movements
Increases in Performance and Capabilities of Motor and 
Communication BMIs Enable Clinical Translation
Subjects Can Type Messages Using Communication BMIs
Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using BMI-
Directed Prosthetic Arms
Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using BMI-
Directed Stimulation of Paralyzed Arms
Subjects Can Use Sensory Feedback Delivered by Cortical 
Stimulation During BMI Control
BMIs Can Be Used to Advance Basic Neuroscience
BMIs Raise New Neuroethics Considerations
Highlights


===== Page 7 =====
954    Part V / Movement
BMIs Measure and Modulate Neural Activity 
to Help Restore Lost Capabilities
Cochlear Implants and Retinal Prostheses Can 
Restore Lost Sensory Capabilities
One of the earliest and most widely used BMIs is the 
cochlear implant. People with profound deafness can 
benefit from restoration of even some audition. Since 
the 1970s, several hundred thousand people who 
have a peripheral cause of deafness that leaves the 
cochlear nerve and central auditory pathways intact 
have received cochlear implants. These systems have 
restored considerable hearing and spoken language, 
even to children with congenital deafness who have 
learned to perceive speech using cochlear implants.
Cochlear implants operate by capturing sounds 
with a microphone that resides outside the skin and 
sending these signals to a receiver surgically implanted 
under the skin near the ear. After conversion (encod-
ing) to appropriate spatial-temporal signal patterns, 
these signals electrically stimulate spiral ganglion cells 
in the cochlear modiolus (Chapter 26). In turn, sig-
nals from the activated cochlear cells are transmitted 
through the auditory nerve to the brain stem and higher 
auditory areas where, ideally, the neural signals are 
interpreted as the sounds captured by the microphone.
Another example of a BMI is a retinal prosthesis. 
Blindness can be caused by diseases such as retinitis 
pigmentosa, an inherited retinal degenerative disease. 
At present, there is no cure and no approved medical 
therapy to slow or reverse the disease. Retinal prosthe-
ses currently enable patients to recognize large letters 
and locate the position of objects. They operate by cap-
turing images with a camera and sending these signals 
to a receiver positioned within the eye. After conver-
sion to appropriate spatial-temporal patterns, these 
electrical signals stimulate retinal ganglion cells in the 
retina through dozens of electrodes. In turn, these cells 
send their signals through the optic nerve to the thala-
mus and higher visual areas where, ideally, the afferent 
signals are interpreted as the image captured by the 
camera.
Motor and Communication BMIs Can Restore Lost 
Motor Capabilities
BMIs are also being developed to assist paralyzed peo-
ple and amputees by restoring lost motor and com-
munication function. This is the central topic of this 
chapter. First, electrical neural activity in one or more 
brain areas is measured using penetrating multi-
electrode arrays placed, for example, in the arm and 
hand region of the primary motor cortex, dorsal and 
ventral premotor cortex, and/or intraparietal cortex 
(particularly the parietal reach region and medial 
intraparietal area)  (Figure 39–1).
Second, an arm movement is attempted but cannot 
be made in the case of people with paralysis. Action 
potentials and local field potentials are measured dur-
ing these attempts. With 100 electrodes placed in the 
primary motor cortex and another 100 in the dorsal 
premotor cortex, for example, action potentials from 
approximately 200 neurons and local field potentials 
from 200 electrodes are measured. Local field poten-
tials are lower-frequency signals recorded on the same 
electrodes as the action potentials and believed to arise 
from local synaptic currents of many neurons near 
the electrode tips. Together, these neural signals con-
tain considerable information about how the person 
wishes to move her arm.
Third, the relationship between neural activity and 
attempted movements is characterized. This relation-
ship makes it possible to predict the desired movement 
from new neural activity, a statistical procedure we 
refer to as neural decoding. Fourth, the BMI is then oper-
ated in its normal mode where neural activity is meas-
ured in real time and desired movements are decoded 
from the neural activity by a computer. The decoded 
movements can be used to guide prosthetic devices, 
such as a cursor on a computer screen or a robotic arm. 
It is also possible to electrically stimulate muscles in 
a paralyzed limb to enact the decoded movements, 
a procedure known as functional electrical stimulation. 
Many other prosthetic devices can be envisioned as we 
increasingly interact with the world around us elec-
tronically (eg, smart phones, automobiles, and every-
day objects that are embedded with electronics so that 
they can send and receive data—known as the “internet 
of things”).
Finally, because the person can see the prosthetic 
device, she can alter her neural activity by thinking 
different thoughts on a moment-by-moment basis 
so as to guide the prosthetic device more accurately. 
This closed-loop feedback control system can make 
use of nonvisual sensory modalities as well, includ-
ing delivering pressure and position information from 
electronic sensors wrapped on or embedded in a pros-
thetic arm. Such surrogate sensory information can be 
transformed into electrical stimulation patterns that 
are delivered to proprioceptive and somatosensory 
cortex.
The BMIs described above include motor and 
communication BMIs. Motor BMIs aim to provide 
natural control of a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb. 
In the case of upper-limb prostheses, this involves the 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    955
Figure 39–1  Concept of motor and communication 
brain–machine interfaces. One or more electrode arrays are 
implanted in brain regions such as the primary motor cortex, 
dorsal and ventral premotor cortex, or intraparietal cortex. They 
record action potentials from tens to hundreds of neurons and 
local field potentials. The recorded neural activity is then con-
verted by a decoding algorithm into (1) computer commands 
for controlling a computer interface or a prosthetic (robotic) 
arm, or (2) stimulation patterns for functional electrical stimula-
tion of muscles in a paralyzed arm.
precise movement of the arm along a desired path and 
with a desired speed profile. Such control is indeed 
an ambitious ultimate goal, but even intermediate 
steps toward this goal could improve quality of life by 
restoring some lost motor function and improving the 
patient’s ability to carry out “activities of daily living.” 
For example, numerous people with tetraplegia could 
benefit from being able to feed themselves.
Communication BMIs are designed to provide 
a fast and accurate interface with a plethora of elec-
tronic devices. The ability to move a computer cursor 
around an on-screen keyboard allows a patient to type 
commands for computers, smart phones, voice syn-
thesizers, smart homes, and the “internet of things.” 
Ideally, communication BMIs would allow for a com-
munication rate at which most people speak or type. 
Such BMIs would benefit people with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS), who often become “locked in” 
and unable to communicate with the outside world 
through any movements. Communication BMIs would 
also benefit people with other neurodegenerative dis-
eases that severely compromise the quality of move-
ment and speech, as well as those with upper spinal 
cord injury. The ability to reliably type several words 
per minute is a meaningful improvement in quality of 
life for many patients.
Motor and communication BMIs build on basic 
neuroscientific research in voluntary movement 
(Chapter 34). The design and development of BMIs have 
so far depended on laboratory animal research, largely 
with nonhuman primates; recently, however, pilot clini-
cal trials with humans with paralysis have begun.
Visual
cortex
Injury
Decoding
algorithm
Neural
signals
Neuron 1
Neuron 2
Neuron 3
Computer
signals
Computer
interface
Prosthetic
arm
Paralyzed
arm
Functional
electrical
stimulation
Motor
cortex
Electrode
array
Retina


===== Page 9 =====
956    Part V / Movement
Pathological Neural Activity Can Be Regulated by 
Deep Brain Stimulation and Antiseizure BMIs
BMIs have been developed to help people with dis-
orders involving pathological neural activity in the 
brain, such as Parkinson disease and epilepsy. People 
with Parkinson disease benefit by having hand and 
arm tremor reduced. At present, there is no cure for 
Parkinson disease, and many people become resistant 
to pharmacological treatments. A deep brain stimula-
tor (DBS) can help these people by delivering electrical 
pulses to targeted areas in the brain to disrupt the aber-
rant neural activity.
DBS is controlled by a neurostimulator implanted 
in the chest, with wires to stimulating electrodes in 
deep brain nuclei (eg, the subthalamic nucleus). The 
nuclei are continuously stimulated with these elec-
trodes in order to alter the aberrant neural activity. 
This method can often greatly reduce Parkinson disease–
related tremor for years. A DBS applied to different 
brain areas can also help people with essential tremor, 
dystonia, chronic pain, major depression, and obsessive-
compulsive disorder.
Millions of people experiencing epileptic seizures 
are currently treated with antiseizure medications or 
neurosurgery, both of which often result in incomplete 
or impermanent seizure reduction. Antiseizure BMIs 
have shown considerable promise for further improv-
ing quality of life. These fully implanted BMIs operate 
by continuously monitoring neural activity in a brain 
region determined to be involved with seizures. They 
identify unusual activity that is predictive of seizure 
onset and then respond within milliseconds to disrupt 
this activity by electrically stimulating the same or a 
different brain region. This closed-loop response can 
be fast enough that seizure symptoms are not felt and 
seizures do not occur.
Replacement Part BMIs Can Restore Lost Brain 
Processing Capabilities
BMIs are capable of restoring more than lost sensory 
or motor capabilities. They are, in principle, capable of 
restoring internal brain processing. Of the four catego-
ries of BMIs, this is the most futuristic. An example is 
a “replacement part” BMI. The central idea is that if 
enough is known about the function of a brain region, 
and if this region is damaged by disease or injury, then 
it may be possible to replace this brain region.
Once the normal input activity to a brain region 
is measured (see next section), the function of the lost 
brain region could then be modeled in electronic hard-
ware and software, and the output from this substitute 
processing center would then be delivered to the next 
brain region as though no injury had occurred. This 
would involve, for example, reading out neural activ-
ity with electrodes, mimicking the brain region’s com-
putational functions with low-power microelectronic 
circuits, and then writing in electrical neural activity 
with stimulating electrodes.
This procedure might also be used to initiate and 
guide neural plasticity. A replacement part BMI that 
is currently being investigated focuses on restoring 
memory by replacing parts of the hippocampus that 
are damaged due to injury or disease. Another poten-
tial application would be to restore the lost functional-
ity of a brain region damaged by stroke.
These systems represent the natural evolution of 
the BMI concept, a so-called “platform technology” 
because a large number of systems can be envisioned 
by mixing and matching various write-in, computa-
tional, and read-out components. The number of neu-
rological diseases and injuries that BMIs should be able 
to help address ought to increase as our understanding 
of the functions of the nervous system and the sophis-
tication of the technology continue to grow.
Measuring and Modulating Neural Activity Rely on 
Advanced Neurotechnology
Measuring and modulating neural activity involves 
four broad areas of electronic technologies applied to 
the nervous system (so-called neurotechnology). The 
first area is the type of neural sensor; artificial neural 
sensors are designed with different levels of invasive-
ness and spatial resolution (Figure 39–2). Sensors that 
are external to the body, such as an electroencephalogram 
(EEG) cap, have been used extensively in recent dec-
ades. The EEG measures signals from many small metal 
disks (electrodes) applied to the surface of the scalp 
across the head. Each electrode detects average activ-
ity from a large number of neurons beneath it.
More recently, implantable electrode-array tech-
niques, such as subdural electrocorticography (ECoG) 
and finely spaced micro-ECoG electrodes, have been 
used. Since ECoG electrodes are on the surface of the 
brain and are thus much closer to neurons than EEG 
electrodes, ECoG has higher spatial and temporal reso-
lution and thus provides more information with which 
to control BMIs.
Most recently, arrays of penetrating intracortical 
electrodes, which we focus on in this chapter, have been 
used. The intracortical electrode arrays are made of sil-
icon or other materials and coated with biocompatible 
materials. The arrays are implanted on the surface of 
the brain, with the electrode tips penetrating 1 to 2 mm 


