===== Page 1 =====
is very wide, from motor disturbances to epilepsy, schizophrenia, 
mood imbalances, cognitive disorders, neurodegeneration, and even 
aging. The more we learn, the more it becomes apparent that these 
diseases exert very broad effects that blur the boundaries between 
their classifications. So-called movement disorders such as Parkinson 
disease, for example, involve cognitive and affective changes; dis-
orders of cognition such as autism or schizophrenia can have very 
physical manifestations. 
Despite these somewhat fuzzy boundaries, each chapter in this sec-
tion will examine the principles underlying each major class of disease 
from the perspective of neuroscience. The emphasis here is on molecu-
lar mechanisms, so far as they are currently understood. It is perhaps 
surprising that so many different disease conditions seem to converge 
on one physiological point: synaptic function. In autism and several 
psychiatric disorders, synaptic development goes awry; in epilepsy, 
abnormal ion channel activity disturbs the balance of synaptic input 
from excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Aging and neurodegenerative 
disorders bring about synaptic loss through gradual alterations in pro-
tein and RNA homeostasis that tax normal cellular functions.
This observation is offered to help give shape to the material you 
are about to encounter, but should not be used to oversimplify. Any-
one tempted by reductionism would do well to engage with the works 
of great artists such as Dostoevsky and Van Gogh, who represent the 
complexities of human experience in all its anguish and glory. 
Part Editor: Huda Y. Zoghbi 
Part IX
Chapter 57	
Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit
Chapter 58	
Seizures and Epilepsy
Chapter 59	
Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental 
Processes
Chapter 60	
Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia
Chapter 61	
Disorders of Mood and Anxiety
Chapter 62	
Disorders Affecting Social Cognition: Autism 
Spectrum Disorder
Chapter 63	
Genetic Mechanisms in Neurodegenerative Diseases 
of the Nervous System
Chapter 64	
The Aging Brain


===== Page 2 =====
57
Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit
… to move things is all that mankind can do, for such the 
sole executant is muscle, whether in whispering a syllable 
or in felling a forest.
Charles Sherrington, 1924
A
 major task of the elaborate  information 
processing that takes place in the brain is the 
contraction of skeletal muscles. The challenge 
of deciding when and how to move is, to a large degree, 
the driving force behind the evolution of the nervous 
system (Chapter 30).
In all but the most primitive animals, movement is 
generated by specialized muscle cells. There are three 
general types of muscles: Smooth muscle is used pri-
marily for internal actions such as peristalsis and con-
trol of blood flow; cardiac muscle is used exclusively 
for pumping blood; and skeletal muscle is used pri-
marily for moving bones. In this chapter, we examine 
a variety of neurological disorders in mammals that 
affect movement by altering either action potential 
conduction in a motor nerve, synaptic transmission 
from nerve to muscle, or muscle contraction itself.
In 1925, Charles Sherrington introduced the term 
motor unit to designate the basic unit of motor function—
a motor neuron and the group of muscle fibers it 
innervates (Chapter 31). The number of muscle fibers 
innervated by a single motor neuron varies widely 
throughout the body depending on the dexterity of the 
movements being controlled and the mass of the body 
part to be moved. Thus, eye movements are finely 
controlled by motor units with fewer than 100 muscle 
Disorders of the Peripheral Nerve, Neuromuscular Junction, 
and Muscle Can Be Distinguished Clinically
A Variety of Diseases Target Motor Neurons and  
Peripheral Nerves
Motor Neuron Diseases Do Not Affect Sensory Neurons 
(Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis)
Diseases of Peripheral Nerves Affect Conduction of the 
Action Potential
The Molecular Basis of Some Inherited Peripheral 
Neuropathies Has Been Defined
Disorders of Synaptic Transmission at the Neuromuscular 
Junction Have Multiple Causes
Myasthenia Gravis Is the Best-Studied Example of a 
Neuromuscular Junction Disease
Treatment of Myasthenia Is Based on the  
Physiological Effects and Autoimmune Pathogenesis  
of the Disease
There Are Two Distinct Congenital Forms of  
Myasthenia Gravis
Lambert-Eaton Syndrome and Botulism Also Alter 
Neuromuscular Transmission
Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Can Be Inherited  
or Acquired
Dermatomyositis Exemplifies Acquired Myopathy
Muscular Dystrophies Are the Most Common Inherited 
Myopathies
Some Inherited Diseases of Skeletal Muscle Arise From 
Genetic Defects in Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
Highlights


===== Page 3 =====
1422    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–1  The four types of motor 
unit disorders. Motor unit disorders 
are categorized according to the part 
of the motor unit that is affected. 
Motor neuron diseases affect the cell 
body of the neuron, while peripheral 
neuropathies target the axon. Dis-
eases of the neuromuscular junction 
affect the functioning of the synapse, 
and myopathies affect muscle fibers.
fibers, whereas in the leg, a single motor unit contains 
up to 1,000 muscle fibers. In each case, all the muscles 
innervated by a motor unit are of the same type. More-
over, motor units are recruited in a fixed order for both 
voluntary and reflex movements. The smallest motor 
units are the first to be recruited, joined later by larger 
units as muscle force increases.
The motor unit is a common target of disease. The 
distinguishing features of diseases of the motor unit 
vary depending on which functional component is 
primarily affected: (1) the cell body of the motor or 
sensory neuron, (2) the corresponding axons, (3) the 
neuromuscular junction (the synapse between the 
motor axon and muscle), or (4) the muscle fibers inner-
vated by the motor neuron. Accordingly, disorders of 
the motor unit have traditionally been grouped into 
motor neuron diseases, peripheral neuropathies, dis-
orders of the neuromuscular junction, and primary 
muscle diseases (myopathies) (Figure 57–1).
Patients with peripheral neuropathies experience 
weakness that arises from abnormal function of motor 
neurons or their axons, although problems with sensa-
tion can also occur since most peripheral neuropathies 
also involve sensory neurons. By contrast, in motor 
neuron diseases, the motor neurons and motor tracts 
in the spinal cord degenerate but sensory nerves are 
spared. In myopathies, weakness is caused by degen-
eration of the muscles with little or no change in motor 
neurons. In neuromuscular junction diseases, altera-
tions in the neuromuscular synapse lead to weakness 
Primary muscle 
diseases
(myopathies)
Diseases of the 
neuromuscular 
junction
Motor neuron 
diseases
(cell body)
Peripheral 
neuropathies
(axon and myelin)
that may be intermittent. Clinical and laboratory stud-
ies usually distinguish disorders of peripheral nerves 
from those of the neuromuscular junction or muscle 
(Table 57–1).
Disorders of the Peripheral Nerve, 
Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscle  
Can Be Distinguished Clinically
When a peripheral nerve is cut, the muscles innervated 
by that nerve immediately become paralyzed and then 
waste progressively. Because the nerve carries sensory 
as well as motor fibers, sensation in the area innervated 
by the nerve is also lost and tendon reflexes are lost 
immediately. The term atrophy (literally, lack of nour-
ishment) refers to the wasting away of a once-normal 
muscle; because of historical usage the term appears in 
the names of several diseases that are now regarded as 
neurogenic.
The main symptoms of the myopathies are due to 
weakness of skeletal muscle and often include dif-
ficulty in walking or lifting. Other less common 
symptoms include inability of the muscle to relax 
(myotonia), cramps, pain (myalgia), or the appearance 
in the urine of the heme-containing protein that gives 
muscle its red color (myoglobinuria). The muscular 
dystrophies are myopathies with special characteristics: 
The diseases are inherited, all symptoms are caused by 
weakness, the weakness becomes progressively more 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1423
Table 57–1  Differential Diagnosis of Disorders of the Motor Unit
Finding
Nerve
Neuromuscular junction
Muscle
Clinical
 
 
 
  Weakness
++
+
++
  Wasting
++
−
+
  Fasciculations
+
−
−
  Cramps
+
−
+/−
  Sensory loss
+/−
−
−
  Hyperreflexia, Babinski
+ (ALS)
−
−
Laboratory
 
 
 
  Elevated serum CPK
−
−
++
  Elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein
+/−
−
−
  Slowed nerve conduction
+
−
−
  Response to repetitive stimulation
Normal
Decremental (MG)
Normal
 
 
Incremental (LEMS)
 
Electromyography
 
 
 
  Fibrillation, fasciculation
++
−
+/−
  Duration of potentials
Increased
Normal
Decreased
  Amplitude of potentials
Increased
Normal
Decreased
Muscle Biopsy
 
 
 
  Isolated fiber atrophy
++
Normal
+/−
  Grouped fiber atrophy
++
Normal
Normal
  Muscle necrosis
Normal
Normal
++
ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; CPK, creatine phosphokinase; LEMS, Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome; MG, myasthenia gravis.
severe, and signs of degeneration and regeneration are 
seen histologically.
Distinguishing neurogenic and myopathic dis-
eases may be difficult because both are characterized 
by weakness of muscle. As a first approximation, 
weakness of the distal limbs most often indicates a 
neurogenic disorder, whereas proximal limb weakness 
signals a myopathy. The main clinical and laboratory 
features used for the differential diagnosis of diseases 
of the motor unit are listed in Table 57–1.
One test that is very helpful is needle electromyo-
graphy (EMG), a clinical procedure in which a small 
needle is inserted into a muscle to record extracellularly 
the electrical activity of several neighboring motor units. 
Three specific measurements are important: spontane-
ous activity at rest, the number of motor units under vol-
untary control, and the duration and amplitude of action 
potentials in each motor unit. (Normal ranges of values 
have been established for the amplitude and duration of 
motor unit potentials; the amplitude is determined by 
the number of muscle fibers within the motor unit.)
In normal muscle, there is usually no activity 
outside the end-plate in the muscle at rest. During 
a weak voluntary contraction, a series of motor unit 
potentials is recorded as different motor units become 
recruited. In fully active normal muscles, these abun-
dant potentials overlap in an interference pattern so 
that it is impossible to identify single potentials 
(Figure 57–2A).
In neurogenic disease, the partially denervated 
muscle is spontaneously active even at rest. The mus-
cle may still contract in response to voluntary motor 
commands, but the number of motor units under vol-
untary control is smaller than normal because some 
motor axons have been lost. The loss of motor units 
is evident in the EMG during a maximal contraction, 
which shows a pattern of discrete motor unit potentials 
instead of the profuse interference pattern for normal 
muscles (Figure 57–2B). In recently denervated muscle, 
the EMG may also show spontaneous low-amplitude 
electrical potentials that correspond to the firing of a 
single muscle fiber, known as fibrillation potentials. 
As the neurogenic disease progresses, the amplitude 
and duration of individual motor unit potentials may 
increase because the remaining axons give off small 
branches that innervate the muscle fibers denervated 


===== Page 5 =====
1424    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–2  Electrical recording from skeletal muscle 
reveals different profiles in neuropathies and primary  
muscle diseases.
A. Typical activity in a normal muscle. The muscle fibers 
innervated by a single motor neuron are usually not adjacent 
to one another. When a motor unit potential is recorded by a 
needle electrode inserted into the muscle, the highly effective 
transmission at the neuromuscular junction ensures that each 
muscle fiber innervated by the same neuron will generate an 
action potential and contract in response to an action potential 
in the motor neuron. In the normal, resting muscle, there is no 
electrical activity recorded from muscle in the electromyogram 
(EMG). Slight activation of the muscle by a voluntary move-
ment reveals characteristic extracellular electrical responses 
in muscle (motor unit potentials (MUPs)). Maximal muscle 
contraction produces a characteristic complex burst of electrical 
activity from muscle (the interference pattern).
B. When motor neurons are diseased, the number of motor 
units under voluntary control is reduced. The muscle fibers 
supplied by the degenerating motor neuron (cell A) become 
denervated and atrophic. However, the surviving neuron  
(cell B) sprouts axonal branches that reinnervate some of the 
denervated muscle fibers. Axons of the surviving motor neuron 
fire spontaneously even at rest, giving rise to fasciculations, 
another characteristic of motor neuron disease. Single dener-
vated fibers also fire spontaneously, producing fibrillations (top 
trace). With loss of nerve input from motor neuron A and reinner-
vation of the denervated fibers by motor neuron B, activation of 
motor neuron B produces an enlarged MUP (giant motor unit). In 
this setting, there is simplification of the interference pattern.
C. When muscle is diseased (myopathy), the number of muscle 
fibers in each motor unit is reduced. Some muscle fibers inner-
vated by the two motor neurons shrink and become nonfunc-
tional. In the electromyogram, the motor unit potentials do not 
decrease in number but are smaller and of longer duration than 
normal and are polyphasic. Affected single muscle fibers some-
times contract spontaneously, producing fibrillation. When mus-
cle is mildly activated, the MUPs show reduced amplitudes. 
After maximal muscle contraction, the interference pattern also 
shows a reduction in amplitude.
A
B
A
B
A  Normal muscle
B  Denervated muscle
C  Myopathy
Rest
Giant unit
Small polyphasic units
Fibrillation
Fibrillation
Reduced interference pattern
Full interference pattern
Slight
contraction
Maximal
contraction
1 mV
1 mV
5 mV
500 µV
500 µV
100 µV
A
B
Needle 
electrode
Motor
neurons
by the loss of other axons. Accordingly, surviving 
motor units contain more than the normal number of  
muscle fibers.
In myopathic diseases, there is no activity in the 
muscle at rest and no change in the number of motor 
units firing during a contraction. But because there are 
fewer surviving muscle fibers in each motor unit, the 
motor unit potentials are of longer duration and more 
complex, with alternating +/- polarity (polyphasic), 
and are smaller in amplitude (Figure 57–2C).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1425
Figure 57–3  Motor nerve conduction velocity can be deter-
mined by recording the compound muscle action potential 
(CMAP) in response to electrical stimulation at different 
points along the nerve.
A. A shock is applied through a proximal surface stimulating 
electrode (S2) or through a distal stimulating electrode (S1), 
and the extracellular CMAP in the thumb is measured trans-
cutaneously by the recording electrode. The time it takes the 
action potential to propagate from S2 to the muscle (tS2) is the 
proximal latency; the time from S1 to the muscle (tS1) is the dis-
tal latency. The distance between S1 and S2 divided by (tS2 – tS1) 
gives the conduction velocity.
B. The waveforms of the thumb CMAPs elicited by stimula-
tion of the motor nerve at the wrist (1), just below the elbow 
(2), and just above the elbow (3). In normal subjects (left), the 
waveforms are the same regardless of the site of stimulation. 
They are distinguished only by the longer time period required 
for the waveform to develop as the site of the stimulus is 
moved up the arm (away from the recording site). When the 
motor nerve is demyelinated between S1 and S2  but above 
the wrist, the CMAP is normal when stimulation occurs at the 
wrist (1) but delayed and desynchronized when stimulation is 
proximal to the nerve lesion (2, 3). (Adapted, with permission, 
from Bromberg 2002.)
Recording
electrode
Distal
stimulating
electrode (S1)
Proximal
stimulating
electrode (S2)
S2–S1 time
Recording of
distal latency
Recording 
of proximal 
latency
Stimulus
Normal
Demyelinated
A
B
1
2
3
1
2
3
0
10
20
20
0
10
30
40
50
5 mV
The conduction velocities of peripheral motor axons 
can also be measured through electrical stimulation and 
recording (see Figure 57–3). The conduction velocity of 
motor axons is slowed in demyelinating neuropathies 
but is normal in neuropathies without demyelination 
(axonal neuropathies).
Another test that helps to distinguish myopathic 
from neurogenic diseases is the measurement of 
serum enzyme activities. The sarcoplasm of muscle 
is rich in soluble enzymes that are normally found 
in low concentrations in the serum. In many mus-
cle diseases, the concentration of these sarcoplasmic 
enzymes in serum is elevated, presumably because 
the diseases affect the integrity of surface membranes 
of the muscle, allowing the enzymes to leak into the 
bloodstream. The enzyme activity most commonly 
used for diagnosing myopathy is creatine kinase, an 
enzyme that phosphorylates creatine and is impor-
tant in the energy metabolism of muscle.
Muscle histochemical appearance in a biopsy can 
also provide a useful diagnostic tool. Human mus-
cle fibers are identified by histochemical reactions as 
type I or type II, which respectively are either aerobic 
(enriched for oxidative enzymes) or anaerobic (abun-
dant glycolytic enzymes) (Chapter 31). All muscle 
fibers innervated by a single motor neuron are of the 
same histochemical type. However, the muscle fibers 
of one motor unit are normally interspersed among the 
muscle fibers of other motor units. In a cross section 
of healthy muscle, enzyme stains show that oxidative 
or glycolytic fibers are intermixed in a “checkerboard” 
pattern.


===== Page 7 =====
1426    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
In chronic neurogenic diseases, the muscle inner-
vated by a dying motor neuron becomes atrophic and 
some muscle fibers disappear. Axons of surviving 
neurons tend to sprout and reinnervate some of the 
adjacent remaining muscle fibers. Because the motor 
neuron determines the biochemical and thus histo-
chemical properties of a muscle fiber, the reinnervated 
muscle fibers assume the histochemical properties of 
the innervating neuron. As a result, the fibers of a muscle 
in neurogenic disease become clustered by type (a pat-
tern called fiber-type grouping).
If the disease is progressive and the neurons in the 
surviving motor units also become affected, atrophy 
occurs in groups of adjacent muscle fibers belonging 
to the same histochemical type, a process called group 
atrophy. In contrast, in myopathic diseases, the muscle 
fibers are affected in a more or less random fashion. 
Sometimes an inflammatory cellular response is evi-
dent, and sometimes there is prominent infiltration of 
the muscle by fat and connective tissue.
Fasciculations—visible twitches of muscle that 
can be seen as flickers under the skin—are often signs 
of neurogenic diseases. They result from involuntary 
but synchronous contractions of all muscle fibers in a 
motor unit. Fibrillations—spontaneous contractions 
within single muscle fibers—can also be signs of ongo-
ing denervation of muscle. Fibrillations are not vis-
ible but can be recorded with an EMG. The electrical 
record of a fibrillation is a low-amplitude potential that 
reflects electrical activity in a single muscle cell. Elec-
trophysiological studies suggest that fasciculations 
arise in the motor nerve terminal.
In diagnosing motor neuron disorders, clinicians 
have historically distinguished between so-called lower 
motor neurons and premotor neurons. Lower motor 
neurons are motor neurons of the spinal cord and brain 
stem that directly innervate skeletal muscles. Premotor 
neurons, also known as “upper” motor neurons, origi-
nate in the motor cortex and issue commands for move-
ments to the lower motor neurons through their axons 
in the corticospinal (pyramidal) tract.
Diseases of upper motor neurons can be distin-
guished from those affecting lower motor neurons by 
distinct sets of symptoms. Disorders of lower motor 
neurons cause atrophy, fasciculations, decreased mus-
cle tone, and loss of tendon reflexes, whereas disorders 
of upper motor neurons and their axons result in spas-
ticity, overactive tendon reflexes, and abnormal plan-
tar extensor reflex (the Babinski sign).
The primary symptom of disorders of the neuro-
muscular junction is weakness; in some neuromuscu-
lar junction diseases, this weakness is quite variable 
even over the course of a single day.
A Variety of Diseases Target Motor Neurons 
and Peripheral Nerves
Motor Neuron Diseases Do Not Affect Sensory 
Neurons (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis)
The best-known disorder of motor neurons is amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; Lou Gehrig disease). 
“Amyotrophy” is another term for neurogenic atro-
phy of muscle; “lateral sclerosis” refers to the hardness 
felt when the pathologist examines the spinal cord at 
autopsy. This hardness results from the proliferation 
of astrocytes and scarring of the lateral columns of the 
spinal cord due to degeneration of the corticospinal 
tracts.
The symptoms of ALS usually start with painless 
weakness in a single arm or leg. Typically, the patient, 
often a man in his 40s or 50s, discovers that he has 
trouble in executing fine movements of the hands—
typing, playing the piano, playing baseball, fingering 
coins, or working with tools. This focal weakness then 
spreads over 3 or 4 years to involve all four limbs, as 
well as the muscles of chewing, speaking, swallowing, 
and breathing.
Most cases of ALS involve both the upper and the 
lower motor neurons. Some motor neurons are spared, 
notably those supplying ocular muscles and those 
involved in voluntary control of bladder sphincters. The 
typical weakness of the hand is associated with wasting 
of the small muscles of the hands and feet and fascicu-
lations of the muscles of the forearm and upper arm. 
These signs of lower motor neuron disease are often 
associated with hyperreflexia, an over-responsiveness 
in tendon reflexes characteristic of corticospinal upper 
motor neuron disease. The cause of most cases (90%) of 
ALS is not known; the disease is progressive and ulti-
mately affects the muscles of respiration. There is no 
effective treatment for this fatal condition.
About 10% of cases are inherited in a dominant 
manner (Table 57–2). In North America, greater than 
25% of inherited cases arise from mutations in the gene 
C9orf72. The offending genetic defect is an expansion 
in an intronic hexanucleotide repeat, from 30 or fewer in 
normal individuals to hundreds or even thousands 
in affected individuals. Besides giving rise to conven-
tional ALS, mutations in C9orf72 can also cause fronto-
temporal dementia. The toxicity of the mutant C9orf72 
protein probably reflects both a reduction in total 
activity of the mutant protein and toxic effects of the 
intronic expansion. For example, the expanded intronic 
segments produce intranuclear deposits of RNA that 
likely sequester and inactivate important nuclear pro-
teins. In addition, the expanded RNA is translated to 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1427
Table 57–2  Selected Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Genes
Gene 
Protein 
Protein function 
Mutations 
Proportion of ALS
Familial
Sporadic
SOD1
Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase
Superoxide dismutase
>150
20%
2%
DCTN1
Dynactin subunit 1
Component of dynein motor 
complex
10
1%
<1%
ANG
Angiogenin
Ribonuclease
>10
<1%
<1%
TARDBP
TDP-43
RNA-binding protein
>40
5%
<1%
FUS
FUS
RNA-binding protein
>40
5%
<1%
VCP
Transitional endoplasmic  
reticulum ATPase
Ubiquitin segregase
5
1–2%
<1%
OPTN
Optineurin
Autophagy adaptor
1
4%
<1%
C9orf72
C9orf72
Possible guanine nucleotide 
exchange factor
Intronic 
GGGGCC
25%
10%
UBQLN2
Ubiquilin 2
Autophagy adaptor
5
<1%
<1%
SQSTM1
Sequestosome 1
Autophagy adaptor
10
<1%
?
FFN1
Profilin-1
Actin-binding protein
5
<1%
<1%
HNRNPA1
hnRNP A1
RNA-binding protein
3
<1%
<1%
MATR3
Matrin 3
RNA-binding protein
4
<1%
<1%
TUBA4A
Tubulin α-4A chain
Microtubule subunit
7
<1%
<1%
CHCHD10
Coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix 
domain-containing protein 10
Mitochondrial protein of 
unknown function
2
<1%
<1%
TBK1
Serine/threonine-protein kinase 
TBK1
Regulates autophagy and 
inflammation
10
1%
<1%
Source: Modified from Taylor, Brown, and Cleveland 2016.
produce peptides composed of repeated couplets of 
amino acids, such as poly-(glycine-proline) or poly-
(proline-arginine); some of these are neurotoxic.
Two other genes commonly mutated in ALS are 
SOD1 and TDP43. SOD1 encodes the protein copper/
zinc cytosolic superoxide dismutase, whereas TDP43 
encodes a 43-kD, RNA-interacting protein that is nor-
mally intranuclear but is mislocalized to the cytosol 
in most cases of ALS (both inherited and sporadic). 
Mutations in SOD1 and several other ALS genes (eg, 
ubiquilin-2) destabilize the conformation of the protein 
product, promoting misfolding and causing adverse 
consequences to diverse subcellular processes and com-
partments. By contrast, mutations in TDP43 and a few 
other ALS genes (eg, FUS) encoding RNA binding pro-
teins act at the RNA level, impairing RNA homeostasis 
and perturbing critical processes such as surveillance 
of gene splicing. Infrequently, familial ALS is caused 
by mutations in genes encoding cytoskeletal proteins 
such as profilin-1, dynactin, or tubulin-A4.
Many studies suggest that mutant ALS-associated 
proteins tend to aggregate, particularly in membrane-
less organelles called stress granules that form in condi-
tions of cellular distress. Several lines of investigation 
support the view that aggregates migrate and trans-
mit pathology between adjacent cells, accounting for 
spread of the disease to different brain regions. Strik-
ingly, mice that express high levels of defective SOD1 
or profilin-1 proteins develop a lethal, adult-onset 
form of motor neuron disease, but mice expressing 
equivalently high levels of normal SOD1 or profilin-1 
proteins do not. These findings are consistent with the 
concept that the defective protein has gained some sort 
of toxic function.


===== Page 9 =====
1428    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
In the past 10 years, it has also become clear that 
motor neuron pathophysiology is modulated by the 
reactions of nonneural cells to degeneration in the motor 
neuron. Thus, in most cases of ALS, there are varying 
degrees of proliferation and activation of microglia, 
astrocytes, and some populations of lymphocytes, which 
may begin as compensatory responses but can eventu-
ally adversely affect the injured motor neurons. Genetic 
studies have underscored the importance of non–cell-
autonomous factors, such as variants that reduce func-
tion of the microglial gene TREM-2 and enhance the risk 
of developing not only ALS but also other neurodegen-
erative disorders (eg, Alzheimer disease).
Progressive bulbar palsy is a type of motor neuron 
disease in which damage is restricted to muscles inner-
vated by cranial nerves, causing dysarthria (difficulty 
speaking) and dysphagia (difficulty swallowing). (The 
term “bulb” is used interchangeably with “pons,” the 
structure at the base of the brain where motor neurons 
that innervate the face and swallowing muscles reside, 
and “palsy” means weakness). If only lower motor 
neurons are involved, the syndrome is called progres-
sive spinal muscular atrophy.
Progressive spinal muscular atrophy is actually a 
developmental motor neuron disorder characterized 
by weakness, wasting, loss of reflexes, and fascicula-
tions. Most cases arise in infancy and are caused by 
recessively inherited mutations in the gene encoding 
a protein called survival motor neuron (SMN). Sur-
vival in these cases is very short, although there are 
rare cases that begin in late childhood or even early 
adulthood and are associated with longer survival of 
many years. The SMN protein is implicated in traffick-
ing RNA in and out of the nucleus and in the forma-
tion of complexes that are important in RNA splicing. 
The SMN locus on chromosome 5 in humans has two 
almost identical copies of the SMN gene: SMN1 pro-
duces a full-length SMN protein, while alternative 
splicing of SMN2 causes omission of the seventh exon 
in the gene, leading to expression of a small amount 
of full-length SMN and a shortened SMN. The clinical 
effect of the loss of full-length SMN from mutations at 
the main locus can be mitigated to some degree by the 
shortened SMN protein expressed by the SMN2 gene 
(Figure 57–4A,B).
Two treatment strategies have achieved extraordi-
nary benefits in spinal muscular atrophy. In one, small 
strings of approximately 20 nucleic acids (antisense 
oligonucleotides [ASO]s) are administered to alter 
splicing of the SMN2 gene so that it produces higher 
levels of the full-length SMN protein (Figure 57-4A). 
This occurs because the ASO is targeted to bind to the 
SMN2 RNA and inhibit the action of the RNA binding 
protein hnRNPA1/A2 that normally leads the splic-
ing machinery to skip exon 7. By blocking the binding 
of hnRNPA1/A2, the ASO blocks the inhibitory effect  
of hnRNPA1/A2 on splicing, promoting expression of 
full-length SMN protein (Figure 57–4B). It seems likely 
that ASOs will become powerful therapeutic tools with 
many applications. In this example, ASO is used to pro-
mote exon inclusion; as noted below in the discussion 
on muscle dystrophy, ASO can also be used to promote 
exon skipping. It can also be used in other paradigms 
to inhibit or enhance levels of target gene expression.
The second approach to treating spinal muscular 
atrophy has been to deliver the missing SMN gene to spi-
nal motor neurons and muscle using high doses of intra-
venously infused adeno-associated virus carrying the 
SMN1 gene. This, too, dramatically augments survival in 
infantile spinal muscular atrophy (Figure 57–4B).
ALS and its variants are restricted to motor neu-
rons; they do not affect sensory neurons or autonomic 
neurons. The acute viral disease poliomyelitis is also 
confined to motor neurons. These diseases illustrate 
the individuality of nerve cells and the principle of 
selective vulnerability. The basis of this selectivity is, 
in general, not understood.
Diseases of Peripheral Nerves Affect Conduction of 
the Action Potential
Diseases of peripheral nerves may affect either axons 
or myelin. Because motor and sensory axons are bun-
dled together in the same peripheral nerves, disorders 
of peripheral nerves usually affect both motor and 
sensory functions. Some patients with peripheral neu-
ropathy report abnormal, frequently unpleasant, sen-
sory experiences such as numbness, pins-and-needles 
prickling, or tingling. When these sensations occur 
spontaneously without an external sensory stimulus, 
they are called paresthesias.
Patients with paresthesias usually have impaired 
perception of cutaneous sensations (pain and temper-
ature), often because the small fibers that carry these 
sensations are selectively affected. This is not always 
the case, however. Proprioceptive sensations (position 
and vibration) can be lost without loss of cutaneous 
sensation. Lack of pain perception may lead to inju-
ries. The sensory deficits are more prominent distally 
(called a glove-and-stocking pattern), likely because 
the distal portions of the nerves are most remote from 
the cell body and therefore most susceptible to disor-
ders that interfere with axonal transport of essential 
metabolites and proteins.
Peripheral neuropathy is first manifested by weak-
ness that is usually distal. Tendon reflexes are usually 


