===== Page 1 =====
476    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–4  Signals from nociceptors in the viscera can be 
felt as “referred pain” elsewhere in the body.
A. Myocardial infarction and angina can be experienced as deep 
referred pain in the chest and left arm. The source of the pain 
cannot be readily predicted from the site of referred pain.
B. Convergence of visceral and somatic afferent fibers may 
account for referred pain. Nociceptive afferent fibers from 
the viscera and fibers from specific areas of the skin  
converge on the same projection neurons in the dorsal horn. 
The brain has no way of knowing the actual site of the  
noxious stimulus and mistakenly associates a signal from  
a visceral organ with an area of skin. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Fields 1987.)
Skin in
which pain
is perceived
B
A
Intestine:
site of injury
Anterolateral
column axon
nerves. Its interaction with neurokinin receptors on 
dorsal horn neurons elicits slow excitatory postsynap-
tic potentials that prolong the depolarization elicited 
by glutamate. Although the physiological actions of 
glutamate and neuropeptides on dorsal horn neurons 
are different, these transmitters act coordinately to reg-
ulate the firing properties of dorsal horn neurons.
Details of the interaction of neuropeptides with 
their receptors on dorsal horn neurons have suggested 
strategies for chronic pain regulation. Infusion of sub-
stance P coupled to a neurotoxin into the dorsal horn 
of experimental animals results in selective destruction 
of neurons that express neurokinin receptors. Animals 
treated in this way fail to develop the central sensitization 
that is normally associated with peripheral injury. This 
method of neuronal ablation is more selective than 
traditional surgical interventions such as partial spi-
nal cord transection (anterolateral cordotomy) and is 
being considered as a treatment for patients suffering 
from otherwise intractable chronic pain.
Hyperalgesia Has Both Peripheral and  
Central Origins
Up to this point, we have considered the conveyance of 
noxious signals in the normal physiological state. But 
the normal process of sensory signaling can be dra-
matically altered when peripheral tissue is damaged, 
resulting in an increase in pain sensitivity or hyper-
algesia. This condition can be elicited by sensitizing 
peripheral nociceptors through repetitive exposure to 
noxious stimuli (Figure 20–7).
The sensitization is triggered by a complex mix of 
chemicals released from damaged cells that accumulate 
at the site of tissue injury. This cocktail contains pep-
tides and proteins such as bradykinin, substance P, and 
nerve growth factor, as well as molecules such as ATP, 
histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, 
and acetylcholine. Many of these chemical mediators 
are released from distinct cell types, but together they 
act to decrease the threshold of nociceptor activation.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    477
Figure 20–5  Neuropeptides and their receptors in the 
superficial dorsal horn of the rat spinal cord. (Images repro-
duced, with permission, from A. Basbaum.)
A. The terminals of unmyelinated primary sensory neurons are 
a major source of substance P in the superficial dorsal horn. 
Substance P activates the neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor, which is 
expressed by neurons in the superficial dorsal horn, the major-
ity of which are projection neurons.
B. Enkephalin is localized in interneurons and found in the same 
region of the dorsal horn as terminals containing substance P.  
The μ-opioid receptor, which is targeted by enkephalins, is 
expressed by neurons in the superficial dorsal horn and also, 
presynaptically, on the terminals of sensory neurons.
A  Substance P
µ-opioid receptor
B  Enkephalin
NK-1 receptor


===== Page 3 =====
478    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–6  Transmitter storage in the synaptic terminals of 
primary nociceptive neurons in the dorsal spinal cord.
A.  The terminal of a C fiber on the dendrite (D) of a dorsal horn 
neuron has two classes of synaptic vesicles that contain differ-
ent transmitters. Small electron-lucent vesicles contain gluta-
mate, whereas large dense-cored vesicles store neuropeptides. 
(Image reproduced, with permission, from H. J. Ralston III.)
B. Glutamate and the peptide substance P (marked by large 
and small gold particles, respectively) are scattered in the axo-
plasm of a sensory neuron terminal in lamina II of the dorsal 
horn. Dense core vesicles also store calcitonin gene–related 
peptide (CGRP). (Reproduced, with permission, from De Biasi 
and Rustioni 1990.)
D
A
B
Glutamate
Substance P
D
D
D
Small clear vesicles 
contain glutamate
Large dense vesicles 
contain substance P
Dendrite
C ﬁber 
terminal
Where do these chemicals come from, and what 
exactly do they do? Histamine is released from mast 
cells after tissue injury and activates polymodal noci-
ceptors. The lipid anandamide, an endogenous can-
nabinoid agonist, is released under conditions of 
inflammation, activates the TRPV1 channel, and may 
trigger pain associated with inflammation. ATP, ace-
tylcholine, and serotonin are released from damaged 
endothelial cells and platelets; they act indirectly to 
sensitize nociceptors by triggering the release of chem-
ical agents such as prostaglandins and bradykinin 
from peripheral cells.
Bradykinin is one of the most active pain-producing 
agents. Its potency stems in part from the fact that it 
directly activates Aδ and C nociceptors and increases 
the synthesis and release of prostaglandins from 
nearby cells. Prostaglandins are metabolites of ara-
chidonic acid that are generated through the activity 
of cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes that cleave arachi-
donic acid (Chapter 14). The COX-2 enzyme is pref-
erentially induced under conditions of peripheral 
inflammation, contributing to enhanced pain sensitiv-
ity. The enzymatic pathways of prostaglandin synthesis 
are targets of commonly used analgesic drugs. Aspirin 
and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics, 
such as ibuprofen and naproxen, are effective in con-
trolling pain because they block the activity of the COX 
enzymes, reducing prostaglandin synthesis.
Activity of peripheral nociceptors can also produce 
all of the cardinal signs of inflammation, including heat 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    479
(calor), redness (rubor), and swelling (tumor). Heat 
and redness result from the dilation of peripheral blood 
vessels, whereas swelling results from plasma extrava-
sation, a process in which proteins, cells, and fluids are 
able to penetrate postcapillary venules. Release of the 
neuropeptides substance P and CGRP from the periph-
eral terminals of C fibers provokes plasma extravasa-
tion and vasodilation, respectively. Because this form 
of inflammation depends on neural activity, it has been 
termed neurogenic inflammation (Figure 20–8). Impor-
tantly, as profound peripheral vasodilation is a critical 
trigger of many migraine headaches, the development 
of antibodies to CGRP, which counteract the vasodila-
tion by scavenging CGRP, offers significant hope for a 
new migraine therapy.
The release of substance P and CGRP from the 
peripheral terminals of sensory neurons is also respon-
sible for the axon reflex, a physiological process charac-
terized by vasodilation in the vicinity of a cutaneous 
injury. Pharmacological antagonists of substance P are 
able to block neurogenic inflammation and vasodila-
tion in humans; this discovery illustrates how knowl-
edge of nociceptive mechanisms can be applied in 
improving clinical therapies for pain.
In addition to these small molecules and peptides, 
neurotrophins are causative agents in pain. Nerve 
growth factor (NGF) and brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) are particularly active in inflammatory 
pain states. The synthesis of BDNF is upregulated in 
many inflamed peripheral tissues (Figure 20–9). NGF-
neutralizing molecules are effective analgesic agents 
in animal models of persistent pain. Indeed, inhibition 
of NGF function and signaling blocks pain sensation 
as effectively as COX inhibitors and opiates. Several 
promising clinical trials using antibodies to NGF for 
the management of knee osteoarthritis have been 
reported, once again demonstrating the translation of 
basic science to the clinic.
What accounts for the enhanced sensitivity of dor-
sal horn neurons to nociceptor signals? Under condi-
tions of persistent injury, C fibers fire repetitively and the 
response of dorsal horn neurons increases progressively 
(Figure 20–10A). The gradual enhancement in the excit-
ability of dorsal horn neurons has been termed “win-
dup” and is thought to involve N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA)-type glutamate receptors (Figure 20–10B).
Repeated exposure to noxious stimuli therefore 
results in long-term changes in the response of dorsal 
horn neurons through mechanisms that are similar to 
those underlying the long-term potentiation of synap-
tic responses in many circuits in the brain. In essence, 
these prolonged changes in the excitability of dorsal 
horn neurons constitute a “memory” of the state of 
C-fiber input. This phenomenon has been termed 
central sensitization to distinguish it from sensitization 
at the peripheral terminals of the dorsal horn neurons, 
a process that involves activation of the enzymatic 
pathways of prostaglandin synthesis.
Figure 20–7  Hyperalgesia results from sensitization of noci-
ceptors. (Reproduced, with permission, from Raja, Campbell, 
and Meyer 1984. Copyright © 1984, Oxford University Press.)
A. Mechanical thresholds for pain were recorded at sites A, B, and 
C before and after burns at sites A and D. The areas of redden-
ing (flare) and mechanical hyperalgesia resulting from the burns 
are shown on the hand of one subject. In all subjects, the area of 
mechanical hyperalgesia was larger than the area of flare. Mechan-
ical hyperalgesia was present even after the flare disappeared.
B. Mean mechanical pain thresholds before and after burns. 
The mechanical threshold for pain is significantly decreased 
after the burn.
A
B
D
C
1 cm
A
B
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Mechanical
hyperalgesia
Flare
Mechanical pain thresholds
Before burn
After burn
Site A
Site B
Site C


===== Page 5 =====
480    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–8  Neurogenic inflammation. Injury or tissue 
damage releases bradykinin and prostaglandins, which acti-
vate or sensitize nociceptors. Activation of nociceptors leads 
to the release of substance P and calcitonin gene–related 
peptide (CGRP). Substance P acts on mast cells (light blue) 
in the vicinity of sensory endings to evoke degranulation and 
the release of histamine, which directly excites nociceptors. 
Substance P also produces plasma extravasation and edema, 
and CGRP produces dilation of peripheral blood vessels 
(leading to reddening of the skin); the resultant inflammation 
causes additional liberation of bradykinin. These mechanisms 
also occur in healthy tissue, where they contribute to  
secondary or spreading hyperalgesia. (Abbreviation: CNS, 
central nervous system.)
Damage
Prostaglandin
Bradykinin
Prostaglandin
Bradykinin
To CNS
To CNS
Plasma
To CNS
Plasma
Plasma
C ﬁbers
(nociceptors)
CGRP
Substance P
Histamine
Nerve growth 
factor
Site of injury
Initial spreading
Further spreading
Prostaglandin
Bradykinin


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    481
NGF
Inﬂammation 
TNF,
IL-1
Mast cell
NGF
A
B
C
D
A  Peripheral exposure to NGF
B  Retrograde transport of 
 
signaling endosomes
C  Increased transcription 
 
of BDNF
D  Central release of BDNF
BDNF
Nucleus
BDNF
Figure 20–9  Neurotrophins are pain mediators. Local pro-
duction of inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) 
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) promotes the synthesis and 
release of nerve growth factor (NGF) from several cell types 
in the periphery. Nerve growth factor binds to TrkA receptors 
on primary nociceptive terminals (A), triggering upregulation 
in expression of ion channels that increase nociceptor excit-
ability. Retrograde transport of signaling endosomes to the 
cell body (B) results in enhanced expression of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (C), and its release from sensory 
terminals in the spinal cord (D) further increases excitability of 
dorsal horn neurons.
The sensitization of dorsal horn neurons also 
involves recruitment of second-messenger pathways 
and activation of protein kinases that have been 
implicated in memory storage in other regions of 
the central nervous system. One consequence of this 
enzymatic cascade is the expression of immediate-
early genes that encode transcription factors such as 
c-fos, which are thought to activate effector proteins 
that sensitize dorsal horn neurons to sensory inputs. 
Most importantly, central sensitization of “pain” 
transmission circuitry in the dorsal horn is the pro-
cess that can decrease pain thresholds (allodynia) 
and lead to spontaneous pain (ie, ongoing pain in the 
absence of peripheral stimulation).
Central sensitization is also a major contributor 
to neuropathic pain due to nerve injury. Here again, 
there is increased excitability of dorsal horn circuits 
mediated by NMDA receptors. There is also loss of 
inhibitory controls in the dorsal horn. Under normal 
conditions, GABAergic inhibitory interneurons in the 
dorsal horn are not only tonically active but are also 
turned on by activity of large-diameter, nonnociceptive 
Aβ fibers (Figure 20–11A). Peripheral nerve damage 
decreases the GABAergic controls, thus exacerbat-
ing the hyperactivity of these nociceptive pathways 
(Figure 20–11B). Recent studies also implicate nerve 
injury–induced activation of microglia and consequent 
reduced GABAergic inhibition in the central sensiti-
zation process (Figures 20–11C and 20–12). Together, 
these changes contribute to mechanical allodynia (ie, pain 
provoked by normally innocuous mechanical stimula-
tion). Mechanical allodynia can also develop because 
of an inappropriate engagement of dorsal horn noci-
ceptive pathway circuits by the Aβ myelinated affer-
ents. In fact, spread of pain (secondary hyperalgesia) 
can occur because uninjured Aβ afferents outside of 


===== Page 7 =====
482    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–10  Mechanisms for enhanced excitability of dor-
sal horn neurons.
A. Typical responses of a dorsal horn neuron in the rat to elec-
trical stimuli delivered transcutaneously at a frequency of 1 Hz. 
With repetitive stimulation, the long-latency component evoked 
by a C fiber increases gradually, whereas the short-latency 
component evoked by an A fiber remains constant.
B. Dorsal horn neurons receive mono- and polysynaptic input 
from Aδ and C fiber nociceptors. Elevation of residual Ca2+ in 
the presynaptic terminal leads to increased release of gluta-
mate and substance P (and CGRP, not shown). Left: Activa-
tion of postsynaptic AMPA receptors by Aδ fibers causes a 
fast transient membrane depolarization, which relieves the 
Mg2+ block of the NMDA receptors. Right: Activation of the 
postsynaptic NMDA receptors and neurokinin-1 (NK1) recep-
tors by C fibers generates a long-lasting cumulative depo-
larization. The cytosolic Ca2+ concentration in the dorsal horn 
neuron increases because of Ca2+ entry through the NMDA 
receptor channels and voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels. The 
elevated Ca2+ and activation by NK1 receptors of second-
messenger systems enhance the performance of the NMDA 
receptors. Activation of NK1 receptors, cumulative depolariza-
tion, elevated cytosolic Ca2+, and other factors regulate the 
behavior of voltage-gated ion channels responsible for action 
potentials, resulting in enhanced excitability, all of which con-
tribute to the process of central sensitization. (Abbreviations: 
AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate; 
NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate)
80
60
40
20
0
0
3
6
9
12
15
Number of spikes
Stimulus number
A  Repetitive stimulation of C and Aδ ﬁbers
NMDA
NMDA
NMDA
Ion channels
NK1
AMPA
AMPA
AMPA
Fast membrane
depolarization
(transient)
Long-lasting 
depolarization
(cumulative)
Ca2+
Ca2+
Glutamate
Substance P
Aδ ﬁber 
stimulation
C ﬁber
stimulation 
B  Enhancement of excitability
B
Aδ ﬁber
C ﬁber
Response to C ﬁber
Response to Aδ ﬁber


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    483
Lamina V 
projection
neuron
Excitatory
interneuron
GABA 
inhibitory
interneuron
GABA 
inhibitory
interneuron
Lamina V 
projection
neuron
Microglial
cell
Lamina V 
projection
neuron
Excitatory
interneuron
To the brain
Neuropathic
pain
Neuropathic
pain
Aβ ﬁber
Nociceptor
Lamina I 
projection
neuron
Aβ ﬁber
Nociceptor
Nociceptor
Lamina I 
projection
neuron
Lamina I 
projection
neuron
Peripheral
nerve injury
Peripheral
nerve injury
A  Normal pain control
B  Loss of Aβ−mediated inhibition
C  Activation of microglia
Figure 20–11  Nerve injury triggers multiple dorsal horn 
central sensitization mechanisms that contribute to  
neuropathic pain.
A. Under normal conditions, nociceptors engage dorsal 
horn pain transmission circuits, via both monosynaptic and 
polysynaptic (excitatory) inputs to projection neurons of 
laminae I and V that transmit nociceptive information to the 
brainstem and thalamus. (See Figure 20–13.) The output of 
the projection neurons is regulated by GABAergic inhibitory 
interneurons, which can be activated by nonnociceptive, 
large-diameter, myelinated Aβ afferent fibers.
B. Peripheral nerve injury can result in a loss of the inhibitory 
control exerted by the Aβ afferents, via loss of GABAergic 
interneurons, reduced production of GABA, or reduced 
expression of GABAergic receptors by the projection  
neurons. Pathophysiological sprouting of Aβ afferents may 
also permit nonnociceptive inputs to directly engage the 
projection neurons (not shown), resulting in the condition of 
Aβ-mediated mechanical hypersensitivity/allodynia, a hallmark 
of neuropathic pain.
C. Peripheral nerve injury not only activates dorsal horn 
neurons directly but also activates microglia, which in turn 
release a host of mediators that enhance neuronal excitabil-
ity and reduce the inhibitory controls exerted by GABAergic 
interneurons. Thus, targeting the mediators released from 
microglia introduces yet another potential approach to the 
pharmacotherapy of chronic pain.


===== Page 9 =====
484    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–12  Peripheral nerve injury activates microglia in 
the dorsal and ventral horns. Schematic drawing and photo-
micrograph illustrate the location where microglia are activated 
after peripheral nerve injury. Activation of microglia in the dorsal 
horn results from damage (arrow) to the peripheral branch of 
primary sensory neurons (orange cells). Microglial activation 
around motor neuron cell bodies in the ventral horn occurs 
because the same injury damages efferent axons of the motor 
neurons (green cells). (Micrograph reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Julia Kuhn.)
Microglia
the area of injury can inappropriately activate dorsal 
horn circuits that have undergone central sensitization.
Four Major Ascending Pathways Convey 
Nociceptive Information From the Spinal Cord 
to the Brain
Four major ascending pathways—the spinothalamic, 
spinoreticular, spinoparabrachial, and spinohypotha-
lamic tracts—contribute sensory information to the 
central processes that generate pain.
The spinothalamic tract is the most prominent 
ascending nociceptive pathway in the spinal cord. It 
includes the axons of nociceptive-specific, thermosen-
sitive, and wide-dynamic-range neurons in laminae 
I and V through VII of the dorsal horn. These axons 
cross the midline of the spinal cord near their segment 
of origin and ascend in the anterolateral white matter 
before terminating in thalamic nuclei (Figure 20–13). 
The spinothalamic tract has a crucial role in the trans-
mission of nociceptive information. Cells at the origin 
of this tract typically have discrete, unilateral receptive 
fields that underlie our ability to localize painful 
stimuli. Not surprisingly, electrical stimulation of the 
tract is sufficient to elicit the sensation of pain; con-
versely, lesioning this tract (anterolateral cordotomy), 
a procedure that is generally only used for intractable 
pain in terminal cancer patients, can result in a marked 
reduction in pain sensation on the side of the body 
contralateral to that of the lesion.
The spinoreticular tract contains the axons of projec-
tion neurons in laminae VII and VIII. This tract ascends 
in the anterolateral quadrant of the spinal cord with 
spinothalamic tract axons, and terminates in both the 
reticular formation and the thalamus. As neurons at 
the origin of the spinoreticular tract generally have 
large, often bilateral receptive fields, this pathway 
has been implicated more in the processing of diffuse, 
poorly localized pains.
The spinoparabrachial tract contains the axons of 
projection neurons in laminae I and V. Information 
transmitted along this tract is thought to contribute 
to the affective component of pain. This tract projects 
in the anterolateral quadrant of the spinal cord to the 
parabrachial nucleus at the level of the pons (Figure 
20–13). This pathway has extensive collaterals to the 
mesencephalic reticular formation and periaqueductal 
gray matter. Parabrachial neurons project to the amyg-
dala, a critical nucleus of the limbic system, which reg-
ulates emotional states (Chapter 42).
The spinohypothalamic tract contains the axons of 
neurons found in spinal cord laminae I, V, VII, and VIII. 
These axons project to hypothalamic nuclei that serve as 
autonomic control centers involved in the regulation of 
the neuroendocrine and cardiovascular responses that 
accompany pain syndromes (Chapter 41).
Several Thalamic Nuclei Relay Nociceptive 
Information to the Cerebral Cortex
The thalamus contains several relay nuclei that partici-
pate in the central processing of nociceptive informa-
tion. Two of the most important regions of the thalamus 
are the lateral and medial nuclear groups. The lateral 
nuclear group comprises the ventroposterolateral (VPL), 
ventroposteromedial (VPM) and posterior/pulvinar 
nuclei. The VPL and VPM, respectively, receive inputs 
via the spinothalamic tract from nociception-specific 
and wide-dynamic-range neurons in laminae I and V 
of the dorsal horn and via the trigeminothalamic tract 


