===== Page 1 =====
620    Part IV / Perception
Mammals are not alone in possessing sensitive and 
frequency-selective hearing. Amphibians and rep-
tiles, including birds, also do. It is a remarkable fact 
that these various groups of land vertebrates actually 
acquired their good hearing systems largely indepen-
dently. The small, dedicated auditory receptor organ 
was present in the inner ear of their common ancestor. 
Much later, the ancestors of modern lizards, birds, and 
mammals each independently evolved middle-ear sys-
tems with eardrums collecting sound from the outside 
world. Some species, such as birds and their relatives, 
even evolved two groups of sensory hair cells that have 
a division of labor similar to that of mammalian inner 
and outer hair cells. Comparison of middle-ear and 
inner-ear structures and functions across all living ver-
tebrate groups has revealed that they share many com-
mon features and that hearing performance is largely 
comparable between them. Sound amplification associ-
ated with active hair-bundle motility was already pre-
sent in the very first hair cells that evolved, even before 
the first fishes. This amplifying system was inherited 
by all groups and, as described earlier, plays a critical 
role in improving hearing sensitivity and sharpening 
frequency selectivity. The greatest difference between 
mammals and the other groups is that the upper fre-
quency limit of hearing is generally higher in mam-
mals. Nonmammalian ears are limited in response to 
frequencies lower than about 12 to 14 kHz, whereas 
some mammals can hear beyond 100 kHz.
In addition to active hair-bundle motility, the second 
mechanism that tunes individual hair cells to specific 
frequencies in many nonmammalian ears is electrical 
in nature. In many fishes, amphibians, and birds, the 
membrane potential of each hair cell resonates at a par-
ticular frequency. Several factors, including alternative 
splicing of the mRNA encoding cochlear K+ channels 
and expression of these channels’ auxiliary β subunit, 
tune the characteristic frequency of the resonance along 
the tonotopic axis of the auditory organ. Whether elec-
trical resonance contributes to frequency tuning in the 
ears of mammals, including humans, remains uncertain. 
It is plausible that mammalian hair cells use instead an 
interplay between somatic electromotility, which seems 
absent in nonmammalian species, and the microme-
chanical environment, including hair-bundle motility, to 
actively amplify and filter their inputs.
The key signatures of a Hopf bifurcation have been 
recognized in spontaneous mechanical oscillations of 
the hair bundle, in electrical oscillations of the mem-
brane potential, and in sound-evoked vibration of the 
basilar membrane. It is likely that the parallel evolu-
tion of hearing organs in different groups of vertebrates 
resulted in several ways of benefitting from the generic 
properties of critical oscillation.
Box 26–2  The Evolutionary History of Hearing Resulted in Similarities Between Groups
chemical neurotransmitter is released. An active zone 
is characterized by four prominent morphological fea-
tures (Figure 26–16).
A presynaptic dense body or synaptic ribbon 
lies in the cytoplasm adjacent to the release site. This 
fibrillar structure may be spherical, ovoidal, or flat-
tened, and usually measures a few hundred nanometers 
across. The dense body resembles the synaptic rib-
bon of a photoreceptor cell and represents a special-
ized elaboration of the smaller presynaptic densities 
found at many other synapses. In addition to molecu-
lar components shared with conventional synapses, 
ribbon synapses contain large amounts of the protein 
ribeye.
The presynaptic ribbon is surrounded by clear 
synaptic vesicles, each 35 to 40 nm in diameter, which 
are attached to the dense body by tenuous filaments. 
Between the dense body and the presynaptic cell mem-
brane lies a striking presynaptic density that comprises 
several short rows of fuzzy-looking material. Within 
the cell membrane, rows of large particles are aligned 
with the strips of presynaptic density. These particles 
include the Ca2+ channels involved in the release of 
transmitter as well as the K+ channels that participate 
in electrical resonance in nonmammalian vertebrates.
Studies of nonmammalian experimental models 
show that, as with most other synapses (Chapter 15),  
the release of transmitter by hair cells is evoked by 
presynaptic depolarization and requires influx of Ca2+ 
from the extracellular medium. Hair cells lack synap-
totagmins 1 and 2, however, and the role of those pro-
teins as rapid Ca2+ sensors has probably been assumed 
by the protein otoferlin, which also promotes the 
replenishment of synaptic vesicles. Although gluta-
mate is the principal afferent neurotransmitter, other 
substances are released as well.
The presynaptic apparatus of hair cells has several 
unusual features that underlie the signaling abilities of 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    621
Figure 26–16  The presynaptic active zone of a hair cell.  This 
transmission electron micrograph shows the spherical presyn-
aptic dense body or synaptic ribbon that is characteristic of 
the hair cell’s presynaptic active zone. It is surrounded by clear 
synaptic vesicles. Beneath the ribbon lies a presynaptic density, 
in the middle of which one vesicle is undergoing exocytosis. A 
modest postsynaptic density lies along the inner aspect of the 
plasmalemma of the afferent terminal. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Jacobs and Hudspeth 1990.)
Presynaptic
dense body
Synaptic
vesicles
Presynaptic
density
Postsynaptic
density
these cells. At rest, inner hair cells continuously release 
synaptic transmitter. The rate of transmitter release 
can be modulated upward or downward, depending 
on whether the hair cell is respectively depolarized 
or hyperpolarized. Consistent with this observation, 
some Ca2+ channels of hair cells are activated at the 
resting potential, providing a steady leak of Ca2+ that 
evokes transmitter release from unstimulated cells. 
Another unusual feature of the hair cell’s synapses is 
that, like those of photoreceptors, they must be able 
to release neurotransmitter reliably in response to a 
threshold receptor potential of only 100 μV or so. This 
feature, too, depends on the fact that the presynaptic 
Ca2+ channels are activated at the resting potential.
Outer hair cells receive inputs from neurons in the 
brainstem in the form of large boutons on their baso-
lateral surfaces (Figure 26–4). This efferent system 
desensitizes the cochlea by hyperpolarizing outer hair 
cells, which turns down the active process. The effer-
ent terminals contain numerous clear synaptic vesicles 
about 50 nm in diameter, as well as a smaller number 
of larger, dense-core vesicles. The principal transmit-
ter at these synapses is acetylcholine (ACh); calcitonin 
gene–related peptide (CGRP) also occurs in efferent 
terminals and may be co-released with ACh. ACh 
binds to nicotinic ionotropic receptors consisting of α9 
and α10 subunits that have a substantial permeability 
to Ca2+ as well as to Na+ and K+. The Ca2+ that enters 
through these channels activates small-conductance 
Ca2+-sensitive K+ channels (SK channels), whose open-
ing leads to a protracted hyperpolarization. The cyto-
plasm of a hair cell immediately beneath each efferent 
terminal holds a single cisterna of smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum. This structure may be involved in the reup-
take of the Ca2+ that enters the cytoplasm in response 
to efferent stimulation, thus accelerating the return to 
the cell’s resting potential.
Auditory Information Flows Initially Through 
the Cochlear Nerve
Bipolar Neurons in the Spiral Ganglion Innervate 
Cochlear Hair Cells
Information flows from cochlear hair cells to neu-
rons whose cell bodies lie in the cochlear ganglion. 
The central processes of these bipolar neurons form 
the cochlear division of the vestibulocochlear nerve 
(eighth cranial nerve). Because this ganglion follows 
a spiral course around the bony core of the cochlea, 
it is also called the spiral ganglion. Approximately 
30,000 ganglion cells innervate the hair cells of each 
inner ear.
The afferent pathways from the human cochlea 
reflect the functional distinction between inner and 
outer hair cells. At least 90% of the spiral ganglion 
cells terminate on inner hair cells (Figure 26–17). Each 
axon contacts only a single inner hair cell, but each 
cell directs its output to many nerve fibers, on aver-
age nearly 10. This arrangement has three important 
consequences.
First, the neural information from which hearing 
arises originates almost entirely at inner hair cells. 
Second, because the output of each inner hair cell is 


===== Page 3 =====
622    Part IV / Perception
Outer hair cells
Inner hair cells
Spiral ganglion
cells
To cochlear
nuclei (afferent)
From superior
olivary complex
(efferent)
Figure 26–17  Innervation of cochlear hair 
cells.  The great majority of sensory axons 
(orange) in the cochlea carry signals from 
inner hair cells, each of which constitutes 
the sole input to an average of 10 axons. A 
few sensory axons of small caliber transmit 
information from the outer hair cells. Effer-
ent axons (green) largely innervate the 
outer hair cells and do so directly. In con-
trast, efferent innervation of inner hair cells 
is sparse and occurs on the sensory axon 
terminals. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Spoendlin 1974.)
sampled by many afferent nerve fibers, the informa-
tion from one receptor is encoded independently in 
parallel channels. Third, at any point along the coch-
lear spiral, or at any position within the spiral gan-
glion, each ganglion cell responds best to stimulation 
at the characteristic frequency of the presynaptic hair 
cell. The tonotopic organization of the auditory neu-
ral pathways thus begins at the earliest possible site, 
immediately postsynaptic to inner hair cells.
Relatively few cochlear ganglion cells contact 
outer hair cells, and each such neuron extends branch-
ing terminals to numerous outer hair cells. Although 
the ganglion cells that receive input from outer hair 
cells are known to project into the central nervous 
system, these neurons are so few that it is not certain 
whether their projections contribute significantly to 
the analysis of sound.
The patterns of efferent and afferent connections 
of cochlear hair cells are complementary. Mature inner 
hair cells do not receive efferent input; just beneath 
these cells, however, are extensive axo-axonic synaptic 
contacts between efferent axon terminals and the end-
ings of afferent nerve fibers. In contrast, other effer-
ent nerves have extensive connections with outer hair 
cells on their basolateral surfaces. Each outer hair cell 
receives input from several large efferent terminals, 
which fill most of the space between the cell’s base and 
the associated supporting cell, leaving little space for 
afferent terminals.
Cochlear Nerve Fibers Encode Stimulus Frequency 
and Level
The acoustic sensitivity of axons in the cochlear nerve 
mirrors the connection pattern of the spiral ganglion 
cells to the hair cells. Each axon is most responsive to 
a characteristic frequency. Stimuli of lower or higher 
frequency also evoke responses, but only when pre-
sented at greater levels. An axon’s responsiveness may 
be characterized by a frequency selectivity, or tuning, 
curve, which is V-shaped like the curves for basilar-
membrane motion and hair-cell sensitivity (Figure 
26–11). The tuning curves for nerve fibers with differ-
ent characteristic frequencies resemble one another but 
are shifted along the frequency axis.
The relationship between sound level in decibels 
SPL and firing rate in each fiber of the cochlear nerve 
is approximately linear. Because of the dependence of 
decibel level on sound pressure, this relation implies 
that sound pressure is logarithmically encoded by neu-
ronal activity. At the upper end of a fiber’s dynamic 
range, very loud sounds saturate the response. Because 
an action potential and the subsequent refractory 
period each last almost 1 ms, the greatest sustainable 
firing rate is about 500 spikes per second.
Even among nerve fibers with the same character-
istic frequency, the threshold of responsiveness varies 
from axon to axon. The most sensitive fibers, whose 
response thresholds extend down to approximately 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    623
Figure 26–18  The firing pattern of a cochlear nerve fiber.  A 
cochlear nerve fiber is stimulated for somewhat more than  
250 ms with a tone burst at about 5 kHz, the cell’s character-
istic frequency. After a quiet period, the stimulus is repeated. 
Histograms show the average response patterns of the fiber as 
a function of stimulus level. The sample period is divided into 
discrete temporal bins, and the number of spikes occurring in 
each bin is displayed. An initial, phasic increase in firing is cor-
related with the onset of the stimulus. The discharge continues 
during the remainder of the stimulus during adaptation, but 
decreases following termination. This pattern is evident when 
the stimulus is 20 dB or more above threshold. Activity gradu-
ally returns to baseline during the interval between stimuli. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Kiang 1965.)
0 dB SPL, characteristically have high rates of sponta-
neous activity and produce saturating responses for 
stimulation at moderate intensities, approximately 
30 dB SPL. At the opposite extreme, the least sensitive 
afferent fibers have very little spontaneous activity 
and much higher thresholds, but respond in a graded 
fashion to levels even in excess of 100 dB SPL. The 
activity patterns of most fibers range between these 
extremes.
The afferent neurons of lowest sensitivity contact 
the surface of an inner hair cell nearest the axis of the 
cochlear spiral. The most sensitive afferent neurons, on 
the other hand, contact the hair cell’s opposite side. The 
multiple innervation of each inner hair cell is therefore 
not redundant. Instead, the output from a given hair 
cell is directed into parallel channels of differing sensi-
tivity and dynamic range.
The firing pattern of fibers in the eighth cranial 
nerve exhibits both phasic and tonic components. 
Brisk firing occurs at the onset of a tone but, as adap-
tation occurs, the firing rate declines to a plateau level 
over a few tens of milliseconds. When stimulation 
ceases, there is usually a transitory cessation of activ-
ity with a similar time course to that of adaptation, 
before gradual resumption of the spontaneous firing 
rate (Figure 26–18).
When a periodic stimulus such as a pure tone is 
presented, the firing pattern of a cochlear nerve fiber 
encodes information about the periodicity of the stim-
ulus. For example, a relatively low-frequency tone at a 
moderate intensity might produce one spike in a nerve 
fiber during each cycle of stimulation. The phase of 
firing is also stereotyped. Each action potential might 
occur, for example, during the compressive phase of 
the stimulus. As the stimulation frequency rises, the 
stimuli eventually become so rapid that the nerve fiber 
can no longer produce action potentials on a cycle-by-
cycle basis. Up to a frequency in excess of 3 kHz, how-
ever, phase-locking persists; a fiber may produce an 
action potential only every few cycles of the stimulus, 
but its firing continues to occur at a particular phase in 
the stimulus cycle.
Periodicity in neuronal firing enhances the infor-
mation about the stimulus frequency. Any pure tone 
of sufficient level evokes firing in numerous cochlear 
nerve fibers. Those fibers whose characteristic fre-
quency coincides with the frequency of the stimulus 
respond at the lowest stimulus level, but respond still 
more briskly for stimuli of moderate intensity. Other 
nerve fibers with characteristic frequencies further 
from the stimulus also respond, although less vigor-
ously. Regardless of their characteristic frequencies, 
however, all the responsive fibers may display phase 
10 dB
20 dB
30 dB
40 dB
0
250
Time (ms)
Duration of tone at characteristic frequency


===== Page 5 =====
624    Part IV / Perception
locking: Each tends to fire during a particular part of 
the stimulus cycle.
The central nervous system can therefore gain 
information about stimulus frequency in two ways. 
First, there is a place code: The fibers are arrayed in a 
tonotopic map in which the position is related to char-
acteristic frequency. Second, there is a frequency code: 
The phase-locked firing of the fiber provides informa-
tion about the frequency of the stimulus, at least for 
frequencies below 3 kHz.
Sensorineural Hearing Loss Is Common but Is 
Amenable to Treatment
Whether mild or profound, most deafness falls into 
the category of sensorineural hearing loss, often mis-
named “nerve deafness.” Although hearing loss can 
result from direct damage to the eighth cranial nerve, 
for example from an acoustic neuroma, deafness stems 
primarily from the loss of cochlear hair cells and their 
afferent fibers.
The 16,000 hair cells in each human cochlea are 
not replaced by cell division but must last a lifetime. 
However, in amphibians and birds, supporting cells 
can be induced to divide and their progeny to produce 
new hair cells. In the zebrafish and in birds, some hair 
cell populations are regenerated continually by the 
activity of stem or supporting cells. Researchers have 
recently succeeded in replenishing mammalian hair 
cells in vitro. Until we understand how hair cells can 
be restored to the organ of Corti, however, we must 
cope with hearing loss.
The past few decades have brought remarkable 
advances in our ability to treat deafness. For the major-
ity of patients who have significant residual hearing, 
hearing aids can amplify sounds to a level sufficient 
to activate the surviving hair cells. A modern aid is 
custom-tailored to compensate for each individual’s 
hearing loss, so that the device amplifies sounds at fre-
quencies to which the wearer is least sensitive, while 
providing little or no enhancement to those that can 
still be heard well.
When most or all of a person’s cochlear hair cells 
have degenerated, no amount of amplification can 
assist hearing. However, a degree of hearing can be 
restored by bypassing the damaged organ of Corti 
with a cochlear prosthesis or implant. A user wears a 
compact unit that picks up sounds, separates their fre-
quency components, and forwards electronic signals 
representing these constituents along separate wires 
to small antennae situated just behind the auricle. The 
signals are then transmitted transdermally to receiving 
antennae implanted in the temporal bone. From there, 
fine wires bear the signals to appropriate electrodes 
implanted as an array in the cochlea at various posi-
tions along the scala tympani. Activation of the elec-
trodes excites action potentials in any nearby axons 
that have survived the degeneration of the hair cells 
(Figure 26–19).
The cochlear prosthesis takes advantage of the tono-
topic representation of stimulus frequency along the 
cochlea—the place code (Figure 26–11 and Chapter 28).  
The axons innervating each segment of the cochlea are 
concerned with a specific, narrow range of frequen-
cies. Each electrode in a prosthesis can excite a clus-
ter of nerve fibers that represent similar frequencies. 
The stimulated neurons then forward their outputs 
along the eighth nerve to the central nervous system, 
where these signals are interpreted as a sound of the 
frequency represented at that position on the basilar 
membrane. An array of approximately 20 electrodes 
can mimic a complex sound by appropriately stimulat-
ing several clusters of neurons.
The number of implanted cochlear prostheses 
worldwide is now approaching 350,000. Their effec-
tiveness, however, varies widely from person to per-
son. In the best outcome, an individual can, under 
quiet conditions, understand speech nearly as well as 
a normally hearing person and can even conduct tele-
phone conversations. At the other extreme are patients 
who derive little benefit from prostheses, presumably 
because of extensive degeneration of the nerve fibers 
near the electrode array. Most patients find their pros-
theses of great value. Even if hearing is not completely 
restored, the devices help in lip reading and alert 
patients to noises in the environment.
Hearing loss is often accompanied by another 
distressing symptom, tinnitus, or “ringing in the 
ears.” By interfering with concentration and disrupt-
ing sleep, tinnitus can exasperate, depress, and even 
madden its victims. Because on rare occasions tinni-
tus stems from lesions to the auditory pathways, such 
as acoustic neuromas, it is important in neurological 
diagnosis to exclude such causes. Most tinnitus, how-
ever, is idiopathic: Its cause is uncertain. More and 
more studies implicate stress as an important factor. 
Some drugs also trigger the condition; antimalarial 
drugs related to quinine and aspirin at the high dos-
ages used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis are 
notorious for this. Often, however, tinnitus occurs at 
high frequencies to which a damaged ear is no longer 
sensitive. In these instances, tinnitus may reflect 
hypersensitivity in the deafferented central nervous 
system, a phenomenon analogous to phantom limb 
pain (Chapter 20).


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    625
Figure 26–19  A cochlear prosthesis.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Loeb 
et al. 1983.)
A. Transmitting antennas receive elec-
trical signals from a sound processor, 
located behind the subject’s auricle or on 
the frame of his eyeglasses, and transmit 
them across the skin to receiving anten-
nas implanted subdermally behind the 
auricle. The signals are then conveyed in 
a fine cable (dark purple) to an electrode 
array in the cochlea.
B. This cross section of the cochlea 
shows the placement of pairs of elec-
trodes in the scala tympani. A portion of 
the extracellular current passed between 
an electrode pair is intercepted by nearby 
cochlear nerve fibers, which are thus 
excited and send action potentials to the 
brain.
Spiral
ganglion
cell
Cochlear
nerve
Skin
Receiving antennas
Mastoid bone
Receiver circuitry
Cochlea
Auditory
nerve
Electrode
array
Round
window
Ear
drum
External
auditory
meatus
Connection
from sound
processor
Transmitting
antennas
A  Sound transmission to cochlea
B  Electrode array in cochlea
B
Scala vestibuli
Reissner’s
membrane
Organ
of Corti
Scala
tympani
Basilar
membrane
Electrodes
Plastic


===== Page 7 =====
626    Part IV / Perception
Highlights
  1.  Hearing begins with capture of sound by the ear. 
Mechanical energy captured by the outer ear flows 
through the middle ear to the cochlea, where it 
causes the elastic basilar membrane to oscillate.
  2.  The basilar membrane supports the receptor 
organ of the inner ear—the organ of Corti, an epi-
thelial strip that contains approximately 16,000 
mechanosensory hair cells. Hair cells transduce 
basilar-membrane vibrations into receptor poten-
tials that cause sensory neurons to fire.
  3.  The frequency components of a sound stimulus 
are detected at different locations along the basi-
lar membrane by different hair cells, following a 
tonotopic map. Mechanical gradients of the basi-
lar membrane contribute to frequency analysis 
by the cochlea. In addition, each hair cell is tuned 
at a characteristic frequency according to its mor-
phological, mechanical, and electrical properties, 
which vary continuously along the tonotopic axis 
of the cochlea.
  4.  Hair cells operate much more quickly than do 
other sensory receptors, which allows them to 
respond to sound frequencies beyond 100 kHz in 
some mammalian species. Accordingly, the mech-
anoelectrical transduction channels in the hair cell 
are activated directly by mechanical strain.
  5.  Each hair cell projects from its apical surface 
a tuft of cylindrical stereocilia—the hair bun-
dle, which works as a mechanical antenna that 
vibrates in response to sound stimuli. The trans-
duction channels occur at the stereociliary tips. 
Their open probability is modulated by tension 
changes in tip links that interconnect neighbor-
ing stereocilia.
  6.  Uniquely among sensory receptors, hair cells 
amplify their inputs to enhance their sensitivity, 
sharpen their frequency selectivity, and widen 
the range of stimulus levels that they can detect. 
Two forms of cellular motility contribute to this 
active process. First, receptor potentials evoke 
length changes of the somata of outer hair cells, 
a biological analog of piezoelectricity called elec-
tromotility. Second, the hair bundle—the mecha-
nosensory antenna of the hair cell—can vibrate 
autonomously.
  7.  The ear not only receives sound but also emits 
sound called otoacoustic emissions. Spontaneous 
and evoked otoacoustic emissions result from the 
cochlea’s active amplification processes.
  8.  The cochlea does not work as a high-fidelity 
sound receiver; instead, it introduces conspicuous 
distortions that contribute to sound perception. 
The auditory nonlinearity originates in the cochlea, 
which amplifies preferentially weak sound stimuli, 
and constitutes a hallmark of sensitive hearing that 
is used to screen hearing deficits in newborns.
  9.  A large variety of experimental observations at 
the level of a single hair bundle, of the basilar 
membrane, and in psychoacoustics are readily 
explained if the cochlea contains active mechani-
cal modules that each operate on the verge of an 
oscillatory instability—the Hopf bifurcation. The 
Hopf bifurcation provides a general principle 
of auditory detection that simplifies our under-
standing of hearing.
10.  The evolutionary history of hearing reveals that the 
various groups of land vertebrates acquired their 
hearing systems largely independently, but that 
their sensitivity and frequency selectivity are 
similar. In particular, both mammalian and non-
mammalian ears benefit from mechanical ampli-
fication of sound inputs and show otoacoustic 
emissions. Mammals most notably differ from 
other groups in that their hearing range extends 
to frequencies beyond 12 to 14 kHz.
11.  Analysis of the genetic forms of deafness has pro-
vided information on dozens of proteins key to 
the function of the hair cell, in particular those 
responsible for mechanoelectrical transduction 
and for synaptic transmission between hair cells 
and fibers of the auditory nerve. Although these 
genes may serve as potential targets for future 
therapies, sensorineural hearing loss is cur-
rently treated mostly with hearing aids or coch-
lear prostheses. New strategies, such as hair-cell 
replenishment via stem-cell differentiation or 
optogenetic stimulation of the spiral ganglion, 
provide promising avenues for research on hear-
ing restoration.
 Pascal Martin  
 Geoffrey A. Manley 
Selected Reading
Hudspeth AJ. 1989. How the ear’s works work. Nature 
341:397–404.
Hudspeth AJ. 2014. Integrating the active process of hair cells 
with cochlear function. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:600–614.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 26 / Auditory Processing by the Cochlea    627
Hudspeth AJ, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2010. A critique of the 
critical cochlea: Hopf—a bifurcation—is better than none.  
J Neurophysiol 104:1219–1229.
Kazmierczak P, Sakaguchi H, Tokita J, et al. 2007. Cadherin 
23 and protocadherin 15 interact to form tip-link filaments 
in sensory hair cells. Nature 449:87–91.
Loeb GE. 1985. The functional replacement of the ear. Sci Am 
252:104–111.
Pickles JO. 2008. An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing, 
3rd ed. New York: Academic.
Robbles L. Ruggero MA. 2001. Mechanics of the mammalian 
cochlea. Physiol Rev 81:1305–1352.
Zheng J, Shen W, He DZZ, Long KB, Madison LD, Dallos P. 
2000. Prestin is the motor protein of cochlear outer hair 
cells. Nature 405:149–155.
References
Art JJ, Crawford AC, Fettiplace R, Fuchs PA. 1985. Efferent 
modulation of hair cell tuning in the cochlea of the turtle. 
J Physiol 360:397–421.
Ashmore JF. 2008. Cochlear outer-hair-cell motility. Physiol 
Rev 88:173–210.
Assad JA, Shepherd GM, Corey DP. 1991. Tip-link integrity 
and mechanical transduction in vertebrate hair cells. 
Neuron 7:985–994.
Avan P, Buki B, Petit C. 2013. Auditory distortions: origins 
and functions. Physiol Rev 93:1563–1619.
Barral J, Dierkes K, Lindner B, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2010. 
Coupling a sensory hair-cell bundle to cyber clones 
enhances nonlinear amplification. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 107:8079–8084.
Barral J, Martin P. 2012. Phantom tones and suppressive 
masking by active nonlinear oscillation of the hair-cell 
bundle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:E1344–E1351.
Beurg M, Fettiplace R, Nam J-H, Ricci AJ. 2009. Localiza-
tion of inner hair cell mechanotransducer channels using 
high-speed calcium imaging. Nat Neurosci 12:553–558.
Chan DK, Hudspeth AJ. 2005. Ca2+ current-driven nonlin-
ear amplification by the mammalian cochlea in vitro. Nat 
Neurosci 8:149–155.
Corey D, Hudspeth AJ. 1983. Kinetics of the receptor current 
in bullfrog saccular hair cells. J Neurosci 3:962–976.
Crawford AC, Fettiplace R. 1981. An electrical tuning mecha-
nism in turtle cochlear hair cells. J Physiol 312:377–412.
Fettiplace R, Kim KX. 2014. The physiology of mechano-
electrical transduction channels in hearing. Physiol Rev 
94:951–986.
Frolenkov GI, Atzori M, Kalinec F, Mammano F, Kachar, B. 
1998. The membrane-based mechanism of cell motility in 
cochlear outer hair cells. Mol Biol Cell 9:1961–1968.
Glowatzki E, Fuchs PA. 2002. Transmitter release at the hair 
cell ribbon synapse. Nat Neurosci 5:147–154.
Helmholtz HLF. [1877] 1954. On the Sensations of Tone as a 
Physiological Basis for the Theory of Music. New York: Dover.
Holley MC, Ashmore JF. 1988. On the mechanism of a high-
frequency force generator in outer hair cells isolated 
from the guinea pig cochlea. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
232:413–429.
Howard J, Hudspeth AJ. 1988. Compliance of the hair bun-
dle associated with gating of mechanoelectrical transduc-
tion channels in the bullfrog’s saccular hair cell. Neuron 
1:189–199.
Hudspeth AJ, Gillespie PG. 1994. Pulling springs to tune 
transduction: adaptation by hair cells. Neuron 12:1–9.
Jacobs RA, Hudspeth AJ. 1990. Ultrastructural correlates of 
mechanoelectrical transduction in hair cells of the bull-
frog’s internal ear. Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 
55:547–561.
Johnson SL, Beurg M, Marcotti W, Fettiplace R. 2011. Prestin-
driven cochlear amplification is not limited by the outer 
hair cell membrane time constant. Neuron 70:1143–1154.
Kemp DT. 1978. Stimulated acoustic emissions from 
within the human auditory system. J Acoust Soc Am 
64:1386–1391.
Kiang NY-S. 1965. Discharge Patterns of Single Fibers in the 
Cat’s Auditory Nerve. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kiang NY-S. 1980. Processing of speech by the auditory nerv-
ous system. J Acoust Soc Am 68:830–835.
Liberman MC. 1982. Single-neuron labeling in the cat audi-
tory nerve. Science 216:1239–1241.
Loeb GE, Byers CL, Rebscher SJ, et al. 1983. Design and fab-
rication of an experimental cochlear prosthesis. Med Biol 
Eng Comput 21:241–254.
Manley GA. 2012. Evolutionary paths to mammalian coch-
leae. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 13:733–743.
Manley GA, Köppl C. 1998. Phylogenic development of the 
cochlea and its innervation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 8:468–474.
Martin P, Hudspeth AJ. 1999. Active hair-bundle movements 
can amplify a hair cell’s response to oscillatory mechani-
cal stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:14306–14311.
Michalski N, Petit C. 2015. Genetics of auditory mechano-
electrical transduction. Pflugers Arch 467:49–72.
Murphy WJ, Tubis A, Talmadge CL, Long GR. 1995. Relaxa-
tion dynamics of spontaneous otoacoustic emissions per-
turbed by external forces. II. Suppression of interacting 
emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 97:3711–3720.
Oshima K, Shin K, Diensthuber M, Peng AW, Ricci AJ, 
Heller S. 2010. Mechanosensitive hair cell-like cells from 
embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 141: 
704–716.
Pan B, Akyuz N, Liu XP, et al. 2018. TMC1 forms the pore 
of mechanosensory transduction channels in vertebrate 
inner ear hair cells. Neuron 99:736–753.
Probst R, Lonsbury-Martin BL, Martin GK. 1991. A review 
of otoacoustic emissions. J Acoust Soc Am 89:2027–2067.
Reichenbach T, Hudspeth AJ. 2014. The physics of hearing: 
fluid mechanics and the active process of the inner ear. 
Rep Prog Phys 77:0706601.
Ricci AJ, Crawford AC, Fettiplace R. 2003. Tonotopic vari-
ation in the conductance of the hair cell mechanotrans-
ducer channel. Neuron 40:983–990.
Sotomayor M, Weihofen WA, Gaudet R, Corey DP. 2012. Struc-
ture of a force-conveying cadherin bond essential for the 
inner-ear mechanotransduction. Nature 492:128–132.


===== Page 9 =====
628    Part IV / Perception
Spoendlin H. 1974. Neuroanatomy of the cochlea. In:  
E Zwicker, E Terhardt (eds). Facts and Models in Hearing, 
pp. 18–32. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stauffer EA, Scarborough JD, Hirono M, et al. 2005. Fast 
adaptation in vestibular hair cells requires myosin-1c 
activity. Neuron 47:541–553.
Tinevez JY, Jülicher F, Martin P. 2007. Unifying the various 
incarnations of active hair-bundle motility by the verte-
brate hair cell. Biophys J 93:4053–4067.
von Békésy G. 1960. Experiments in Hearing. EG Wever (ed, 
transl). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson JP. 1980. Evidence for a cochlear origin for acoustic 
re-emissions, threshold fine-structure and tonal tinnitus. 
Hear Res 2:233–252.
Wu Z, Müller U. 2016. Molecular identity of the mecha-
notransduction channel in hair cells: not quiet there yet.  
J Neurosci 36:10927–10934.


