===== Page 1 =====
180    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
channels. The use of X-ray crystallography and cryo-
electron microscopy to define the structure of chan-
nels at atomic resolution provides a framework for 
achieving greater understanding of the mechanisms of 
ion channel function and malfunction due to disease-
causing mutations. Combining a wide array of data 
from these various approaches makes possible the con-
struction of detailed molecular models, which can be 
tested by further experiments, as well as by theoretical 
approaches such as molecular dynamics simulation.
X-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Potassium 
Channel Structure Provides Insight Into Mechanisms 
of Channel Permeability and Selectivity
The first high-resolution X-ray crystallographic analysis 
of the molecular architecture of the pore region of an 
ion-selective channel was provided by Rod MacKinnon 
and his colleagues. To overcome the difficulties inher-
ent in obtaining crystals of large integral membrane 
proteins, they initially focused on a non–voltage-gated 
K+ channel, termed KcsA, from a bacterium. This chan-
nel is advantageous for crystallography as it can be 
expressed at high levels for purification, is relatively 
small, and has a simple transmembrane topology simi-
lar to that of the inward-rectifying K+ channel in higher 
organisms, including mammals (Figure 8–11B).
The crystal structure of the KcsA protein provides 
several important insights into the mechanisms by 
which the channel facilitates the movement of K+ ions 
across the hydrophobic lipid bilayer. The channel is 
made up of four identical subunits arranged symmetri-
cally around a central pore (Figure 8–12A). Each subu-
nit has two membrane-spanning α-helixes, an inner and 
outer helix. They are connected by the P-loop, which 
forms the selectivity filter of the channel. The amino 
acid sequence of these subunits is homologous to that of 
the S5-P-S6 region of vertebrate voltage-gated K+ chan-
nels. The two α-helixes of each subunit tilt away from 
the central axis of the pore such that the structure resem-
bles an inverted tepee (Figure 8–12B,C).
The four inner α-helixes from each of the subunits 
line the cytoplasmic end of the pore. At the intracel-
lular mouth of the channel, these four helixes cross, 
forming a very narrow opening—the “smoke hole” 
of the tepee. Because this hole is too small to allow 
passage of K+ ions, the crystal structure is presumed 
to represent the channel in the closed state. The inner 
helixes are homologous to the S6 membrane-spanning 
segment of voltage-gated K+ channels (Figure 8–11A). 
At the extracellular end of the channel, the transmem-
brane helixes in each subunit are connected by a region 
consisting of three elements: (1) a chain of amino acids 
that surrounds the mouth of the channel (the turret 
region), (2) an abbreviated α-helix (the pore helix) 
approximately 10 amino acids in length that projects 
toward the central axis of the pore, and (3) a stretch of 
5 amino acids near the C-terminal end of the P-region 
that forms the selectivity filter.
The shape and structure of the pore determine its 
ion-conducting properties. Both the inner and outer 
mouths of the pore are lined with acidic amino acids 
whose negative charges help attract cations from the 
bulk solution. Going from inside to outside, the pore 
consists of a medium-wide tunnel, 18 Å in length, 
which leads into a wider (10 Å diameter) spherical 
inner chamber. This chamber is lined predominantly 
by the side chains of hydrophobic amino acids. These 
relatively wide regions are followed by the very nar-
row selectivity filter, only 12 Å in length, which is 
rate-limiting for the passage of K+ ions. A high K+ ion 
throughput rate is ensured by the fact that the inner 
28 Å of the pore, from the cytoplasmic entrance to the 
selectivity filter, lacks polar groups that could delay 
ion passage by binding and unbinding the ion (Figure 
8–12C,D).
An ion passing from the polar solution through the 
nonpolar lipid bilayer encounters the least energeti-
cally favorable region in the middle of the bilayer. The 
large energy difference between these two regions for 
a K+ ion is minimized by two details of channel struc-
ture. The inner chamber is filled with water, which pro-
vides a highly polar environment, and the pore helixes 
provide dipoles whose electronegative carboxyl ends 
point toward this inner chamber (Figure 8–12C).
The high energetic cost incurred as a K+ ion sheds 
its waters of hydration is partially compensated by the 
presence of 20 electronegative oxygen atoms that line 
the walls of the selectivity filter and form favorable 
electrostatic interactions with the permeant ions. Each 
of the four subunits contributes four main-chain car-
bonyl oxygen atoms from the protein backbone and 
one side-chain hydroxyl oxygen atom to form a total 
of four binding sites for K+ ions. Each bound K+ ion 
is thus stabilized by interactions with a total of eight 
oxygen atoms, which lie in two planes above and 
below the bound cation. In this way, the channel is 
able to compensate for the loss of the K+ ion’s waters of 
hydration. The selectivity filter is stabilized at a critical 
width, such that it provides optimal electrostatic inter-
actions with K+ ions as they pass but is too wide for the 
smaller Na+ ions to interact effectively with all eight 
oxygen atoms at any point along the length of the filter 
(Figure 8–12C).
In light of the extensive interactions between a 
K+ ion and the channel, how does the KcsA channel 


===== Page 2 =====
Figure 8–12  The X-ray crystal structure of a bacterial potas-
sium channel. (Reproduced, with permission, from Doyle et al. 
1998. Copyright © 1998 AAAS.)
A. The view is looking down the channel pore from outside the 
cell. Each of the four subunits of the KcsA K+ channel contrib-
utes two membrane-spanning helixes, an outer helix (blue) and 
an inner helix (red). The P-region (white) lies near the extracel-
lular surface of the channel pore and consists of a short α-helix 
(pore helix) and a loop that forms the selectivity filter of the 
channel. In the center of the pore is a K+ ion (pink).
B. The channel is seen in a side view within a cross section of 
the membrane. The four subunits are shown in different colors.
C. Another view in the same orientation as in part B shows 
only two of the four subunits. The channel contains five K+ bind-
ing sites (dashed). Four of the sites lie in the selectivity filter 
(yellow), while the fifth site lies in an inner chamber near the 
center of the channel. The four K+ binding sites of the selectiv-
ity filter are formed by successive rings of oxygen atoms (red) 
from five amino acid residues per subunit. Four of the rings are 
formed by carbonyl oxygen atoms from the main chain backbone 
of four consecutive amino acid residues—glycine (G), tyrosine 
(Y), glycine (G), and valine (V). A fifth ring of oxygen near the 
internal end of the selectivity filter is formed by the side-chain 
hydroxyl oxygen of threonine (T). Each ring contains four oxy-
gen atoms, one from each subunit. Only the oxygen atoms 
from two of the four subunits are shown in this view.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Morais-Cabral et al. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
D. A view of K+ ion permeation through the channel illustrates 
the sequence of changes in occupancy of the various K+ bind-
ing sites. A pair of ions hops in concert between a pair of bind-
ing sites in the selectivity filter. In the initial state, the “outer 
configuration,” a pair of ions is bound to sites 1 and 3. As an 
ion enters the inner mouth of the channel, the ion in the inner 
chamber jumps to occupy the innermost binding site of the 
selectivity filter (site 4). This causes the pair of ions in the outer 
configuration to hop outward, expelling an ion from the chan-
nel. The two ions now in the inner configuration (sites 2 and 4) 
can hop to binding sites 1 and 3, returning the channel to its 
initial state (the outer configuration), from which it can conduct 
a second K+ ion. (Adapted, with permission, from Miller 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
G
G
Y
T
V
Extracellular
sites
Extracellular
side
Selectivity
filter
Cytoplasmic
side
Inner
chamber
Pore
axis
1
2
3
4
5
1  Ions in outer
  conﬁguration
2  Ions in inner
 
conﬁguration
A  Looking down the channel
C  K+ ion binding sites
D  K+ ion movements
B  Cross-section
Turret
Outer
helix
Inner helix
Selectivity ﬁlter


===== Page 3 =====
182    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
manage its high rate of conduction? Although the 
channel contains a total of five potential binding sites 
for K+ ions, X-ray analysis shows that the channel can 
be occupied by at most three K+ ions at any instant. 
One ion is normally present in the wide inner cham-
ber, and two ions occupy two of the four binding sites 
within the selectivity filter (Figure 8–12D).
These structural data led to the following hypothe-
sis. Because of electrostatic repulsion, two K+ ions never 
simultaneously occupy adjacent binding sites within 
the selectivity filter; rather, a water molecule is always 
interposed between K+ ions. During conduction, a pair 
of K+ ions within the selectivity filter hop in tandem 
between pairs of binding sites. If only one ion were in 
the selectivity filter, it would be bound rather tightly, 
and the throughput rate for ion permeation would be 
compromised. But the mutual electrostatic repulsion 
between two K+ ions occupying nearby sites ensures 
that the ions will linger only briefly, thus resulting in a 
high overall rate of K+ conduction.
The form of the KcsA selectivity filter appears to 
be highly conserved among various types of mamma-
lian voltage-gated K+ channels. However, more recent 
studies by MacKinnon and colleagues have revealed 
how variations in geometric and surface charge fea-
tures below the selectivity filter of this canonical pore 
can cause some voltage-gated K+ channels to differ 
markedly in single-channel conductance and in affin-
ity for various open channel blockers.
The snug fit between the K+ channel selectivity fil-
ter and K+ ions that helps explain the unusually high 
selectivity of these channels is not representative of 
all channel types. As we shall see in later chapters, in 
many channels pore diameters are significantly wider 
than the principal permeating ion, contributing to a 
lower degree of selectivity.
X-Ray Crystallographic Analysis of Voltage-Gated 
Potassium Channel Structures Provides Insight into 
Mechanisms of Channel Gating
As described earlier, the S4 segment of voltage-gated 
ion channels is thought to be the voltage sensor that 
detects changes in membrane potential. How do the 
positive charges in S4 move through the membrane 
electric field in response to a change in membrane 
potential? How is S4 movement coupled to gating? 
What is the relationship of the voltage-sensing region 
to the pore-forming region of the channel? What is the 
configuration of the open channel? Some answers to 
these questions have come from X-ray crystallographic 
analyses of mammalian voltage-gated K+ channels, as 
well as from a number of studies using mutagenesis 
and other biophysical approaches. MacKinnon and 
colleagues studied the mammalian voltage-gated 
Kv1.2 K+ channel, as well as a closely related chimera 
Kv1.2-Kv2.1, which yielded higher-resolution images.
Their analysis of X-ray crystal structures of the 
Kv1.2 channel and the Kv1.2-2.1 chimera showed that 
a K+ channel subunit has two domains. The S1–S4 seg-
ments form a voltage-sensing domain at the periphery 
of the channel, whereas the S5-P–S6 segments form the 
pore domain at the central axis of the channel. The two 
domains are linked at their intracellular ends by the 
short S4–S5 coupling helix (Figure 8–13). The idea that 
the S1–S4 voltage sensor is a separate domain is sup-
ported by the fact that certain bacterial proteins contain 
S1–S4 domains but lack a pore domain. One such pro-
tein is a voltage-sensitive phosphatase, while another 
forms a voltage-gated proton channel. Conversely, the 
inward-rectifying K+ channels (Figure 8–11B) have a 
high K+ selectivity but are not directly gated by voltage 
because they lack the voltage sensor domain.
The crystal structures also help clarify what 
happens when the channel opens. Studies by Clay 
Armstrong in the 1960s suggested that a gate exists at 
the intracellular mouth of voltage-gated K+ channels 
of higher organisms. He found that small organic cati-
ons such as tetraethylammonium (TEA) can enter 
and block the channel only when this internal gate 
is opened by depolarization. As described earlier, in 
the closed bacterial K+ channels the four inner trans-
membrane helixes, which correspond to the S6 helixes 
in voltage-gated K+ channels, meet at a tight bundle 
crossing at their cytoplasmic ends to form the closed 
gate of the channel (Figure 8–12). In contrast, the S6 
helix of the Kv1.2–2.1 chimera is bent at a flexible three-
amino-acid hinge (proline-valine-proline), causing the 
inner end of the helix to bend outward. This configu-
ration results in an open channel conformation with an 
internal orifice that is dilated to 12 Å in diameter, wide 
enough to pass fully hydrated K+ ions as well as larger 
cations such as TEA (Figures 8–13 and 8–14C). Once 
inside the channel lumen, TEA blocks K+ permeation 
because it is too large to pass through the selectivity 
filter. It is not surprising that the Kv channel is in 
the open state, as there is no voltage gradient across 
the channel in the crystals. This is similar to the situa-
tion in a membrane that has been depolarized to 0 mV, 
a voltage at which the channels are normally open. 
This opening mechanism is likely to be a general one 
because the inner helixes of many K+ channels in bac-
teria and higher organisms also have a flexible hinge 
at this position.
One long-standing question concerns the place-
ment and movement of the gating charges on the S4 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    183
segment voltage sensor. As mentioned earlier, move-
ment of these charges within the plane of the mem-
brane in response to changes in membrane potential is 
thought to couple membrane depolarization to chan-
nel gating. However, placement of charges within 
the hydrophobic membrane results in an unfavorable 
energy state, as discussed earlier for free ions in solu-
tions. How do ion channels compensate for this unfa-
vorable free energy?
The crystal structure provides some answers to 
this question. Mutagenesis studies indicate that four 
positively charged arginine residues in the exter-
nal half of the S4 segment are likely to carry most of 
the gating charge. In the open state, the four positive 
charges face outward toward the extracellular side 
of the membrane, where they may undergo energeti-
cally favorable interactions with water or with the 
negatively charged head groups of the phospholipid 
bilayer. Positive charges on other S4 residues that lie 
more deeply within the lipid bilayer are stabilized by 
interactions with negatively charged acidic residues on 
the S1–S3 transmembrane helixes.
At present, a crystal structure for the closed 
state of the Kv1.2–Kv2.1 chimera is lacking. However, 
MacKinnon and colleagues have proposed a plausi-
ble model for voltage gating based on the structures 
of the open voltage-gated K+ channel and the closed 
bacterial K+ channel KcsA (Figure 8–14). According to 
this model, a negative voltage inside the cell exerts a 
force on the positively charged S4 helix that causes it 
to move inward by about 1.0 to 1.5 nm. As a result, 
the four positively charged S4 residues, which in the 
depolarized state face the external environment and 
sense the extracellular potential, now face the intra-
cellular side of the membrane and sense the intracel-
lular potential. In this manner, movement of each S4 
segment will translocate 3 to 4 gating charges across 
the membrane electric field as the channel transitions 
between the closed and open states, for a total of 12 to 16 
charges moved per tetrameric channel. This number 
is similar to the total gating charge movement deter-
mined from biophysical measurements (Chapter 10).
How are S4 movements coupled to the gate of the 
channel? According to the model, when the membrane 
voltage becomes negative, the resulting inward move-
ment of the S4 segment exerts a downward force on the 
S4–S5 coupling helix. This helix, which lies roughly par-
allel to the membrane at its cytoplasmic surface, rests 
on the inner end of the S6 helix gate in the open state. 
As the S4–S5 helix moves downward, it acts as a lever, 
applying force to S6 and closing the gate. Thus, voltage-
gating is thought to rely on the electromechanical 
coupling between the voltage-sensing domain and the 
Figure 8–13  X-ray crystal structure of a voltage-gated 
potassium channel. (Adapted, with permission, from Long  
et al. 2007. Copyright © 2007 Springer Nature.)
A. Top: In addition to its six transmembrane α-helixes (S1–S6), 
a voltage-gated K+ channel subunit contains a short α-helix 
(the P helix) that is part of the P-region selectivity filter, as well 
as an α-helix on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane that 
connects transmembrane helixes S4 and S5 (4–5 coupling helix). 
Bottom: An X-ray structural model of a single subunit shows the 
positions of the six membrane-spanning helixes, the P helix, 
and the 4–5 coupling helix. The S1–S4 voltage-sensing region 
and S5-P–S6 pore-forming regions are localized in separate 
domains. Two K+ ions bound in the pore are shown in pink.
B. In this side view of the channel, each subunit is a different 
color. Subunit 6 (red) is in the same orientation as in part A.
Pore 
Voltage sensor
1
2
3
5
6
4
P
4-5
helix 
2
3
4
1
5
6
P
Voltage 
sensor
Voltage 
sensor
Pore
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
4-5
helix 
A
B


===== Page 5 =====
184    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 8–14  Model for voltage gating based 
on X-ray crystal structures of two potassium 
channels. In each part of the figure, the draw-
ing on the left shows the actual structure of the 
open voltage-gated Kv1.2-2.1 chimera, while 
the drawing on the right shows the hypotheti-
cal structure of a closed voltage-gated K+ chan-
nel, based in part on the structure of the pore 
region of the bacterial K+ channel KcsA in the 
closed state. (Adapted, with permission, by Yu-
hang Chen from Long et al. 2007. Copyright © 
2007 Springer Nature.)
A. A view looking down on the open and 
closed channel from outside the cell. The cen-
tral pore is constricted in the closed state, pre-
venting K+ flow through the channel.
B. A view of the S1–S4 voltage-sensing 
domain from the side, parallel to the plane of 
the membrane. Positively charged residues 
in S4 are shown as blue sticks. In the open 
state, when the membrane is depolarized, four 
positive charges on the S4 helix are located 
in the external half of the membrane, facing 
the external solution. The positive charges in 
the interior of the membrane are stabilized by 
interactions with negatively charged residues 
in S1 and S2 (red sticks). In the closed state, 
when the membrane potential is negative, the 
S4 region moves inward so that its positive 
charges now lie in the inner half of the mem-
brane. The inward movement of S4 causes the 
cytoplasmic S4–S5 coupling helix (orange) to 
move downward.
C. The putative conformational change in the 
channel pore upon voltage gating. A side view 
of the tetrameric S5-P–S6 pore region of the 
channel shows the S4–S5 coupling helix. Mem-
brane repolarization causes the downward 
movement of the S4–S5 helix, applying force 
to the S6 inner helix of the pore (blue). This 
causes the S6 helix to bend at its pro-val-pro 
hinge, thereby closing the gate of the channel.
Closed:  hypothetical structure
Open:  actual structure
B  Voltage sensor movement
C  Gate movement
4
1
4-5
helix
4-5
helix
Voltage 
sensors
4-5 
helix
6
Closure
Pore
A  
pore domain of the channel. Although this electrome-
chanical coupling model provides a satisfying picture 
of how changes in membrane voltage lead to channel 
gating, a definitive answer to this key problem will 
require resolution of the structure of the closed state of 
a related voltage-gated mammalian K+ channel.
Such a direct coupling between the sensing ele-
ment of a channel (S4/S4–S5 linker) and the pore gate 
(S6) is found in most voltage-gated K+ channels, as well 
as in voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ channels. However, 
in many cases, the element of a channel that responds 
directly to the gating signal is not in direct contact with 
the channel gate, and instead, an allosteric mechanism 
propagates the response indirectly by more remote con-
formational changes. For example, in the voltage-gated 
K+ channel Kv10, the S4–S5 linker is not in a position 
to act as a lever on S6. Rather, the inward movement 
of S4 in response to a negative potential closes the S6 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    185
gate indirectly, by laterally compressing the S5 helix, 
which is packed against the S6 helix. Additional cases 
of allosteric gating mechanisms are discussed later 
in the context of inactivation of voltage-gated Na+ 
channels (Chapter 10) and activation of ligand-gated 
(Chapters 12 and 13) and mechanically gated channels 
(Chapter 18).
The Structural Basis of the Selective Permeability 
of Chloride Channels Reveals a Close Relation 
Between Channels and Transporters
Ions move across cell membranes by active transport by 
ion transporters or pumps, as well as by passive diffu-
sion through ion channels. Ion transporters are distin-
guished from ion channels because (1) they use a source 
of energy to actively transport ions against their electro-
chemical gradients, and (2) they transport ions at rates 
much lower than ion channels, too low to support fast 
neuronal signaling. Nevertheless, some types of trans-
porters and certain ion channels have similar structures, 
according to studies of the CLC family of proteins.
The CLC proteins expressed in vertebrates consist 
of a family of Cl− channels and a closely related family 
of Cl−-H+ cotransporters. Cotransporters use the elec-
trochemical gradient of one ion to move another ion 
against its electrochemical gradient. The CLC Cl−-H+ 
cotransporters, which are expressed in intracellular 
organelles, transfer two Cl− ions across the membrane 
in exchange for one proton. This type of transporter is 
termed an ion exchanger.
The human voltage-gated ClC-1 channels are 
important for maintaining the resting potential in skel-
etal muscle (Chapter 57).
0.5 pA
0.5 s
0
2
1
A  Single vertebrate Cl– channel currents
B  Model of ClC channel
Figure 8–15  The vertebrate CLC 
family of chloride channels and 
transporters are double-barrel chan-
nels with two identical pores.
A. Recordings of current through a 
single vertebrate Cl− channel show 
three levels of current: both pores 
closed (0), one pore open (1), and 
both pores open (2). (Adapted from 
Miller 1982.)
B. The channel is shown from the side 
(left) and looking down on the mem-
brane from outside the cell (right). 
Each subunit contains its own ion 
transport pathway and gate. In addi-
tion, the dimer has a gate shared by 
both subunits (not shown).
The crystal structures of the human ClC-1 chan-
nel and the homologous E. coli CLC exchangers have 
been determined by MacKinnon and colleagues. They 
found a close similarity in amino acid sequence to be 
reflected in a marked overall structural resemblance. 
Both types of CLC proteins consist of a homodimer 
composed of two identical subunits. Each subunit 
forms a separate ion pathway, and the two subunits 
function independently (Figure 8–15). The structures 
of the CLC proteins are quite different from those of 
K+ channels. Unlike the pore of a K+ channel, which 
is widest in the central region, each pore of the CLC 
protein has an hourglass profile. The neck of the hour-
glass, a tunnel 12 Å in length which forms the selec-
tivity filter, is just wide enough to contain three fully 
dehydrated Cl− ions.
Although the ion permeation pathways of the 
CLC proteins and the K+ channel differ in significant 
respects, they have evolved four similar features that 
are critical to their function. First, their selectivity fil-
ters contain multiple sequential binding sites for the 
permeating ion. Multi-ion occupancy creates a meta-
stable state that facilitates rapid ion passage. Second, 
the ion binding sites are formed by polar, partially 
charged atoms, not by fully ionized atoms. The result-
ant relatively weak binding energy ensures that the 
permeating ions do not become too tightly bound. 
Third, permeant ions are stabilized in the center of 
the membrane by the positively polarized ends of two 
α-helixes. Fourth, wide, water-filled vestibules at either 
end of the selectivity filter allow ions to approach the 
filter in a partially hydrated state. Thus although the 
K+ channels and CLC proteins differ fundamentally in 
amino acid sequence and overall structure, strikingly 


===== Page 7 =====
186    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic 
side
A
B
1
3
4
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
2
Figure 8–16  The functional difference between ion channels 
and transporters or pumps. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Gadsby 2004. Copyright © 2004 Springer Nature.)
A. Ion channels have a continuous aqueous pathway for 
ion conduction across the membrane. This pathway can be 
occluded by the closing of a gate.
B. Ion pumps and transporters have two gates in series that 
control ion flux. The gates are never open simultaneously, but 
both can close to trap one or more ions in the pore. The type of 
transporter illustrated here moves two different types of ions 
in opposite directions and is termed an exchanger or antiporter. 
Ion movement is tightly linked to a cycle of opening and closing 
of the two gates. When the external gate is open, one type of 
ion leaves while the other type enters the pore (1). This triggers 
a conformational change, causing the external gate to shut, 
thereby trapping the incoming ion (2). A second conformational 
change then causes the internal gate to open, allowing the 
trapped ion to leave and a new ion to enter (3). A further con-
formational change closes the internal gate, allowing the cycle 
to continue (4). With each cycle, one type of ion is transported 
from the outside to the inside of the cell, whereas the other 
type is transported from the inside to the outside of the cell. 
By coupling the movements of two or more ions, an exchanger 
can use the energy stored in the electrochemical gradient of 
one ion to actively transport another ion against its electro-
chemical gradient.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 8 / Ion Channels    187
similar functional features have evolved in these two 
classes of membrane proteins that promote both a 
high degree of ion selectivity and efficient throughput. 
These features have been conserved with surprising 
fidelity from prokaryotes through humans.
More detailed structural studies will be needed to 
understand how some CLC proteins function as Cl--H+ 
exchangers whereas others act as conventional chan-
nels. Most exchangers and pumps, such as the Na+-K+ 
pump (Chapter 9), are thought to have two gates, one 
external and one internal, which are never open simul-
taneously. Instead, ion movements and gate movements 
are presumed to be part of a tightly coupled reaction 
cycle (Figure 8–16). CLC exchangers apparently have 
two gates that control Cl− flux, coupled to the proto-
nation-deprotonation cycle of a flexible glutamate resi-
due in the selectivity filter that shuttles protons across 
the membrane. The resultant conformational changes 
enable transport of Cl- against its concentration gradi-
ent, driven by the flux of H+ ions down their electro-
chemical gradient. CLC channels are apparently built 
on a very similar structure as the transporters, but with 
modified gates and small structural changes in the ion 
transport pathway that allow much more rapid move-
ment of Cl- down its electrochemical gradient.
Highlights
  1.  Ions cross cell membranes through two main 
classes of integral membrane proteins—ion chan-
nels and ion pumps or transporters.
  2.  Ion channels act as catalysts for the passive flux 
of ions across the membrane. Channels have a 
central water-filled pore that substitutes for the 
polar environment on either side of the mem-
brane. It allows the electrically charged ions to 
rapidly cross the nonpolar environment of the 
cell membrane, driven by the ion’s electrochemi-
cal gradient.
  3.  Most ion channels are selectively permeable 
to certain ions. The portion of the channel pore 
called the selectivity filter determines which ions 
can penetrate based on the ion’s charge, size, and 
physicochemical interactions with the amino 
acids that line the wall of the pore.
  4.  Ion channels have gates that open and close in 
response to different signals. In the open state, 
channels generate ionic currents that produce 
rapid voltage signals that carry information in 
the nervous system and in other excitable cells.
  5.  Most ion channels have three states: open, closed, 
and inactivated or desensitized. Transitioning 
between these states is termed gating. Depend-
ing on the type of channel, gating is controlled 
by various factors, including membrane voltage, 
ligand binding, mechanical force, phosphoryla-
tion state, and temperature.
  6.  The most common ion channels in nerve and 
muscle cells belong to three major gene super-
families, the members of which are related by 
gene sequence homology and, in most cases, by 
functional properties.
  7.  Most ion channels are composed of multiple 
subunits. Combinatorial permutations of these 
subunits can generate a diverse array of chan-
nels with different functional properties. Post-
transcriptional modifications generate additional 
diversity.
  8.  The various types of ion channels are differen-
tially expressed in different types of neurons and 
different regions of neurons, contributing to the 
functional complexity and computational power 
of the nervous system. The expression patterns of 
some ion channels and transporters change dur-
ing development and in response to changes in 
neuronal activity patterns.
  9.  The rich variety of ion channels in different types 
of neurons has stimulated intensive efforts to 
develop drugs that can activate or block specific 
channel types in nerve and muscle cells. Such 
drugs would, in principle, maximize therapeutic 
effectiveness with minimal side effects.
10.  Structure-function and X-ray crystallographic 
studies of voltage-gated ion channels have 
provided key insights into the molecular and 
atomic-level details of K+ channel conduction, 
selectivity, and gating. Recent technical advances 
in single-particle cryo-electron microscopy have 
led to rapid progress in studies of a wide range 
of  ion channels.
11.  Active transport, which is mediated by integral 
membrane proteins called transporters or pumps, 
enables ions to move across the membrane against 
their electrochemical gradient. The driving force 
that generates active ion fluxes comes either from 
chemical energy (the hydrolysis of ATP) or from 
the favorable electrochemical potential difference 
for a cotransported ion.
12.  Most ion transporters and pumps do not pro-
vide a continuous pathway for ions. Rather, they 
undergo conformational changes for the differ-
ent phases of the transport cycle, thereby provid-
ing alternating access of the molecule’s central 
lumen to the two sides of the membrane. Because 
these conformational changes are relatively slow, 


===== Page 9 =====
188    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
they are much less efficient than ion channels in 
mediating ion fluxes.
John D. Koester 
 Bruce P. Bean 
Selected Reading
Hille B. 2001. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Isacoff EY, Jan LY, Minor DL. 2013. Conduits of life’s spark: 
a perspective on ion channel research since the birth of 
Neuron. Neuron 80:658–674.
Jentsch TJ, Pusch M. 2018. CLC chloride channels and trans-
porters: structure, function, physiology and disease. 
Physiol Rev 98:1493–1590.
Miller C. 1987. How ion channel proteins work. In: LK Kac-
zmarek, IB Levitan (eds). Neuromodulation: The Biological  
Control of Neuronal Excitability, pp. 39–63. New York: 
Oxford Univ. Press.
Yu FH, Yarov-Yarovoy V, Gutman GA, Catterall WA. 2005. 
Overview of molecular relationships in the voltage-gated 
ion channel superfamily. Pharmacol Rev 57:387–395.
References
Accardi A, Miller C. 2004. Secondary active transport medi-
ated by a prokaryotic homologue of ClC Cl− channels. 
Nature 427:803–807.
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD. 1994. 
Molecular Biology of the Cell, 3rd ed. New York: Garland.
Armstrong CM. 1971. Interaction of tetraethylammonium 
ion derivatives with the potassium channels of giant 
axons. J Gen Physiol 58:413–437.
Basilio D, Noack K, Picollo A, Accardi A. 2014. Conforma-
tional changes required for H+/Cl− exchange mediated by 
a CLC transporter. Nat Struct Mol Biol 21:456–464.
Bayliss WM. 1918. Principles of General Physiology, 2nd ed., 
rev. New York: Longmans, Greene.
Boscardin E, Alijevic O, Hummler E, Frateschi S, Kellenberger 
S. 2016. The function and regulation of acid-sensing ion 
channels (ASICs) and the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC): 
IUPHAR Review 19. Br J Pharmacol. 173:2671–2701.
Brücke E. 1843. Beiträge zur Lehre von der Diffusion tropf-
barflüssiger Korper durch poröse Scheidenwände. Ann 
Phys Chem 58:77–94.
Coste B, Xiao B, Santos JS, et al. 2012. Piezo proteins are pore-
forming subunits of mechanically activated channels. 
Nature 483:176–181.
Doyle DA, Cabral JM, Pfuetzner RA, et al. 1998. The structure 
of the potassium channel: molecular basis of K+ conduc-
tion and selectivity. Science 280:69–77.
Eisenman G. 1962. Cation selective glass electrodes and their 
mode of operation. Biophys J 2:259–323. Suppl 2.
Enyedi P, Gabor G. 2010. Molecular background of leak K+ 
currents: two-pore domain potassium channels. Physiol 
Rev 90:550–605.
Feng L, Campbell EB, MacKinnon R. 2012. Molecular mecha-
nism of proton transport in CLC Cl-/H+ exchange trans-
porters. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109:11699–11704.
Gadsby DC. 2004. Ion transport: spot the difference. Nature 
427:795–797.
Hamill OP, Marty A, Neher E, Sakmann B, Sigworth FJ. 1981. 
Improved patch-clamp techniques for high-resolution 
current recording from cells and cell-free membrane 
patches. Pflugers Arch 391:85–100.
Hansen SB. 2015. Lipid antagonism: the PIP2 paradigm 
of ligand-gated ion channels. Biochim Biophys Acta 
1851:620–628.
Henderson R, Unwin PNT. 1975. Three-dimensional model 
of purple membrane obtained by electron microscopy. 
Nature 257:28–32.
Hille B. 1973. Potassium channels selective permeability to 
small cations. J Gen Physiol 61:669–686.
Hille B. 1984. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, Sunder-
land, MA: Sinauer.
Isom LL, DeJongh KS, Catterall WA. 1994. Auxiliary subunits 
of voltage-gated ion channels. Neuron 12:1183–1194.
Kaczmarek LK. 2013. Slack, slick, and sodium-activated 
potassium channels. ISRN Neurosci 2013:354262.
Katz B, Thesleff S. 1957. A study of the “desensitization” pro-
duced by acetylcholine at the motor end-plate. J Physiol 
(Lond) 138:63–80.
Kyte J, Doolittle RF. 1982. A simple method for displaying the 
hydropathic character of a protein. J Mol Biol 157:105–132.
Lau C, Hunter MJ, Stewart A, Perozo E, and Vandenberg 
JI. 2019. Never at rest: insights into the conformational 
dynamics of ion channels from cryo-electron microscopy. 
J Physiol 596:1107–1119.
Lewis AH, Cui AF, McDonald MF, Grandl J. 2017. Transduc-
tion of repetitive mechanical stimuli by Piezo1 and Piezo2 
ion channels. Cell Rep 19:2572–2585.
Long SB, Tao X, Campbell EB, MacKinnon R. 2007. Atomic 
structure of a voltage-dependent K+ channel in a lipid 
membrane-like environment. Nature 450:376–382.
Miller C. 1982. Open-state substructure of single chloride 
channels from Torpedo electroplax. Philos Trans R Soc Lond 
B Biol Sci 299:401–411.
Miller C (ed). 1986. Ion Channel Reconstitution. New York: 
Plenum.
Miller C. 2001. See potassium run. Nature 414:23–24.
Morais-Cabral JH, Zhou Y, MacKinnon R. 2001. Energetic 
optimization of ion conduction rate by the K+ selectivity 
filter. Nature 414:37–42.
Moran Y, Barzilai MG, Liebeskind BJ, Zakon HH. 2015. Evo-
lution of voltage-gated ion channels at the emergence of 
Metazoa. J Exp Biol 218:515–525.
Murata Y, Iwasaki H, Sasaki M, Inaba K, Okamura Y. 2005. 
Phosphoinositide phosphatase activity coupled to an 
intrinsic voltage sensor. Nature 435:1239–1243.


