===== Page 1 =====
740    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–2  The force exerted by a motor unit varies with 
the rate at which its neuron generates action potentials.
A. Traces show the forces exerted by fast- and slow-contracting 
motor units in response to a single action potential (top trace) 
and a series of action potentials (set of four traces below). The 
time to the peak twitch force, or contraction time, is briefer in 
the faster unit. The rates of the action potentials used to evoke 
the tetanic contractions range from 17 to 100 Hz in the slow-
contracting unit to 46 to 100 Hz in the fast-contracting unit. The 
peak tetanic force evoked by 100-Hz stimulation is greater for 
the fast-contracting unit. Note the different force scales for the 
two sets of traces. (Adapted, with permission, from Botterman, 
Iwamoto, and Gonyea 1986; adapted from Fuglevand,  
Macefield, and Bigland-Ritchie 1999; and Macefield, Fuglevand, 
and Bigland-Ritchie 1996.)
B. Relation between peak force and the rate of action poten-
tials for fast- and slow-contracting motor units. The absolute 
force (left plot) is greater for the fast-contracting motor unit at 
all frequencies. At lower stimulus rates (right plot), the force 
evoked in the slow-contracting motor unit (longer contraction 
time) sums to a greater relative force (percent of peak force) 
than in the fast-contracting motor unit (shorter contraction time).
and summate (ie, the force varies with the contraction 
time of the motor unit and the rate at which the action 
potentials are evoked). At lower rates of stimulation, 
the ripples in the tetanus denote the peaks of individ-
ual twitches (Figure 31–2A). The peak force achieved 
during a tetanic contraction varies as a sigmoidal 
function of action potential rate, with the shape of the 
curve depending on the contraction time of the motor 
unit (Figure 31–2B). Maximal force is reached at lower 
100 Hz
60
56
46
200 ms
400 ms
100 mN
40 ms
40 ms
Slow twitch
100 Hz
25
21
17
5 mN
Fast twitch
Fast
Slow
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Peak force (mN)
Frequency (Hz)
0
20
40
60
80
100
20
0
40
60
80
100
Peak force (% maximum)
Frequency (Hz)
Fast
Slow
300
200
100
500
400
0
Force (mN)
75
50
25
100
0
Force (mN)
A
B
action potential rates for slow-contracting motor units 
than the rates needed to achieve maximal force in fast-
contracting units.
The functional properties of motor units vary across 
the population and between muscles. At one end of the 
distribution, motor units have long twitch contraction 
times and produce small forces, but are less fatigable. 
At the other end of the distribution, motor units have 
short contraction times, produce large forces, and are 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    741
Figure 31–3  Most human motor units produce low forces 
and have intermediate contraction times. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Van Cutsem et al. 1997. © Canadian Science 
Publishing.)
A. Distribution of twitch torques for 528 motor units in the tibi-
alis anterior muscle obtained from 10 subjects.
B. Distribution of twitch contraction times for 528 motor units 
in the tibialis anterior muscle.
more fatigable. The order in which motor units are 
recruited during a voluntary contraction begins with 
the slow-contracting, low-force units and proceeds up 
to the fast-contracting, high-force units. As observed 
by Jacques Duchateau and colleagues, most motor 
units in humans produce low forces and have interme-
diate contraction times (Figure 31–3).
The range of contractile properties exhibited by 
motor units is partly attributable to differences in the 
structural specializations and metabolic properties of 
muscle fibers. One commonly used scheme to charac-
terize muscle fibers is based on their reactivity to his-
tochemical assays for the enzyme myosin adenosine 
triphosphatase (ATPase), which is used as an index 
Motor unit count (%)
A  Twitch torques
B  Twitch contraction times
Motor unit count (%)
Time to peak (ms)
Twitch torque (mN•m)
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
20
0
5
10
15
20
40
60
80
100
of contractile speed. Histochemical stains for myosin 
ATPase can identify two types of muscle fibers: type I 
(low levels of myosin ATPase) and type II (high lev-
els of myosin ATPase). Slow-contracting motor units 
contain type I muscle fibers, and fast-contracting 
units include type II fibers. The type II fibers can be 
further classified as being less fatigable (type IIa) or 
more fatigable (type IIb, IIx, or IId), due to the associa-
tion between myosin ATPase content and the relative 
abundance of oxidative enzymes. Another commonly 
used scheme distinguishes muscle fibers on the basis 
of genetically defined isoforms of the myosin heavy 
chain (MHC). Muscle fibers in slow-contracting motor 
units express MHC-I, those in the less fatigable fast-
contracting units express MHC-IIA, and those in the 
more fatigable fast-contracting units express MHC-IIX.
In actuality, the contractile properties of single 
muscle fibers are less distinct than the two classifica-
tion schemes suggest (Figure 31–4). In addition to the 
variability in the contractile properties of each type of 
muscle fiber (MHC-I, -IIA, or -IIX), some muscle fibers 
co-express more than one MHC isoform. Such hybrid 
muscle fibers exhibit contractile properties that are 
intermediate between the muscle fibers that compose a 
Figure 31–4  The contractile properties of muscle fiber types 
are distributed continuously. Peak power produced by seg-
ments of single muscle fibers from the vastus lateralis muscle 
with different types of myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoforms. 
Two types of hybrid fibers (I-IIA and IIA-IIX) contain isoforms of 
both types of MHCs. Power is calculated as the product of peak 
tetanic force (Po) and maximal shortening velocity (segment 
length per second [L/s]). (Adapted, with permission, from  
Bottinelli et al. 1996. Copyright © 1996 The Physiological Society.)
Number of ﬁbers
Myosin heavy chain
Power (Po ∙ L/s)
0
IIX
IIA–IIX
IIA
I–IIA
I
0
2
4
6
8
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05 


===== Page 3 =====
742    Part V / Movement
single isoform. The relative proportion of hybrid fibers 
in a muscle increases with age. As with the distribu-
tion of contractile properties across motor units (Figure 
31–3), the distribution across individual muscle fibers 
is also continuous, from slow to fast contracting and 
from least to most powerful (Figure 31–4).
Physical Activity Can Alter Motor Unit Properties
Alterations in habitual levels of physical activity can 
influence the three contractile properties of motor units 
(contraction speed, maximal force, and fatigability). A 
decrease in muscle activity, such as occurs with aging, 
bed rest, limb immobilization, or space flight, reduces 
the maximal capabilities of all three properties. The 
effects of increased physical activity vary with the inten-
sity and duration of the activity. Brief sets of strong con-
tractions performed a few times each week can increase 
motor unit force (strength training); brief sets of rapid 
contractions performed a few times each week can 
increase motor unit discharge rate (power training); and 
prolonged periods of weaker contractions can reduce 
motor unit fatigability (endurance training).
Changes in the contractile properties of motor units 
involve adaptations in the structural specializations and 
biochemical properties of muscle fibers. The improve-
ment in contraction speed caused by power training, 
for example, is associated with an increase in the maxi-
mal shortening velocity of a muscle fiber caused by an 
increase in the quantity of myosin ATPase in the fiber. 
Similarly, the increase in maximal force is associated 
with the enlarged size and increased intrinsic force 
capacity of the muscle fibers produced by an increase in 
the number and density of the contractile proteins.
In contrast, decreases in the fatigability of a mus-
cle fiber can be caused by many different adaptations, 
such as increases in capillary density, number of mito-
chondria, efficiency of the processes involved in acti-
vating the contractile proteins (excitation-contraction 
coupling), and oxidative capacity of the muscle fibers. 
Although the adaptive capabilities of muscle fibers 
decline with age, the muscles remain responsive to 
exercise even at 90 years of age.
Despite the efficacy of strength, power, and endur-
ance training in altering the contractile properties of 
muscle fibers, these training regimens have little effect 
on the composition of a muscle’s fibers. Although 
several weeks of exercise can change the relative 
proportion of type IIA and IIX fibers, it produces no 
change in the proportion of type I fibers. All fiber types 
adapt in response to exercise, although to varying 
extents depending on the type of exercise. For exam-
ple, strength training of leg muscles for 2 to 3 months 
can increase the cross-sectional area of type I fibers by 
0% to 20% and of type II fibers by 20% to 60%, increase 
the proportion of type IIa fibers by approximately 
10%, and decrease the proportion of type IIx fibers by 
a similar amount. Furthermore, endurance training 
may increase the enzyme activities of oxidative meta-
bolic pathways without noticeable changes in the 
proportions of type I and type II fibers, but the rela-
tive proportions of type IIa and IIx fibers do change 
as a function of the duration of each exercise session. 
Conversely, although several weeks of bed rest or limb 
immobilization do not change the proportions of fiber 
types in a muscle, they do decrease the size and intrin-
sic force capacity of muscle fibers. Adaptations in fiber 
type properties and proportions in turn alter the distri-
bution of contractile properties in muscle fibers (Figure 
31–4) and motor units (Figure 31–3).
Although physical activity has little influence on 
the proportion of type I fibers in a muscle, more sub-
stantial interventions can have an effect. Space flight, 
for example, exposes muscles to a sustained decrease 
in gravity that reduces the proportion of type I fibers in 
some leg muscles and decreases contractile properties. 
Similarly, surgically changing the nerve that innervates 
a muscle alters the pattern of activation and eventu-
ally causes the muscle to exhibit properties similar to 
those of the muscle that was originally innervated by 
the transplanted nerve. Connecting a nerve that origi-
nally innervated a rapidly contracting leg muscle to a 
slowly contracting leg muscle, for example, will cause 
the slower muscle to become more like a faster muscle. 
In contrast, a history of performing powerful contrac-
tions with leg muscles is associated with a modest 
reduction in the proportion of type I fibers, a marked 
increase in the proportion of type IIx fibers, and a huge 
increase in the power that can be produced by the 
type IIa and IIx fibers.
Muscle Force Is Controlled by the Recruitment and 
Discharge Rate of Motor Units
The force exerted by a muscle during a contraction 
depends on the number of motor units that are acti-
vated and the rate at which each of the active motor 
neurons discharges action potentials. Force is increased 
during a muscle contraction by the activation of addi-
tional motor units, which are recruited progressively 
from the weakest to the strongest (Figure 31–5). A 
motor unit’s recruitment threshold is the force during 
the contraction at which the motor unit is activated. 
Muscle force decreases gradually by terminating the 
activity of motor units in the reverse order from strong-
est to weakest.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    743
Figure 31–5  (Left) Motor units that exert low forces are 
recruited before those that exert greater forces. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Desmedt and Godaux 1977; Milner-Brown, 
Stein, and Yemm 1973. Copyright © 1973 The Physiological 
Society.)
A. Action potentials in two motor units were recorded concur-
rently with a single intramuscular electrode while the subject 
gradually increased muscle force. Motor unit 1 began discharg-
ing action potentials near the beginning of the voluntary con-
traction, and its discharge rate increased during the contraction. 
Motor unit 2 began discharging action potentials near the end 
of the contraction.
B. Average twitch forces for motor units 1 and 2 as extracted 
with an averaging procedure during the voluntary contraction.
C. The plot shows the net muscle forces at which 64 motor 
units in a hand muscle of one person were recruited (recruit-
ment threshold) during a voluntary contraction relative to the 
twitch forces of the individual motor units.
Muscle
action 
potentials
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 2
0.5 mV
2.5 N
2.5 s
Force
Average
force
Average
force
A  Action potentials in two motor units
B  Force produced by the two units
C  Recruitment of 64 motor units in one muscle
50 ms
Time to peak
Unit 1
2.5 mN
10 mN
Twitch force of motor unit (mN)
1
10
100
0.2
2.0
20
Recruitment threshold (N)
The order in which motor units are recruited is 
highly correlated with several indices of motor unit 
size, including the size of the motor neuron cell bod-
ies, the diameter and conduction velocity of the axons, 
and the amount of force that the muscle fibers can 
exert. Because individual sources of synaptic input are 
broadly distributed across most neurons in a motor 
nucleus, the orderly recruitment of motor neurons is 
not accomplished by the sequential activation of dif-
ferent sets of synaptic inputs that target specific motor 
neurons. Rather, recruitment order is determined by 
intrinsic differences in the responsiveness of individual 
motor neurons to relatively uniform synaptic input.
One of these factors is the anatomical size of a 
neuron’s soma and dendrites. Smaller neurons have 
a higher input resistance (Rin) to current and, due 
to Ohm’s law (∆Vm = Isyn × Rin), experience a greater 
change in membrane potential (∆Vm) in response to a 
given synaptic current (Isyn). Consequently, increases 
in the net excitatory input to a motor nucleus cause 
the levels of depolarization to reach threshold in 
an ascending order of motor neuron size: Contrac-
tion force is increased by recruiting the smallest 
motor neuron first and the largest motor neuron last  
(Figure 31–6). This effect is known as the size principle 
of motor neuron recruitment, a concept enunciated by 
Elwood Henneman in 1957.
The size principle has two important consequences 
for the control of movement by the nervous system. 
First, the sequence of motor neuron recruitment is 
determined by the properties of the spinal neurons and 
not by supraspinal regions of the nervous system. This 
means that the brain cannot selectively activate spe-
cific motor units. Second, the axons arising from small 
motor neurons are thinner than those associated with 


===== Page 5 =====
744    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–6  The size principle of 
motor neuron recruitment.  Two motor 
neurons of different sizes have the same 
resting membrane potential (Vr) and 
receive the same excitatory synaptic 
current (Isyn) from a spinal interneuron. 
Because the small motor neuron has a 
smaller surface area, it has fewer parallel 
ion channels and therefore a higher input 
resistance (Rhigh). According to Ohm’s 
law (V = IR), Isyn in the small neuron 
produces a large excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP) that reaches threshold, 
resulting in the discharge of an action 
potential. However, the axon of the small 
motor neuron has a small diameter and 
thus conducts the action potential at a 
relatively low velocity (Vslow) and to fewer 
muscle fibers. In contrast, the large motor 
neuron has a larger surface area, which 
results in a lower transmembrane resist-
ance (Rlow) and a smaller EPSP that does 
not reach threshold in response to Isyn; 
however, when synaptic input does reach 
threshold, the action potential is con-
ducted relatively rapidly (Vfast) (Chapter 9).
Figure 31–7  Muscle force can be adjusted by varying the 
number of active motor units and their discharge rate. Each 
line shows the discharge rate (pulses per second [pps]) for a 
single motor unit in a hand muscle over a range of finger forces 
(maximal voluntary contraction [MVC]). The finger force was 
produced by the action of a single hand muscle. The leftmost 
point of each line indicates the threshold force at which the 
motor unit is recruited, whereas the rightmost point corre-
sponds to the peak force at which the motor unit could be iden-
tified. The range of discharge rates was often less for motor 
units with lower recruitment thresholds. Increases in finger 
force were produced by concurrent increases in discharge rate 
and the number of activated motor units. (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Moritz et al. 2005.)
Small-diameter
motor neuron
Large-diameter
motor neuron
Spinal
interneuron
Isyn
Isyn
Rlow
Rhigh
Vslow
Vfast
Action 
potential
0
Em
EPSP
Threshold
Rest
EPSP
Threshold
0
Em
Rest
large motor neurons and innervate fewer muscle fibers. 
Because the number of muscle fibers innervated by a 
motor neuron is a key determinant of motor unit force, 
motor units are activated in order of increasing strength, 
so the earliest recruited motor units are the weakest ones.
As suggested by Edgar Adrian in the 1920s, the 
muscle force at which the last motor unit in a motor 
nucleus is recruited varies between muscles. In some 
hand muscles, all the motor units have been recruited 
when the force reaches approximately 60% of maximum 
during a slow muscle contraction. In the biceps brachii, 
deltoid, and tibialis anterior muscles, recruitment con-
tinues up to approximately 85% of the maximal force. 
Beyond the upper limit of motor unit recruitment, 
changes in muscle force depend solely on variations in 
the rate at which motor neurons generate action poten-
tials. Over most of the operating range of a muscle, 
the force it exerts depends on concurrent changes in 
discharge rate and the number of active motor units  
(Figure 31–7). Except at low forces, however, variation in 
Finger force (% MVC)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
Discharge rate (pps)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    745
discharge rate has a greater influence on muscle force 
than does changes in the number of active motor units.
The order in which motor units are recruited does 
not change with contraction speed. Due to the time 
involved in excitation-contraction coupling, faster 
contractions require the action potential for each motor 
unit to be generated earlier than during a slow contrac-
tion. As a result of this adjustment, the upper limit of 
motor unit recruitment during the fastest muscle con-
tractions is approximately 40% of maximum. Conse-
quently, it is possible to manipulate the rate at which 
motor units are recruited by varying contraction speed.
The Input–Output Properties of Motor Neurons Are 
Modified by Input From the Brain Stem
The discharge rate of motor neurons depends on the 
magnitude of the depolarization generated by excita-
tory inputs and the intrinsic membrane properties of 
the motor neurons in the spinal cord. These properties 
can be profoundly modified by input from monoam-
inergic neurons in the brain stem (Chapter 40). In the 
absence of this input, the dendrites of motor neurons 
passively transmit synaptic current to the cell body, 
resulting in a modest depolarization that immediately 
ceases when the input stops. Under these conditions, 
the relation between input current and discharge rate 
is linear over a wide range.
The input–output relation becomes nonlinear, 
however, when the monoamines serotonin and nor-
epinephrine induce a huge increase in conductance by 
activating L-type Ca2+ channels that are located on the 
dendrites of the motor neurons. The resulting inward 
Ca2+ currents can enhance synaptic currents by three- 
to five-fold (Figure 31–8). In an active motor neuron, 
this augmented current can sustain an elevated dis-
charge rate after a brief depolarizing input has ended, 
a behavior known as self-sustained firing. A subsequent 
brief inhibitory input, such as from a spinal reflex 
pathway, can terminate such self-sustained firing.
Because the properties of motor neurons are 
strongly influenced by monoamines, the excitability of 
the pool of motor neurons innervating a single muscle 
is partly under control of the brain stem. In the awake 
state, moderate levels of monoaminergic input to the 
motor neurons of slowly contracting motor units pro-
mote self-sustained firing. This is probably the source 
of the sustained force exerted by slower motor units 
to maintain posture (Chapter 36). Conversely, the 
withdrawal of monoaminergic drive during sleep 
decreases excitability and helps ensure a relaxed motor 
state. Thus, monoaminergic input from the brain stem 
can adjust the gain of the motor unit pool to meet 
the demands of different tasks. This flexibility does 
not compromise the size principle of orderly recruit-
ment because the threshold for activation of the per-
sistent inward currents is lowest in the motor neurons 
of slower contracting motor units, which are the first 
recruited even in the absence of monoamines.
Muscle Force Depends on the Structure  
of Muscle
Muscle force depends not only on the amount of motor 
neuron activity but also on the arrangement of the fib-
ers in the muscle. Because movement involves the 
controlled variation of muscle force, the nervous sys-
tem must take into account the structure of muscle to 
achieve specific movements.
The Sarcomere Is the Basic Organizational  
Unit of Contractile Proteins
Individual muscles contain thousands of fibers that 
vary from 1 to 50 mm in length and from 10 to 60 μm in 
diameter. The variation in fiber dimensions reflects dif-
ferences in the quantity of contractile protein. Despite 
this quantitative variation, the organization of con-
tractile proteins is similar in all muscle fibers. The pro-
teins are arranged in repeating sets of thick and thin 
filaments, each set known as a sarcomere (Figure 31–9). 
The in vivo length of a sarcomere, which is bounded 
by Z disks, ranges from 1.5 to 3.5 μm within and across 
muscles. Sarcomeres are arranged in series to form a 
myofibril, and the myofibrils are aligned in parallel to 
form a muscle fiber (myocyte).
The force that each sarcomere can generate arises 
from the interaction of the contractile thick and thin fil-
aments. The thick filament consists of several hundred 
myosin molecules arranged in a structured sequence. 
Each myosin molecule comprises paired coiled-coil 
domains that terminate in a pair of globular heads. The 
myosin molecules in the two halves of a thick filament 
point in opposite directions and are progressively dis-
placed so that the heads, which extend away from the 
filament, protrude around the thick filament (Figure 
31–9C). The thick filament is anchored in the middle of 
the sarcomere by the protein titin, which connects each 
end of the thick filament with neighboring strands of 
actin in the thin filament and with the Z-disc. To maxi-
mize the interaction between the globular heads of 
myosin and the thin filaments, six thin filaments sur-
round each thick filament.
The primary components of the thin filament are 
two helical strands of fibrous F-actin, each of which 


===== Page 7 =====
746    Part V / Movement
Figure 31–8  Monoaminergic input enhances the excitability of 
motor neurons. (Part A, adapted, with permission, of Heckman 
et al. 2009. Copyright © 2009 International Federation of  
Clinical Neurophysiology; Part B, data from CJ Heckman; Part C, 
adapted, with permission, from Erim et al. 1996. Copyright © 
1996 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
A. Membrane currents and potentials in spinal motor neurons 
of adult cats that were either deeply anesthetized (low mono-
aminergic drive) or decerebrate (moderate monoaminergic 
drive). When monoaminergic input is absent or low, a brief 
excitatory input produces an equally brief synaptic current dur-
ing voltage clamp (upper record). This current is not sufficient 
to bring the membrane potential of the neuron to threshold for 
generating action potentials in the unclamped condition (lower 
record). The same brief excitatory input during moderate levels 
of monoaminergic input activates a persistent inward current in 
the dendrites, which amplifies the excitatory synaptic current 
and decays slowly following cessation of synaptic input (upper 
record). This persistent inward current causes a high discharge 
rate during the input and sustains a lesser discharge rate after 
the input ceases (lower record). A brief inhibitory input will 
return the neuron to its resting state.
B. High levels of monoaminergic input to a motor neuron give 
rise to a persistent inward current in response to injected cur-
rent, resulting in a much greater discharge rate for a given 
amount of current.
C. The blue trace represents the force exerted by the dorsiflexor 
muscle during a contraction that gradually increased to 80% of 
maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVC) force in a human 
subject. Each of the four pink traces indicates the change in the 
rate at which a single motor unit discharged action potentials 
during the contraction. The leftmost point (start) of each of these 
four traces shows the time when the motor unit was recruited, 
and the rightmost point (end) denotes the time at which the 
motor neuron stopped discharging action potentials. The rapid 
increase in discharge rate during the increase in muscle force is 
similar to the change in rate observed in the presence of moder-
ate levels of monoaminergic input (see part B).
0
Depolarizing synaptic input
Ampliﬁcation
Sustained tail current
Sustained ﬁring
Monoaminergic input 
Discharge rate (pps)
Discharge rate (pps)
Force (% MVC)
Current (nA)
Voltage (mV)
B
Time (s)
Time (s)
Current
Motor
unit
Muscle
force
C
–70
0
20
40
–60
–50
–10
0
5
30
100
0
20
40
60
80
25
20
15
10
5
15
10
5
25
20
0
10
1
2
3
4
0
Time (s)
A
Low
Moderate
contains approximately 200 actin monomers. Super-
imposed on F-actin are tropomyosin and troponin, 
proteins that control the interaction between actin and 
myosin. Tropomyosin consists of two coiled strands 
that lie in the groove of the F-actin helix; troponin is a 
small molecular complex that is attached to tropomyo-
sin at regular intervals (Figure 31–9C).
The thin filaments are anchored to the Z disk at 
each end of the sarcomere, whereas the thick filaments 
occupy the middle of the sarcomere (Figure 31–9B). 
This organization accounts for the alternating light 
and dark bands of striated muscle. The light band con-
tains only thin filaments, whereas the dark band con-
tains both thick and thin filaments. When a muscle is 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 31 / The Motor Unit and Muscle Action    747
activated, the width of the light band decreases but the 
width of the dark band does not change, suggesting 
that the thick and thin filaments slide relative to one 
another during a contraction. This led to the sliding 
filament hypothesis of muscle contraction proposed by 
A. F. Huxley and H. E. Huxley in the 1950s.
The sliding of the thick and thin filaments is trig-
gered by the release of Ca2+ from within the sarcoplasm 
of a muscle fiber in response to an action potential that 
travels along the fiber’s membrane, the sarcolemma. 
Varying the amount of Ca2+ in the sarcoplasm controls 
the interaction between the thick and thin filaments. 
The Ca2+ concentration in the sarcoplasm is kept low 
under resting conditions by active pumping of Ca2+ 
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a network of longi-
tudinal tubules and chambers of smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum. Calcium is stored in the terminal cisternae, 
which are located next to intracellular extensions of the 
sarcolemma known as transverse tubules (T-tubules). 
The transverse tubules, terminal cisternae, and sarco-
plasmic reticulum constitute an activation system that 
transforms an action potential into the sliding of the 
thick and thin filaments (Figure 31–9A).
As an action potential propagates along the sarco-
lemma, it invades the transverse tubules and causes the 
rapid release of Ca2+ from the terminal cisternae into 
the sarcoplasm. Once in the sarcoplasm, Ca2+ diffuses 
among the filaments and binds reversibly to troponin, 
which results in the displacement of the troponin–
tropomyosin complex and enables the sliding of the 
thick and thin filaments. Because a single action potential 
does not release enough Ca2+ to bind all available tro-
ponin sites in skeletal muscle, the strength of a contrac-
tion increases with the action potential rate.
The sliding of the filaments depends on mechani-
cal work performed by the globular heads of myosin, 
work that uses chemical energy contained in adeno-
sine triphosphate (ATP). The actions of the myosin 
heads are regulated by the cross-bridge cycle, a sequence 
of detachment, activation, and attachment (Figure 
31–10). In each cycle, a globular head undergoes a dis-
placement of 5 to 10 nm. Contractile activity continues 
as long as Ca2+ and ATP are present in the cytoplasm in 
sufficient amounts.
Once the contractile proteins have been activated 
by the release of Ca2+, sarcomere length may increase, 
remain the same, or decrease depending on the magni-
tude of the load against which the muscle is acting. The 
force generated by an activated sarcomere when its 
length does not change or decreases can be explained 
by the cross-bridge cycle involving the thick and 
thin filaments. When the length of the activated sar-
comere increases, however, the force developed by the 
extension of titin adds significantly to the sarcomere 
force. The force produced by titin during the stretch 
of an activated sarcomere is augmented by its abil-
ity to increase stiffness, which is accomplished when 
titin binds Ca2+ and then attaches at specific locations 
on actin to reduce the length that it can be stretched. 
The force produced by activated sarcomeres therefore 
depends on the interactions of three filaments (actin, 
myosin, and titin).
Noncontractile Elements Provide Essential 
Structural Support
Structural elements of the muscle fiber maintain the 
alignment of the contractile proteins within the fiber 
and facilitate the transmission of force from the sar-
comeres to the skeleton. A network of proteins (nebu-
lin, titin) maintains the orientation of the thick and thin 
filaments within the sarcomere, whereas other proteins 
(desmin, skelemins) constrain the lateral alignment of 
the myofibrils (Figure 31–9B). These proteins contrib-
ute to the elasticity of muscle and maintain the appro-
priate alignment of cellular structures when the muscle 
acts against an external load.
Although some of the force generated by the cross 
bridges is transmitted along the sarcomeres in series, 
most of it travels laterally from the thin filaments to 
an extracellular matrix that surrounds each muscle fiber, 
through a group of transmembrane and membrane-
associated proteins called a costamere (see inset for  
Figure 31–9B). The lateral transmission of force follows 
two pathways through the costamere, one through 
a dystrophin–glycoprotein complex and the other 
through vinculin and members of the integrin family. 
Mutations of genes that encode components of the dys-
trophin–glycoprotein complex cause muscular dystro-
phies in humans, which are associated with substantial 
decreases in muscle force.
Contractile Force Depends on Muscle Fiber 
Activation, Length, and Velocity
The force that a muscle fiber can exert depends on 
the number of cross bridges formed and the force 
produced by each cross bridge. These two factors are 
influenced by the Ca2+ concentration in the sarcoplasm, 
the amount of overlap between the thick and thin fila-
ments, and the velocity with which the thick and thin 
filaments slide past one another.
The influx of Ca2+ that activates formation of the 
cross bridges is transitory because continuous pump 
activity quickly returns Ca2+ to the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum. The release and reuptake of Ca2+ in response to a 
single action potential occurs so quickly that only some 


===== Page 9 =====
748    Part V / Movement
Sarcolemma
Desmin
Z disk
Skelemin
Costamere
Nucleus
Terminal
cisterna
Transverse
tubules
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Sarcolemma
(muscle ﬁber membrane)
Myoﬁbril
Filaments
Mitochondrion
Sarcomere
A
B
C
Z disk
Thin ﬁlament
(F-actin)
Thick ﬁlament
(myosin)
Tropomyosin
Troponin
Titin
Nebulin
Integrin
α3β1
α-Actinin
Talin
Vinculin
Dystroglycans
Dystrophin
Basal lamina
Laminin
Fibronectin
Desmin
γ-Actin
α
β


