===== Page 1 =====
244    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
potential. At electrical synapses, the synaptic delay—
the time between the presynaptic spike and the post-
synaptic potential—is remarkably short (Figure 11–2B).
Such a short latency is not possible with chemi-
cal transmission, which requires several biochemical 
steps: release of a transmitter from the presynaptic 
neuron, diffusion of transmitter molecules across the 
synaptic cleft to the postsynaptic cell, binding of trans-
mitter to a specific receptor, and subsequent gating of 
ion channels (all described in this and the next chapter). 
Only current passing directly from one cell to another 
can produce the near-instantaneous transmission 
observed at the giant motor electrical synapse.
Another feature of electrical transmission is that 
the change in potential of the postsynaptic cell is 
directly related to the size and shape of the change in 
potential of the presynaptic cell. Even when a weak 
subthreshold depolarizing current is injected into the 
presynaptic neuron, some current enters the postsyn-
aptic cell and depolarizes it (Figure 11–3). In contrast, 
at a chemical synapse, the current in the presynaptic 
cell must reach the threshold for an action potential 
before it can release transmitter and elicit a response in 
the postsynaptic cell.
Most electrical synapses can transmit both depolar-
izing and hyperpolarizing currents. A presynaptic action 
potential with a large hyperpolarizing afterpotential 
produces a biphasic (depolarizing-hyperpolarizing) 
change in potential in the postsynaptic cell. Signal trans-
mission at electrical synapses is similar to the passive 
propagation of subthreshold electrical signals along 
axons (Chapter 9) and therefore is also referred to as 
electrotonic transmission. At some specialized gap junc-
tions, the channels have voltage-dependent gates that 
permit them to conduct depolarizing current in only 
Figure 11–3  Electrical transmission is graded. It occurs 
even when the current in the presynaptic cell is below the 
threshold for an action potential. As demonstrated by single-
cell recordings, a subthreshold depolarizing stimulus causes a 
passive depolarization in the presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. 
(Depolarizing or outward current is indicated by an upward 
deflection.)
Current pulse to
presynaptic cell
Voltage recorded
in presynaptic cell
Voltage recorded
in postsynaptic cell
one direction, from the presynaptic cell to the postsyn-
aptic cell. These junctions are called rectifying synapses. 
(The crayfish giant motor synapse is an example.)
Cells at an Electrical Synapse Are Connected by 
Gap-Junction Channels
At an electrical synapse, the pre- and postsynaptic 
components are apposed at the gap junction, where 
the separation between the two neurons (4 nm) is 
much less than the normal nonsynaptic space between 
neurons (20 nm). This narrow gap is bridged by  
gap-junction channels, specialized protein structures 
that conduct ionic current directly from the presynap-
tic to the postsynaptic cell.
A gap-junction channel consists of a pair of 
hemichannels, or connexons, one in the presynaptic and 
the other in the postsynaptic cell membrane. These 
hemichannels thus form a continuous bridge between 
the two cells (Figure 11–4). The pore of the channel 
has a large diameter of approximately 1.5 nm, much 
larger than the 0.3- to 0.5-nm diameter of ion-selective 
ligand-gated or voltage-gated channels. The large pore 
of gap-junction channels does not discriminate among 
inorganic ions and is even wide enough to permit 
small organic molecules and experimental markers 
such as fluorescent dyes to pass between the two cells.
Each connexon is composed of six identical subu-
nits, called connexins. Connexins in different tissues are 
encoded by a large family of 21 separate but related 
genes. In mammals, the most common connexon in 
neurons is formed from the product of connexin 36. 
Connexin genes are named for their predicted molec-
ular weight, in kilodaltons, based on their primary 
amino acid sequence. All connexin subunits have an 
intracellular N- and C-terminus with four interposed 
α-helixes that span the cell membrane (Figure 11–4C).
Many gap-junction channels in different cell 
types are formed by the products of different con-
nexin genes and thus respond differently to modu-
latory factors that control their opening and closing. 
For example, although most gap-junction channels 
close in response to lowered cytoplasmic pH or ele-
vated cytoplasmic Ca2+, the sensitivity of different 
channel isoforms to these factors varies widely. The 
closing of gap-junction channels in response to pH 
and Ca2+ plays an important role in the decoupling 
of damaged cells from healthy cells, as damaged cells 
contain elevated Ca2+ levels and a high concentration 
of protons. Finally, neurotransmitters released from 
nearby chemical synapses can modulate the opening 
of gap-junction channels through intracellular meta-
bolic reactions (Chapter 14).


===== Page 2 =====
Connexon
Postsynaptic
cytoplasm
Presynaptic
cytoplasm
A
Normal
extracellular space
4 nm
20 nm
D
B
Channel formed by 
pores in each membrane
Connexin
Presynaptic
cytoplasm
Extracellular
space
Extracellular loops for
homophilic interactions
1 2 3 4
N
C
NTH
Cytoplasmic loops
for regulation
C
Open
Closed
Figure 11–4  A three-dimensional model of the gap-junction 
channel, based on X-ray and electron diffraction studies.
A. The electrical synapse, or gap junction, is composed of 
numerous specialized channels that span the membranes of 
the pre- and postsynaptic neurons. These gap-junction chan-
nels allow current to pass directly from one cell to the other. 
The array of channels in the electron micrograph was isolated 
from the membrane of a rat liver cell that had been negatively 
stained, a technique that darkens the area around the chan-
nels and in the pores. Each channel appears hexagonal in outline. 
Magnification ×307,800. (Reproduced, with permission, from N. 
Gilula.)
B. A gap-junction channel is actually a pair of hemichannels, 
one in each apposite cell that connects the cytoplasm of the two 
cells. (Adapted from Makowski et al. 1977.)
C. Each hemichannel, or connexon, is made up of six identi-
cal subunits called connexins. Each connexin is approximately 
7.5 nm long and spans the cell membrane. A single connexin 
has intracellular N- and C-terminals, including a short intracel-
lular N-terminal α-helix (NTH), and four membrane-spanning 
α-helixes (1–4). The amino acid sequences of gap-junction 
proteins from many different kinds of tissue have regions of 
similarity that include the transmembrane helixes and the extra-
cellular regions, which are involved in the homophilic matching 
of apposite hemichannels.
D. The connexins are arranged in such a way that a pore is 
formed in the center of the structure. The resulting connexon, 
with a pore diameter of approximately 1.5 to 2 nm, has a 
characteristic hexagonal outline, as shown in the photograph 
in part A. In some gap-junction channels, the pore is opened 
when the subunits rotate approximately 0.9 nm at the cyto-
plasmic base in a clockwise direction. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Unwin and Zampighi 1980. Copyright © 1980 
Springer Nature.)


===== Page 3 =====
246    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
The three-dimensional structure of a gap-junction 
channel formed by the human connexin 26 subu-
nit has been determined by X-ray crystallography. 
This structure shows how the membrane-spanning 
α-helixes assemble to form the central pore of the 
channel and how the extracellular loops connecting 
the transmembrane helixes interdigitate to connect the 
two hemichannels (Figure 11–5). The pore is lined with 
polar residues that facilitate the movement of ions. 
An N-terminal α-helix may serve as the voltage gate 
of the connexin 26 channel, plugging the cytoplasmic 
mouth of the pore in the closed state. A separate gate 
Figure 11–5  High-resolution three-dimensional structure 
of a gap-junction channel. All structures were determined 
by X-ray crystallography of gap-junction channels formed by 
the human connexin 26 subunit. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Maeda et al. 2009. Copyright © 2009 Springer 
Nature.)
A. Left: Diagram of an intact gap-junction channel showing the 
pair of apposed hemichannels. Middle: This high-resolution 
structure of a single connexin subunit shows four transmem-
brane α-helixes (1–4) and a short N-terminal helix (NTH). The 
orientation of the subunit corresponds to that of the yellow 
subunit in the diagram to the right. Right: Bottom-up view look-
ing into a hemichannel from the cytoplasm. Each of the six 
subunits has a different color. The helixes of the yellow subunit 
are numbered. The orientation corresponds to that of the yel-
low hemichannel in the diagram at left, following a 90-degree 
rotation toward the viewer.
B. Two side views of the gap-junction channel in the plane of 
the membrane show the two apposed hemichannels. The ori-
entation is the same as in part A. Left: Cross section through 
the channel shows the internal surface of the channel pore. 
Blue indicates positively charged surfaces; red indicates nega-
tively charged surfaces. The green mass inside the pore at 
the cytoplasmic entrance (funnel) is thought to represent the 
channel gate formed by the N-terminal helix. Right: A side view 
of the channel shows each of the six connexin subunits in the 
same color scheme as in part A. The entire gap-junction channel 
is approximately 9 nm wide by 15 nm tall.
Postsynaptic
cytoplasm
Presynaptic
cytoplasm
Presynaptic
membrane
Extracellular
space
Postsynaptic
membrane
Extracellular
cavity
Negatively
charged
path
Funnel
NTH
2
1
3
4
A
B
2
3
4
NTH
1


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 11 / Overview of Synaptic Transmission    247
at the extracellular side of the channel, formed by the 
extracellular loop connecting the first two membrane 
helixes, has been inferred from functional studies. This 
loop gate is thought to close isolated hemichannels 
that are not docked to a hemichannel partner in the 
apposing cell.
Electrical Transmission Allows Rapid and 
Synchronous Firing of Interconnected Cells
How are electrical synapses useful? As we have seen, 
electrical synaptic transmission is rapid because it 
results from the direct passage of current between cells. 
Speed is important for escape responses. For example, 
the tail-flip response of goldfish is mediated by a giant 
neuron in the brain stem (known as the Mauthner 
cell), which receives sensory input at electrical syn-
apses. These electrical synapses rapidly depolarize the 
Mauthner cell, which in turn activates the motor neu-
rons of the tail, allowing rapid escape from danger.
Electrical transmission is also useful for orchestrat-
ing the actions of groups of neurons. Because current 
crosses the membranes of all electrically coupled cells 
A
B
C
Recording
B  Motor cell responses to tail stimulation
Recording
Recording
Tail
Stimulus
Release
of ink
Tail stimulus
A
B
C
Ink gland
Motor neurons
Sensory neuron
A  Neural circuit of the inking response
Figure 11–6  Electrically coupled motor neurons firing 
together can produce synchronous behaviors. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Carew and Kandel 1976.)
A. In the marine snail Aplysia, sensory neurons from the 
tail ganglion form synapses with three motor neurons that 
innervate the ink gland. The motor neurons are interconnected 
by electrical synapses.
B. A train of stimuli applied to the tail produces a synchronized 
discharge in all three motor neurons that results in the release 
of ink.
at the same time, several small cells can act together 
as one large cell. Moreover, because of the electrical 
coupling between the cells, the effective resistance of 
the network is smaller than the resistance of an indi-
vidual cell. Thus, from Ohm’s law, the synaptic current 
required to fire electrically coupled cells is larger than 
that necessary to fire an individual cell. That is, electri-
cally coupled cells have a higher firing threshold. Once 
this high threshold is surpassed, however, electrically 
coupled cells fire synchronously because voltage-
activated Na+ currents generated in one cell are very 
rapidly conducted to other cells.
Thus, a behavior controlled by a group of electri-
cally coupled cells has an important adaptive advan-
tage: It is triggered explosively. For example, when 
seriously perturbed, the marine snail Aplysia releases 
massive clouds of purple ink that provide a protective 
screen. This stereotypic behavior is mediated by three 
electrically coupled motor cells that innervate the ink 
gland. Once the action potential threshold is exceeded 
in these cells, they fire synchronously (Figure 11–6). In 
certain fish, rapid eye movements (called saccades) are 
also mediated by electrically coupled motor neurons 


===== Page 5 =====
248    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
firing together. Gap junctions are also important in 
the mammalian brain, where the synchronous firing 
of electrically coupled inhibitory interneurons gener-
ates synchronous 40- to 100-Hz (gamma) oscillations 
in large populations of cells.
In addition to providing speed or synchrony in 
neuronal signaling, electrical synapses also can trans-
mit metabolic signals between cells. Because of their 
large-diameter pore, gap-junction channels conduct a 
variety of inorganic cations and anions, including the 
second messenger Ca2+, and even conduct moderate-
sized organic compounds (<1 kDa molecular weight) such 
as the second messengers inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
(IP3), cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), and 
even small peptides.
Gap Junctions Have a Role in Glial  
Function and Disease
Gap junctions are formed between glial cells as well 
as between neurons. In glia, the gap junctions medi-
ate both intercellular and intracellular signaling. In 
the brain, individual astrocytes are connected to each 
other through gap junctions forming a glial cell net-
work. Electrical stimulation of neuronal pathways in 
brain slices can release neurotransmitters that trigger 
a rise in intracellular Ca2+ in certain astrocytes. This 
produces a wave of Ca2+ that propagates from astro-
cyte to astrocyte at a rate of approximately 1–20  μm/s, 
about a million-fold slower than the propagation of an 
action potential (10–100 m/s). Although the precise 
function of the waves is unknown, their existence 
suggests that glia may play an active role in intercellular 
signaling in the brain.
Gap-junction channels also enhance communi-
cation within certain glial cells, such as the Schwann 
cells that produce the myelin sheath of axons in the 
peripheral nervous system. Successive layers of mye-
lin formed by a single Schwann cell are connected by 
gap junctions. These gap junctions may help to hold 
the layers of myelin together and promote the passage 
of small metabolites and ions across the many layers 
of myelin. The importance of the Schwann cell gap-
junction channels is underscored by certain genetic 
diseases. For example, the X chromosome–linked form 
of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, a demyelinating dis-
order, is caused by single mutations that disrupt the 
function of connexin 32, the gene expressed in Schwann 
cells. Inherited mutations that prevent the function of a 
connexin in the cochlea (connexin 26), which normally 
forms gap-junction channels that are important for 
fluid secretion in the inner ear, underlie up to half of 
all instances of congenital deafness.
Chemical Synapses Can Amplify Signals
In contrast to electrical synapses, at chemical synapses, 
there is no structural continuity between presynap-
tic and postsynaptic neurons. In fact, the separation 
between the two cells at a chemical synapse, the syn-
aptic cleft, is usually slightly wider (20–40 nm) than 
the nonsynaptic intercellular space (20 nm). Chemi-
cal synaptic transmission depends on a neurotrans-
mitter, a chemical substance that diffuses across the 
synaptic cleft and binds to and activates receptors in 
the membrane of the target cell. At most chemical syn-
apses, transmitter is released from specialized swell-
ings of the presynaptic axon—synaptic boutons—that 
typically contain 100 to 200 synaptic vesicles, each of 
which is filled with several thousand molecules of 
neurotransmitter (Figure 11–7).
The synaptic vesicles are clustered at specialized 
regions of the synaptic bouton called active zones. Dur-
ing a presynaptic action potential, voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels at the active zone open, allowing Ca2+ to 
enter the presynaptic terminal. The rise in intracellular 
Ca2+concentration triggers a biochemical reaction that 
causes the vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic mem-
brane and release neurotransmitter into the synaptic 
cleft, a process termed exocytosis. The transmitter mol-
ecules then diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind 
Figure 11–7  The fine structure of a presynaptic terminal.   
This electron micrograph shows an axon terminal in the  
cerebellum. The large dark structures are mitochondria. The 
many small round bodies are vesicles that contain neurotrans-
mitter. The fuzzy dark thickenings along the presynaptic mem-
brane (arrows) are the active zones, specialized areas that are 
thought to be docking and release sites for synaptic vesicles. 
The synaptic cleft is the space separating the pre- and post-
synaptic cell membranes. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Heuser and Reese 1977.)


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 11 / Overview of Synaptic Transmission    249
to their receptors on the postsynaptic cell membrane. 
This in turn activates the receptors, leading to the 
opening or closing of ion channels. The resulting flux 
of ions alters the membrane conductance and potential 
of the postsynaptic cell (Figure 11–8).
These several steps account for the synaptic delay 
at chemical synapses. Despite its biochemical com-
plexity, the release process is remarkably efficient—the 
synaptic delay is usually only 1 ms or less. Although 
chemical transmission lacks the immediacy of electrical 
synapses, it has the important property of amplification. 
Just one synaptic vesicle releases several thousand 
molecules of transmitter that together can open thou-
sands of ion channels in the target cell. In this way, a 
small presynaptic nerve terminal, which generates 
only a weak electrical current, can depolarize a large 
postsynaptic cell.
The Action of a Neurotransmitter Depends on the 
Properties of the Postsynaptic Receptor
Chemical synaptic transmission can be divided into 
two steps: a transmitting step, in which the presynap-
tic cell releases a chemical messenger, and a receptive 
Figure 11–8  Synaptic transmission at chemical synapses 
involves several steps. The complex process of chemical syn-
aptic transmission accounts for the delay between an action 
potential in the presynaptic cell and the synaptic potential in the 
postsynaptic cell, as compared with the virtually instantaneous 
transmission of signals at electrical synapses (see Figure 11–2B).
A. An action potential arriving at the terminal of a presynaptic 
axon causes voltage-gated Ca2+ channels at the active zone to 
open. The gray filaments represent the docking and release 
sites of the active zone.
B. The Ca2+ channel opening produces a high concentration of 
intracellular Ca2+ near the active zone, causing vesicles contain-
ing neurotransmitter to fuse with the presynaptic cell mem-
brane and release their contents into the synaptic cleft  
(a process termed exocytosis).
C. The released neurotransmitter molecules then diffuse across 
the synaptic cleft and bind specific receptors on the postsyn-
aptic membrane. These receptors cause ion channels to open 
(or close), thereby changing the membrane conductance and 
membrane potential of the postsynaptic cell.
Presynaptic
action potential
+40
0
–55
–70
Excitatory
postsynaptic
potential
Threshold
mV
Ca2+
Presynaptic 
nerve
terminal
Receptor-
channel
Transmitter
Post-
synaptic
cell
Na+
Na+
Na+
–55
–70
Threshold
1 ms
Delay
mV
A
B
C
step, in which the transmitter binds to and activates 
the receptor molecules in the postsynaptic cell. The 
transmitting process in neurons resembles endocrine 
hormone release. Indeed, chemical synaptic transmis-
sion can be seen as a modified form of hormone secre-
tion. Both endocrine glands and presynaptic terminals 
release a chemical agent with a signaling function, and 
both are examples of regulated secretion (Chapter 7). 
Similarly, both endocrine glands and neurons are usu-
ally some distance from their target cells.
There is one important difference, however, 
between endocrine and synaptic signaling. Whereas 
the hormone released by a gland travels through the 
blood stream until it interacts with all cells that contain 
an appropriate receptor, a neuron usually communi-
cates only with the cells with which it forms synapses. 
Because the presynaptic action potential triggers the 
release of a chemical transmitter onto a target cell 
across a distance of only 20 nm, the chemical signal 
travels only a small distance to its target. Therefore, 
neuronal signaling has two special features: It is fast 
and it is precisely directed.
In most neurons, this directed or focused release is 
accomplished at the active zones of synaptic boutons. 


===== Page 7 =====
250    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
In presynaptic neurons neurons without active zones, 
the distinction between neuronal and hormonal trans-
mission becomes blurred. For example, the neurons in 
the autonomic nervous system that innervate smooth 
muscle reside at some distance from their postsynaptic 
cells and do not have specialized release sites in their 
terminals. Synaptic transmission between these cells 
is slower and relies on a more widespread diffusion 
of transmitter. Furthermore, the same transmitter sub-
stance can be released differently from different cells. 
A substance can be released from one cell as a conven-
tional transmitter acting directly on neighboring cells. 
From other cells, it can be released in a less focused 
way as a modulator, producing a more diffuse action; 
and from still other cells, it can be released into the 
blood stream as a neurohormone.
Although a variety of chemicals serve as neuro-
transmitters, including both small molecules and pep-
tides (Chapter 16), the action of a transmitter depends 
on the properties of the postsynaptic receptors that 
recognize and bind the transmitter, not the chemical 
properties of the transmitter. For example, ACh can 
excite some postsynaptic cells and inhibit others, and 
at still other cells, it can produce both excitation and 
inhibition. It is the receptor that determines the action 
of ACh, including whether a cholinergic synapse is 
excitatory or inhibitory.
Within a group of closely related animals, a trans-
mitter substance binds conserved families of recep-
tors and is often associated with specific physiological 
functions. In vertebrates, ACh acts on excitatory ACh 
receptors at all neuromuscular junctions to trigger con-
traction while also acting on inhibitory ACh receptors 
to slow the heart.
The distinction between the transmitting and 
receptive processes is not absolute; many presynap-
tic terminals contain transmitter receptors that can 
modify the release process. In some instances, these 
presynaptic receptors are activated by the transmitter 
released from the same presynaptic terminal. In other 
instances, the presynaptic terminal can be contacted 
by presynaptic terminals from other classes of neurons 
that release distinct neurotransmitters.
The notion of a receptor was introduced in the late 
19th century by the German bacteriologist Paul Ehrlich 
to explain the selective action of toxins and other phar-
macological agents and the great specificity of immu-
nological reactions. In 1900, Ehrlich wrote: “Chemical 
substances are only able to exercise an action on the 
tissue elements with which they are able to establish 
an intimate chemical relationship … [This relationship]  
must be specific. The [chemical] groups must be 
adapted to one another … as lock and key.”
In 1906, the English pharmacologist John Langley 
postulated that the sensitivity of skeletal muscle to 
curare and nicotine was caused by a “receptive mol-
ecule.” A theory of receptor function was later devel-
oped by Langley’s students (in particular, A.V. Hill 
and Henry Dale), a development that was based on 
concurrent studies of enzyme kinetics and cooperative 
interactions between small molecules and proteins. As 
we shall see in the next chapter, Langley’s “receptive 
molecule” has been isolated and characterized as the 
ACh receptor of the neuromuscular junction.
All receptors for chemical transmitters have two 
biochemical features in common:
1.	 They are membrane-spanning proteins. The 
region exposed to the external environment of  
the cell recognizes and binds the transmitter from 
the presynaptic cell.
2.	 They carry out an effector function within the target 
cell. The receptors typically influence the opening 
or closing of ion channels.
Activation of Postsynaptic Receptors Gates Ion 
Channels Either Directly or Indirectly
Neurotransmitters control the opening of ion channels 
in the postsynaptic cell either directly or indirectly. 
These two classes of transmitter actions are medi-
ated by receptor proteins derived from different gene 
families.
Receptors that gate ion channels directly, such as 
the ACh receptor at the neuromuscular junction, are 
composed of four or five subunits that form a sin-
gle macromolecule. Such receptors contain both an 
extracellular domain that forms the binding site for 
the transmitter and a membrane-spanning domain 
that forms an ion-conducting pore (Figure 11–9A). 
This kind of receptor is often referred to as ionotropic 
because the receptor directly controls ion flux. Upon 
binding neurotransmitter, the receptor undergoes a 
conformational change that opens the ion channel. 
The actions of ionotropic receptors, also called receptor-
channels or ligand-gated channels, are discussed in detail 
in Chapters 12 and 13.
Receptors that gate ion channels indirectly, like 
the several types of receptors for norepinephrine or 
dopamine in neurons of the cerebral cortex, are nor-
mally composed of one or at most two subunits that 
are distinct from the ion channels they regulate. These 
receptors, which commonly have seven membrane-
spanning α-helixes, act by altering intracellular meta-
bolic reactions and are often referred to as metabotropic 
receptors. Activation of these receptors often stimulates 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 11 / Overview of Synaptic Transmission    251
the production of second messengers, small freely 
diffusible intracellular metabolites such as cAMP or 
diacylglycerol. Many of these second messengers acti-
vate protein kinases, enzymes that phosphorylate differ-
ent substrate proteins. In many instances, the protein 
kinases directly phosphorylate ion channels, includ-
ing gap-junction channels and ionotropic receptors, 
modulating their opening or closing (Figure 11–9B). 
The actions of metabotropic receptors are examined in 
detail in Chapter 14.
Ionotropic and metabotropic receptors have differ-
ent functions. The ionotropic receptors produce rela-
tively fast synaptic actions lasting only milliseconds. 
These are commonly found at synapses in neural cir-
cuits that mediate rapid behaviors, such as the stretch 
receptor reflex. The metabotropic receptors produce 
slower synaptic actions, lasting hundreds of millisec-
onds to minutes. These slower actions can modulate a 
behavior by altering the excitability of neurons and the 
A  Direct gating
B  Indirect gating 
Extracellular
side
Transmitter
Transmitter
Effector
function
Channel
Receptor
Pore
Cytoplasmic
side
NH2
COOH
Gate
G protein
Receptor
cAMP
GTP
Adenylyl
cyclase
NH2
COOH
Extracellular side
Cytoplasmic side
Pore
Channel
Gate
PKA
Effector
function
α
γ
α
δ
β
P
P
P
P
Figure 11–9  Neurotransmitters open postsynaptic ion chan-
nels either directly or indirectly.
A. A receptor that directly opens ion channels is an integral part 
of the macromolecule that also forms the channel. Many such 
ligand-gated channels are composed of five subunits, each of 
which is thought to contain four membrane-spanning α-helical 
regions.
B. A receptor that indirectly opens an ion channel is a distinct 
macromolecule separate from the channel it regulates. In one 
large family of such receptors, the receptors are composed 
of a single subunit with seven membrane-spanning α-helical 
regions that bind the ligand within the plane of the mem-
brane. These receptors activate a guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP)–binding protein (G protein), which in turn activates a 
second-messenger cascade that modulates channel activity. In 
the cascade illustrated here, the G protein stimulates adenylyl 
cyclase, which converts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). The cAMP activates the 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), which phosphorylates 
the channel (P), leading to a change in opening.
strength of the synaptic connections in the neural cir-
cuit that mediates the behavior. Such modulatory syn-
aptic actions often act as crucial reinforcing pathways 
in the process of learning.
Electrical and Chemical Synapses  
Can Coexist and Interact
As we now realize, both Henry Dale and John Eccles 
were correct about the existence of chemical and elec-
trical synapses, respectively. Furthermore, we now 
know that both forms of synaptic transmission can coex-
ist in the same neuron and that electrical and chemical 
synapses can modify each other’s efficacy. For exam-
ple, during development, many neurons are initially 
connected by electrical synapses, whose presence helps 
in the formation of chemical synapses. As chemical 


===== Page 9 =====
252    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
synapses begin to form, they often initiate the down-
regulation of electrical transmission.
Both types of synapses also can coexist in neurons 
in the mature nervous system. The role of these two 
types of synapses is perhaps best understood in the 
circuitry of the retina. There, rod and cone photorecep-
tors release the neurotransmitter glutamate and form 
chemical synapses on a class of interneurons called 
bipolar cells. Each bipolar cell extends its dendrites 
horizontally, receiving chemical synaptic input from a 
number of overlying rods and cones that respond to 
light from a very small region of the visual field. The 
receptive field of a bipolar neuron, however, extends 
about twice as far as the receptive field of the photore-
ceptors from which it receives chemical synaptic input. 
This is a result of electrical synapses formed between 
neighboring bipolar cells and between bipolar cells 
and a second type of interneuron, the amacrine cell 
(Chapter 22).
Finally, the efficacy of gap junctions can be regu-
lated by phosphorylation through different protein 
kinases, which generally enhances gap-junction cou-
pling. For example, dopamine and other transmitters 
can increase or decrease gap-junction coupling by 
acting on metabotropic G protein–coupled receptors 
to regulate levels of cAMP and thereby enhance or 
decrease channel phosphorylation. Such complex sign-
aling loops are a hallmark of many neural circuits and 
greatly expand their computational powers.
Highlights
1.	 Neurons communicate by two major mechanisms: 
electrical and chemical synaptic transmission.
2.	 Electrical synapses are formed at regions of tight 
apposition called gap junctions, which provide 
a direct pathway for charge to flow between the 
cytoplasm of communicating neurons. This results 
in very rapid synaptic transmission that is suited 
for synchronizing the activity of populations of 
neurons.
3.	 Neurons at electrical synapses are connected 
through gap-junction channels, which are formed 
from a pair of hemichannels, called connexons, 
one each contributed by the presynaptic and post-
synaptic cells. Each connexon is a hexamer, com-
posed of six subunits termed connexins.
4.	 At chemical synapses, a presynaptic action poten-
tial triggers the release of a chemical transmitter 
from the presynaptic cell through the process of 
exocytosis. Transmitter molecules then rapidly 
diffuse across the synaptic cleft to bind to and 
activate transmitter receptors in the postsynaptic 
cell.
5.	 Although slower than electrical synaptic transmis-
sion, chemical transmission allows for amplification 
of the presynaptic action potential through the 
release of tens of thousands of molecules of trans-
mitter and the activation of hundreds to thou-
sands of receptors in the postsynaptic cell.
6.	 There are two major classes of transmitter recep-
tors. Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion 
channels. Binding of transmitter to an extracellu-
lar binding site triggers a conformational change 
that opens the channel pore, generating an ionic 
current that excites (depolarizes) or inhibits 
(hyperpolarizes) the postsynaptic cell, depend-
ing on the receptor. Ionotropic receptors underlie 
fast chemical synaptic transmission that mediates 
rapid signaling in the nervous system.
7.	 Metabotropic receptors are responsible for the 
second major class of chemical synaptic actions. 
These receptors activate intracellular metabolic 
signaling pathways, often leading to the synthesis 
of second messengers, such as cAMP, that regulate 
levels of protein phosphorylation. Metabotropic 
receptors underlie slow, modulatory synaptic 
actions that contribute to changes in behavioral 
state and arousal.
 Steven A. Siegelbaum  
 Gerald D. Fischbach 
Selected Reading
Bennett MV, Zukin RS. 2004. Electrical coupling and neu-
ronal synchronization in the mammalian brain. Neuron 
19:495–511.
Colquhoun D, Sakmann B. 1998. From muscle endplate to 
brain synapses: a short history of synapses and agonist-
activated ion channels. Neuron 20:381–387.
Cowan WM, Kandel ER. 2000. A brief history of synapses 
and synaptic transmission. In: MW Cowan, TC Südhof, 
CF Stevens (eds). Synapses, pp. 1–87. Baltimore and London: 
The Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.
Curti S, O’Brien J. 2016. Characteristics and plasticity of elec-
trical synaptic transmission. BMC Cell Biol 17:13. Suppl 1.
Eccles JC. 1976. From electrical to chemical transmission in 
the central nervous system. The closing address of the 


