===== Page 1 =====
1484    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–10  Imagining a face or a place correlates 
with activity in specific areas of the brain. Subjects were 
scanned while they viewed or imagined faces and houses. 
In the first block of trials, subjects alternately viewed a face 
or a house. When viewing a face, brain activity increases in 
the fusiform face area of the inferior temporal lobe (FFA). 
When viewing a house, brain activity increases in the 
parahippocampal place area of the inferior temporal cortex 
(PPA). In the next block of trials, subjects alternately imagined 
a face and a house. The same brain regions are active during 
both the imagining and direct viewing of faces and houses, 
although the activity is less pronounced during the imagined 
viewing. (Reproduced, with permission, from O’Craven and 
Kanwisher 2000. Copyright © 2000 MIT.)
the correct box. Similar experiments suggest that rats 
and monkeys also have some metacognitive abilities.
Verification of Subjective Reports Is Challenging
Reports of subjective experience, such as confidence, 
serve like a meter. Just as an electrical meter converts 
electrical resistance into the position of a pointer on a dial 
(reading 100 ohms), so a subject converts a light stimulus 
into the report of a color (“I see red”). But there is a criti-
cal way in which the meter is not like a person. The meter 
does not experience red and cannot communicate mean-
ing. And, although the meter might be faulty, it can never 
pretend to see red when it is really seeing blue. Most of 
the time, we presume that subjective reports are true, 
that is, the subject is trying as far as possible to give an 
accurate description of his experience. But how can we be 
sure that we can rely on these subjective reports?
Viewed
Imagined
Viewed
Imagined
PPA activity (% signal change)
FFA activity (% signal change)
0
2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
–.5
–1
0
1.5
1
.5
–.5
The problem of verifying subjective reports can 
partially be addressed with the use of brain imaging. 
Brain imaging studies have shown that neural activ-
ity occurs in localized areas of the brain during mental 
activity that is not associated with any overt behavior. 
The content of such mental activity, such as imagining 
or daydreaming, can be known only from the subject’s 
reports.
If we scan a subject while he says he is imagining 
moving his hand, activity will be detected in many 
parts of the motor system. In most motor regions, 
this activity is less intense than the activity associ-
ated with an actual movement, but it is well above 
resting levels. Similarly, if a subject reports that she is 
imagining a face she has recently seen, activity can be 
detected in the fusiform gyrus, the “face recognition 
area” (Figure 59–10). In these examples, the location of 
the observed neural activity detected by the scanner 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1485
provides independent confirmation of the content  
of the experience reported by the subject. The content of 
consciousness can, in certain limited cases, be inferred 
from patterns of neural activity.
Malingering and Hysteria Can Lead to Unreliable 
Subjective Reports
What if a subject reports seeing “blue” even though 
what they experienced was red? How could this arise, 
and what is the status of the subjective report in such 
cases?
Consider a patient who has become amnesic as a 
result of extensive damage to the medial temporal cor-
tex. Shown a photograph of someone whom he sees 
every day on the ward, the patient denies ever hav-
ing seen this person, even while physiological meas-
urements (electroencephalogram or skin conductance) 
show a response to this photo (but not to photos of peo-
ple he has not seen before). We conclude that conscious 
memory processes have been damaged while uncon-
scious processes remain intact. This patient’s subjec-
tive report is an accurate account of what he knows 
consciously, but it excludes those things he “knows” 
that have not entered consciousness.
Another patient, found wandering on the street, 
shows no evidence of brain damage but reports he can-
not remember anything about himself or his history. 
When shown photographs of people from his past, he 
denies any knowledge of them, but at the same time, 
he shows physiological responses to the photos. In 
this case, because of the lack of detectable brain dam-
age (and other features of the memory loss), we begin 
to wonder about the truthfulness of his statements. 
Perhaps the physiological responses indicate that he 
does consciously recognize people. Subsequently, the 
patient is identified by the police, and we discover 
that he is wanted for a serious crime committed in the 
neighboring county. Our doubts about the reliability 
of his reports increase. Finally, our suspicions are con-
firmed when he foolishly tells a fellow patient, “It’s so 
easy to fool those clinical psychologists.”
In this case, we have direct evidence that the 
patient was deliberately misleading others about him-
self. To deceive others, we must be conscious not only 
of our own mental state but also that of others. Is there 
some way we can test for deceit? One approach is to 
use a memory test of the kind discussed earlier. The 
patient studies a list of words. He is then shown a new 
list consisting of the words he has just studied and new 
words, and he must decide whether each word is old 
or new. A genuine amnesic would not recognize any 
of the words; he would have to guess, but through 
unconscious priming effects, he would perform better 
than chance. The malingering patient can recognize 
the old words but will have a strong tendency to 
deny that he has seen them before. Unless he is very 
sophisticated, he may perform worse than chance. It 
seems we should be able to distinguish between the 
genuine amnesic and the malingerer.
A third kind of patient also simulates amnesia (or 
some other disorder) but does so unconsciously and 
thus is not a malingerer. Such a case would be called 
hysterical or psychogenic amnesia. Like the malin-
gerer, his performance on the recognition test is worse 
than chance. Nonetheless, he is not aware of his simu-
lation. The same mechanism occurs in normal people 
who have been hypnotized and then told that they 
will have no memory for what has just happened. This 
phenomenon is sometimes referred to as a dissociated 
state: That part of the mind that records experiences 
and makes verbal reports has become dissociated from 
the part that is creating the simulation. Hysterical sim-
ulations can also create sensory loss, such as hysteri-
cal blindness, and motor disorders, such as hysterical 
paralysis or hysterical dystonia.
We are still a long way from understanding the 
cognitive processes or underlying physiology of these 
disorders. A key problem is how to distinguish hys-
teria from malingering. From the standpoint of con-
scious experience, the two disorders are quite different: 
The malingerer is aware that he is simulating, whereas 
the hysterical patient is not. Yet the patients’ subjec-
tive reports and overt behavior in the two cases are 
very similar. Is there no measure that can distinguish 
between these different disorders? Perhaps the only 
way to demonstrate the critical distinction between 
these different states of consciousness is through 
neuroimaging studies.
Highlights
1.	 The study of mental disorders forces us to con-
front the conceptual gap between the mental and 
the physical. It is no longer possible to maintain 
that mental disorders have mental causes, whereas 
physical disorders have physical causes.
2.	 Cognitive neuroscience has had a major impact on 
our attempts to bridge this gap because its descrip-
tive language, the language of information process-
ing, can be applied simultaneously to psychological 
and neural processes. Information theory and the 
development of the computer hint at how science 
can address the question of how subjective experi-
ence can emerge from activity in a physical brain.


===== Page 3 =====
1486    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
3.	 It is now clear that perception, action, and mem-
ory are the result of many parallel processes and 
that, although some of these processes support 
conscious experience, the majority occur below 
the level of awareness.
4.	 Striking abnormalities occur when some of these 
processes are damaged while others remain intact. 
One patient, D.F., with damage to the inferior tem-
poral cortex, is no longer consciously aware of the 
shape of an object and hence cannot describe it or 
recognize what it is. She can nevertheless form her 
hand into the appropriate shape to pick up the 
object.
5.	 We have very little awareness of the details of our 
actions, but we are vividly aware of being in con-
trol (the sense of agency). In extreme cases, this 
sense of agency can become detached from the 
control of action. After limb amputation, many 
people experience having a phantom limb that 
they can move, and after a limb has been para-
lyzed due to a stroke, some patients believe that 
they can still move the limb.
6.	 Recollection of the past is not like replaying a 
video. Memory is a creative process based on 
imperfect recall filled out with general knowl-
edge. Through loss of this creativity, patients with 
amnesia have difficulty with imagining the future 
as well as remembering the past.
7.	 Subjective experience is an important part of 
human life. When we make a decision, our choice 
is indicated by our behavior, but our confidence 
in that choice is a subjective experience. We can 
study such experiences through verbal report. 
Confidence in our choices is an example of 
metacognition (ie, the ability to reflect on our cog-
nitive processes). Damage to the frontal cortex 
can impair metacognition, while leaving decision-
making intact.
8.	 Verbal reports are not always reliable. People 
can fake memory loss in order to escape justice. 
Malingering of this kind is very difficult to detect, 
since it closely resembles disorders such as hys-
terical amnesia, in which the patient is not aware 
that he is simulating the disorder. The challenge 
for cognitive neuroscience is to distinguish these 
cases.
 Christopher D. Frith 
Selected Reading
Dehaene S. 2014. Consciousness and the Brain: Deciphering How 
the Brain Codes Our Thoughts. New York: Viking.
Frith CD. 2007. Making Up the Mind: How the Brain Creates 
Our Mental World. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gazzaniga MS (ed). 1995. Cognitive Neuroscience: A Reader. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Marr D. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the 
Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information. 
San Francisco: Freeman.
McCarthy R, Warrington EK. 1990. Cognitive Neuropsychology: 
A Clinical Introduction. London, San Diego: Academic Press.
Sacks O. 1970. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat and 
Other Clinical Tales. New York: Touchstone.
References
Bauer RM. 1994. Autonomic recognition of names and faces 
in prosopagnosia: a neuropsychological application of the 
Guilty Knowledge test. Neuropsychology 22:457–469.
Beck DM, Rees G, Frith CD, Lavie N. 2001. Neural correlates 
of change and change blindness. Nat Neurosci 4:645–650.
Beck JS. 1995. Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond. New York: 
Guilford Press.
Burgess PW, Baxter D, Rose M, Alderman N. 1986. Delusional 
paramnesic syndrome. In: PW Halligan, JC Marshall (eds). 
Method in Madness: Case Studies in Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 
pp. 51–78. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Caspar EA, Christensen JF, Cleeremans A, Haggard P. 2016. 
Coercion changes the sense of agency in the human brain. 
Curr Biol 26:585–592.
Dierks T, Linden DE, Jandl M, et al. 1999. Activation of 
Heschl’s gyrus during auditory hallucinations. Neuron 
22:615–621.
Ellis HD, Young AW. 1990. Accounting for delusional 
misidentification. Br J Psychiatry 157:239–248.
ffytche DH, Howard RJ, Brammer MJ, David A, Woordruff P, 
Williams S. 1998. The anatomy of conscious vision: an fMRI 
study of visual hallucinations. Nat Neurosci 1:738–742.
Fleming SM, Ryu J, Golfinos JG, Blackmon KE. 2014. Domain-
specific impairment in metacognitive accuracy following 
anterior prefrontal lesions. Brain 137:2811–2822.
Fotopoulou A, Tsakiris M, Haggard P, Vagopoulou A, Rudd 
A, Kopelman, M. 2008. The role of motor intention in 
motor awareness: an experimental study on anosognosia 
for hemiplegia. Brain 131:3432–3442.
Fourneret P, Jeannerod M. 1998. Limited conscious monitor-
ing of motor performance in normal subjects. Neuropsy-
chology 36:1133–1140.
Frith CD. 2011. Explaining delusions of control: the compara-
tor model 20 years on. Conscious Cogn 21:52–54.
Frith CD. 2013. Action, agency and responsibility. Neuropsy-
chologia 55:137–142.
Glinsky EL, Schacter DL. 1988. Long-term retention of com-
puter learning in patients with memory disorders. Neu-
ropsychology 26:173–178.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1487
Goupil L, Romand-Monnier M, Kouider S. 2016. Infants ask 
for help when they know they don’t know. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 113:3492–3496.
Haggard P, Clark S, Kalogeras J. 2002. Voluntary action and 
conscious awareness. Nat Neurosci 5:382–385.
Hassabis D, Kumaran D, Vann SD, Maguire EA. 2007. 
Patients with hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new 
experiences. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:1726–1731.
Jacoby LL, Whitehouse K. 1989. An illusion of memory: false 
recognition influenced by unconscious perception. J Exp 
Psychol Gen 118:126–135.
Kopelman MD. 1995. The assessment of psychogenic amne-
sia. In: AD Baddeley, BA Wilson, FN Watts (eds). Handbook 
of Memory Disorders. New York: Wiley.
Libet B, Gleason CA, Wright EW, Pearl DK. 1983. Time of 
conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral 
activity (readiness potential). The unconscious initiation 
of a freely voluntary act. Brain 106:623–642.
Maniscalco B, Lau H. 2011. A signal detection theoretic 
approach for estimating metacognitive sensitivity from 
confidence ratings. Conscious Cogn 21:422–430.
Marshall JC, Halligan PW. 1988. Blindsight and insight in 
visuo-spatial neglect. Nature 336:766–767.
Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1995. The Visual Brain in Action. 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Moore J, Haggard P. 2008. Awareness of action: inference and 
prediction. Conscious Cogn 17:136–144.
Moretto G, Walsh E, Haggard P. 201 Experience of agency 
and sense of responsibility. Conscious Cogn 20:1847–1854.
O’Craven KM, Kanwisher N. 2000. Mental imagery of faces 
and places activates corresponding stimulus-specific 
brain regions. J Cogn Neurosci 12:1013–1023.
Öhman A, Soares JJ. 1994. “Unconscious anxiety”: phobic 
responses to masked stimuli. J Abnorm Psychol 103:231–240.
Penfield W, Perot P. 1963. The brain’s record of auditory and 
visual experience: a final summary and discussion. Brain 
86:595–696.
Rensink RA, O’Regan JK, Clark JJ. 1997. To see or not to see: 
the need for attention to perceive changes in scenes. Psy-
chol Sci 8:368–373.
Rugg MD, Mark RE, Walla P, Schloerscheidt AM, Birch CS, 
Allan K. 1998. Dissociation of the neural correlates of 
implicit and explicit memory. Nature 392:595–598.
Schurger A, Mylopoulos M, Rosenthal D. 2016. Neural ante-
cedents of spontaneous voluntary movement: a new per-
spective. Trends Cogn Sci 20:77–79.
Shepherd J. 2012 Free will and consciousness: experimental 
studies. Conscious Cogn 21:915–927.
Smith CH, Oakley DA, Morton J. 2013. Increased response 
time of primed associates following an “episodic” hyp-
notic amnesia suggestion: a case of unconscious volition. 
Conscious Cogn 22:1305–1317.
Stewart L, Battelli L, Walsh V, Cowey A. 1999. Motion per-
ception and perceptual learning studied by magnetic 
stimulation. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol Suppl 
51:334.
Swets JA, Tanner WPJ, Birdsall TG. 1959. Decision processes 
in perception. Psychol Rev 68:301–340.
Tong F, Nakayama K, Vaughn JT, Kanwisher N. 1998. Bin-
ocular rivalry and visual awareness in human extrastriate 
cortex. Neuron 21:753–759.
Watson JB. 1930. Behaviorism. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Weiskrantz L. 1986. Blindsight: A Case Study and Its Implica-
tions. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.


===== Page 5 =====
60
Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia
are the leading risk factors for the 800,000 annual sui-
cides reported by the World Health Organization. In 
addition, depression and anxiety disorders frequently 
co-occur with and worsen the outcomes of diabetes 
mellitus, coronary artery disease, stroke, and several 
other illnesses.
Medications such as antipsychotic drugs, lithium, 
and antidepressant drugs discovered during the mid-
20th century made it possible to close large and often 
substandard mental hospitals; however, halfway 
houses and other less restrictive treatment settings 
did not materialize in sufficient numbers. As a result, 
many people with schizophrenia and severe bipo-
lar disorder become homeless at some time in their 
lives, and in many countries, individuals with severe 
mental disorders compose a large fraction of prison 
populations.
In addition, although antipsychotic drugs, lithium, 
and antidepressant drugs have played important roles 
in controlling symptoms of mental disorders, signifi-
cant limitations in treatment efficacy remain. For exam-
ple, there are no effective treatments for the highly 
disabling cognitive impairments and deficit symptoms 
of schizophrenia. Even for symptoms that benefit from 
existing medications, such as hallucinations and delu-
sions, residual symptoms remain and relapses are the 
rule. Because of significant scientific challenges posed 
by the human brain and limitations in animal models 
of mental disorders, there has been little advance in the 
efficacy of psychiatric drugs for more than 50 years. 
However, recent progress in human genetics and neu-
ral science has created significant opportunities to 
improve upon this unfortunate state of affairs.
Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Cognitive Impairments, 
Deficit Symptoms, and Psychotic Symptoms
Schizophrenia Has a Characteristic Course of  
Illness With Onset During the Second and Third  
Decades of Life
The Psychotic Symptoms of Schizophrenia  
Tend to Be Episodic
The Risk of Schizophrenia Is Highly Influenced  
by Genes
Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Abnormalities in Brain 
Structure and Function
Loss of Gray Matter in the Cerebral Cortex Appears to 
Result From Loss of Synaptic Contacts Rather  
Than Loss of Cells
Abnormalities in Brain Development During 
Adolescence May Be Responsible for Schizophrenia
Antipsychotic Drugs Act on Dopaminergic Systems  
in the Brain
Highlights
I
n this chapter and the next, we examine disor-
ders that affect perception, thought, mood, emo-
tion, and motivation: schizophrenia, depression, 
bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders. These have 
been challenging to understand, but recent progress in 
genetic analysis has begun to yield significant clues to 
their pathogenesis.
Mental illness has damaging effects on individuals, 
families, and society. The World Health Organization 
reports that mental illnesses, in the aggregate, con-
stitute the leading cause of disability worldwide and 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1489
Box 60–1  Thought Disorder
The structure of a psychotic person’s speech may 
range from wandering to incoherence, a symptom 
commonly referred to as loosening of association. 
Other examples of schizophrenic speech include 
neologisms (idiosyncratically invented words), block-
ing (sudden spontaneous interruptions), or clanging 
(associations based on the sounds rather than the 
meanings of words, such as, “If you can make sense 
out of nonsense, well, have fun. I’m trying to make 
cents out of sense. I’m not making cents anymore. I 
have to make dollars.”)
Examples of loosening of associations are:
“I’m supposed to be making a film but I don’t know 
what is going to be the end of it. Jesus Christ is writing 
a book about me.”
“I don’t think they care for me because two million 
camels . . . 10 million taxis . . . Father Christmas on the 
rebound.”
Question: “How does your head feel?” Answer: “My 
head, well that’s the hardest part of the job. My memory 
is just as good as the next working man’s. I tell you what 
my trouble is, I can’t read. You can’t learn anything if you 
can’t read or write properly. You can’t pick up a nice book, 
I don’t just mean a sex book, a book about literature or 
about history or something like that. You can’t pick up 
and read it and find things out for yourself.”
Several types of loosening of association have been 
described (eg, derailment, incoherence, tangentiality, or 
loss of goal). However, it remains unclear whether these 
reflect disturbances in fundamentally different mecha-
nisms or different manifestations of a common underlying 
disturbance, such as the inability to represent a “speech 
plan” to guide coherent speech. A disturbance of such 
a mechanism would be consistent with, and may paral-
lel, impairment of control of other cognitive functions in 
schizophrenia, such as deficits in working memory.
Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Cognitive 
Impairments, Deficit Symptoms, and  
Psychotic Symptoms
In medicine, the understanding of a disease, and there-
fore its diagnosis, is ultimately based on identification 
of two features: (1) etiological factors (eg, microbes, 
toxins, or genetic risks) and (2) mechanism of patho-
genesis (the processes by which etiologic agents pro-
duce disease). While human genetics and neural 
science are beginning to provide insights into the etiol-
ogy and pathogenesis of disorders such as schizophre-
nia, bipolar disorder, and autism spectrum disorders, 
this research has not yet yielded objective diagnostic 
tests or biomarkers. As a result, psychiatric diagnoses 
still rely on a description of the patient’s symptoms, 
the examiner’s observations, and the course of the ill-
ness over time.
Schizophrenia is a very severe illness. Its symp-
toms can be divided into three clusters: (1) cognitive 
symptoms; (2) deficit, or negative, symptoms; and (3) 
psychotic symptoms. These symptom clusters exhibit 
different temporal patterns of onset—with cognitive 
impairments and deficit symptoms typically the earli-
est. The different timing of onset and the precise symp-
toms of each cluster are thought to result from the 
effects of developmental pathogenic mechanisms on 
different neural circuits and brain regions. As a result, 
existing treatments such as antipsychotic drugs, which 
act on one “downstream” aspect of the disease process, 
exert no beneficial effects on cognitive impairments or 
deficit symptoms.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Emil Kraepelin 
in Germany recognized that cognitive decline was a 
distinguishing feature of schizophrenia, because psy-
chotic symptoms occur in a variety of psychiatric con-
ditions. Indeed, Kraepelin’s term for what later came 
to be called schizophrenia was dementia praecox, a term 
that highlighted the early onset of cognitive loss. Cog-
nitive impairments in schizophrenia target working 
memory and executive function, declarative memory, 
verbal fluency, the ability to identify the emotions 
conveyed by facial expressions, and other aspects of 
social cognition. These impairments do not signifi-
cantly improve with existing medications, but ongoing 
research shows promising, albeit still modest, ben-
efits from psychological therapies aimed at cognitive 
remediation.
Deficit symptoms include blunted emotional 
responses, withdrawal from social interaction, impov-
erished content of thought and speech, and loss of 
motivation. Psychotic symptoms include hallucina-
tions, delusions, and disordered thought such as loos-
ening of association (Box 60–1). Psychotic symptoms of 
schizophrenia are responsive to antipsychotic drugs. 
These drugs also reduce psychotic symptoms that 


===== Page 7 =====
1490    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
occur in other neuropsychiatric disorders, including 
bipolar disorder, severe depression, and neurodegen-
erative disorders such as Parkinson disease, Huntington 
disease, and Alzheimer disease.
Schizophrenia Has a Characteristic Course of  
Illness With Onset During the Second and Third 
Decades of Life
Schizophrenia affects 0.25% to 0.75% of the population 
worldwide, with only modest regional differences. 
Males are more commonly affected than females, with 
the sex ratio estimated to be 3:2, and onset is often 
earlier in males. Schizophrenia typically begins dur-
ing the late teen years or the early to mid-twenties. 
Enduring cognitive and deficit symptoms generally 
begin months and sometimes years prior to the onset 
of psychotic symptoms. This period is referred to as 
the ultra-high-risk state by some researchers and as the 
schizophrenia prodrome by others.
Individuals in this risk state generally have meas-
urable declines in cognitive functioning accompanied 
by such symptoms as social isolation, suspiciousness, 
and decreased motivation to engage in school work 
or other tasks. Attenuated psychotic symptoms often 
follow, including transient and mild hallucinations. 
Not every teen with such symptoms progresses to 
develop the full spectrum of symptoms warranting a 
diagnosis of schizophrenia. A small fraction recovers; 
others develop serious psychiatric conditions other 
than schizophrenia. Antipsychotic medications do not 
appear to benefit individuals in the risk state, nor do 
they delay the onset of schizophrenia. However, talk 
therapies and therapies delivered via computer-based 
approaches aimed at cognitive remediation show 
promise in delaying the onset of psychosis.
The Psychotic Symptoms of Schizophrenia  
Tend to Be Episodic
Psychotic symptoms, including hallucinations and 
delusions, are the most dramatic manifestations of 
schizophrenia. Hallucinations are percepts that occur 
in the absence of appropriate sensory stimuli, and they 
may occur in any sensory modality. In schizophrenia, 
the most common hallucinations are auditory. Typi-
cally, an affected person hears voices, but noises and 
music are also common. Sometimes, the voices will 
carry on a dialog and frequently are experienced as 
derogatory or bullying. Occasionally, voices will issue 
commands to the affected individual that can create a 
high risk of harm to self or others.
Delusions are firm beliefs that have no realistic 
basis and are not explained by the patient’s culture, nor 
are they amenable to change by argument or evidence. 
Delusions may be quite varied in form. For some affected 
individuals, reality is significantly distorted: The world 
is full of hidden signs meant only for the affected per-
son (ideas of reference), or the person believes that he 
is being closely watched, followed, or persecuted (para-
noid delusions). Others may experience bizarre delu-
sions; for example, they may believe that someone is 
inserting thoughts into or extracting thoughts from their 
minds or that their close relatives have been replaced by 
aliens from another planet. In addition to the person’s 
enduring cognitive impairments, psychotic episodes 
are frequently accompanied by disordered thought and 
odd patterns of speech (Box 60–1).
Psychotic symptoms may also occur in other neu-
ropsychiatric disorders, such as bipolar disorder, major 
(unipolar) depression, various neurodegenerative 
disorders, and drug-induced states. However, these 
other conditions can usually be distinguished from 
schizophrenia by associated symptoms and age of 
onset. Once schizophrenia has become fully manifest, 
psychotic symptoms tend to be episodic. Periods of 
florid psychosis accompanied by markedly disordered 
thinking, emotion, and behavior are interspersed with 
periods in which psychotic symptoms are milder or 
even absent. Psychotic episodes typically require hos-
pitalization; the severity and duration of such episodes 
are markedly shortened by antipsychotic drugs. First 
and second episodes of psychosis often respond fully 
to antipsychotic drugs, but cognitive impairments and 
deficit symptoms typically persist. After the first few 
psychotic relapses, people with schizophrenia typi-
cally suffer residual psychotic symptoms even between 
their acute relapses and suffer these symptoms despite 
treatment with antipsychotic drugs. Cognitive and 
social functioning typically continue to deteriorate 
over several years until they reach a plateau well below 
the person’s premorbid level of functioning.
The Risk of Schizophrenia Is Highly 
Influenced by Genes
As early as 1930, Franz Kalman in Germany studied 
familial patterns of schizophrenia and concluded that 
genes contribute significantly. To separate genetic from 
environmental influences more clearly, Seymour Kety, 
David Rosenthal, and Paul Wender examined children 
who were adopted at or shortly after birth in Denmark. 
They found that the rate of schizophrenia in the bio-
logical family of the adoptee was much more strongly 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 60 / Disorders of Thought and Volition in Schizophrenia    1491
Figure 60–1  The lifetime risk of schizo-
phrenia increases as a function of 
genetic relatedness to a person with 
schizophrenia.  The risk of schizophre-
nia rises with genetic relatedness to an 
affected individual and, therefore, with 
increased sharing of DNA sequences. 
However, the pattern of segregation in 
families does not follow simple Mendelian 
ratios; rather, inheritance reflects genetic 
complexity. In addition, risk varies within 
categories of relatedness (first- and sec-
ond-degree relatives), suggesting a role for 
unshared developmental or environmental 
effects. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Gottesman 1991.)
predictive of schizophrenia than the rate of schizo-
phrenia in the adoptive family.
Kety and his colleagues also observed that some 
of the biological relatives of adoptees with schizo-
phrenia exhibited milder symptoms related to schiz-
ophrenia, such as social isolation, suspiciousness, 
eccentric beliefs, and magical thinking, but not frank 
hallucinations or delusions. Since Kety’s time, it has 
been observed that such relatives may also exhibit 
cognitive impairments that are intermediate between 
unaffected individuals and those with schizophrenia. 
They also may exhibit thinning of the cerebral cortex 
observed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that 
is also intermediate between healthy individuals and 
those with schizophrenia. (Cortical thinning in schizo-
phrenia is discussed below.) Such individuals are now 
diagnosed with schizotypal disorder, which appears 
to be the milder end of the schizophrenia spectrum of 
psychotic disorders. The severity and nature of symp-
toms appear to be influenced by the individual’s over-
all burden of risk-associated genetic variants as well as 
exposure to environmental risk factors.
Irving Gottesman’s studies of extended pedigrees 
of Danish patients with schizophrenia supported the 
importance of genes. Gottesman noted the correlations 
between the risk of schizophrenia in relatives and the 
degree to which they shared DNA sequences with an 
affected person. He found a greater lifetime risk of 
schizophrenia among first-degree relatives (includ-
ing parents, siblings, and children, who share 50% of 
DNA sequences with the patient) than among second-
degree relatives (including aunts, uncles, nieces, 
nephews, and grandchildren, who share 25% of their 
DNA sequences). Even third-degree relatives (who 
share only 12.5% of the patient’s DNA sequences) 
were at higher risk for schizophrenia than the approxi-
mately 1% of the general population at risk for this dis-
ease (Figure 60–1).
Based on the differences in levels of risk Gottesman 
measured in these pedigrees, he recognized that schiz-
ophrenia risk was not transmitted within families as 
Mendelian dominant or recessive traits (ie, it was not 
caused by a single genetic locus). He predicted cor-
rectly that schizophrenia is a polygenic trait, involving 
a large number of loci throughout the human genome. 
This genetic architecture underlies many human pheno-
types, including disease phenotypes, and may involve 
many hundreds of loci within the genome. In polygenic 
traits, variants at each disease-associated locus contrib-
ute small, additive effects to the phenotype. Genetic risk 
variants act together with environmental factors to pro-
duce the schizophrenia phenotype.
In 2014, a large global consortium reported on a 
genome-wide association study of more than 35,000 
individuals with schizophrenia. The study identi-
fied 108 genome-wide significant loci associated 
with schizophrenia that were distributed across the 
genome. The research continues, and the number of 
known loci is already greater than 250. Each of these 
loci represents a segment of DNA identified by a single 
Lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia (%)
10
20
30
40
50
0
None (general
population)
Relationship to
schizophrenic individual
Genes
shared
12.5%
(third-degree
relatives)
25%
(second-degree
relatives)
50%
(ﬁrst-degree
relatives)
100%
First cousin
Uncle/Aunt
Nephew/Niece
Grandchild
Half sibling
Parent
Sibling
Child
Dizygotic twin
Monozygotic twin
2%
1%
2%
4%
5%
6%
6%
9%
13%
17%
48%


===== Page 9 =====
1492    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
nucleotide polymorphism that confers a small incre-
ment in risk (typically 5%–10%) for schizophrenia. 
The value of such allelic variants is as a tool to iden-
tify genes that play a role in the molecular mechanism 
of disease. In turn, the implicated genes help identify 
molecular pathways that can potentially be exploited 
in the development of therapeutic drugs.
In addition to the utility of genetics for discover-
ing biological processes involved in disease, it can also 
contribute to the stratification of study populations in 
epidemiological and clinical studies. A person’s risk 
of schizophrenia or other disorders can be estimated 
by calculating his or her total burden of common risk 
alleles for the condition. The result is a polygenic risk 
score, a measure that is increasingly being used to 
stratify populations by genetic susceptibility to schizo-
phrenia in both clinical studies and in epidemiologic 
studies of environmental risk factors.
Environmental risk factors for schizophrenia that 
have been replicated across studies include nutrient 
deprivation in utero (notably in studies following fam-
ines), season of birth (winter and early spring birth), 
urban birth, and migration. The analysis of causal fac-
tors within such broad categories of exposure is likely 
to benefit from knowing who is susceptible. Moreover, 
clues to environmentally induced causal pathways 
may be found in the risk genotypes of those with schiz-
ophrenia who have had a particular exposure. 
Given the lack of objective diagnostic tests, current 
diagnostic criteria, such as those within the fifth edi-
tion of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, are based on clinical observation and course 
of illness. As a result, individuals currently diagnosed 
with schizophrenia are highly heterogeneous. Poly-
genic risk scores can explain only a portion of the vari-
ance in schizophrenia cohorts, and the scores provide 
only probabilistic information. However, they repre-
sent the first objective tool that permits stratification 
of subjects diagnosed with schizophrenia. As such, the 
application of such scores may begin to diminish het-
erogeneity in clinical studies ranging from neuroimag-
ing to neurophysiological studies to treatment trials.
Although almost all cases of schizophrenia reflect 
polygenic risks, as predicted by Gottesman, a small 
percentage of cases are highly influenced by the pres-
ence of a penetrant mutation that typically exerts pleio-
tropic effects, including intellectual disability, resulting 
in what is often called syndromic schizophrenia. Most 
of these penetrant mutations are copy number vari-
ants: deletions, duplications, or sometimes triplica-
tions of a particular segment of a chromosome.
The most common and best studied cause of syn-
dromic schizophrenia is the 22q11.2 microdeletion, 
which accounts for approximately 1% of patients diag-
nosed with schizophrenia. The microdeletion typi-
cally occurs de novo and results in loss of one of two 
copies of 38 to 44 genes. As is typical for such copy 
number variations, those affected suffer from a com-
plex of symptoms. The syndrome accompanying the 
22q11.2 microdeletion, sometimes called velocardiofa-
cial or DiGeorge syndrome, includes cognitive disabil-
ity, cardiovascular defects, and facial dysmorphology. 
The penetrance of each of these symptoms and signs is 
independent of the others; thus, affected individuals 
have different combinations of phenotypes. Individu-
als with the 22q.11.2 microdeletion have a 25% to 40% 
risk of schizophrenia and a 20% risk of autism. Other 
syndromic forms of psychosis are similarly variable.
Syndromic forms of schizophrenia can provide 
important windows into the biology of psychosis, even 
if their similarities to common polygenic types of schiz-
ophrenia are still a matter of study. One powerful advan-
tage of penetrant mutations is the ability to generate 
cellular and animal models in order to characterize 
their effects on brain structure and function. A second 
advantage is the ability to prospectively study indi-
viduals carrying these mutations. Studying syndromic 
schizophrenia, therefore, has the potential to reveal 
much about basic pathophysiological mechanisms. 
One important area of investigation is how copy num-
ber variations and other high-penetrance mutations 
that lead to psychosis manifest based on a person’s 
genetic background, specifically the many common 
DNA variants that influence risk. To this point, recent 
findings suggest that the propensity in individuals car-
rying a copy number variation to develop psychotic 
symptoms may result from a strong interaction of the 
copy number variation with the person’s polygenic 
background risk for schizophrenia, suggesting sig-
nificant shared mechanisms between schizophrenia 
associated with single genetic mutations and that asso-
ciated only with polygenic variants.
Schizophrenia Is Characterized by Abnormalities 
in Brain Structure and Function
Abnormalities in the structure and function of the 
brain have been identified in schizophrenia both by 
postmortem examination and by a variety of noninva-
sive technologies in living patients. The best replicated 
finding, both by postmortem study and by structural 
MRI, is loss of gray matter in prefrontal, temporal, and 
parietal regions of cerebral cortex (Figure 60–2) with 
counterbalancing increases in the size of the cerebral 
ventricles (Figure 60–3). Thinning of the cerebral cortex 


