===== Page 1 =====
156    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–18  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (type 1A) 
results from increased production of peripheral myelin 
protein 22.
A. A patient with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease shows 
impaired gait and deformities. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Charcot’s original description of the disease, 
Charcot and Marie 1886.)
In the peripheral nervous system, MAG is expressed 
by Schwann cells early during production of myelin and 
eventually becomes a component of mature (compact) 
myelin. Its early expression, subcellular location, and 
structural similarity to other surface recognition pro-
teins suggest that it is an adhesion molecule important 
for the initiation of the myelination process. Two iso-
forms of MAG are produced from a single gene through 
alternative RNA splicing.
The major protein in mature peripheral myelin, 
myelin protein zero (MPZ or P0), spans the plasmalemma 
of the Schwann cell. It has a basic intracellular domain 
and, like MAG, is a member of the immunoglobulin 
superfamily. The glycosylated extracellular part of the 
protein, which contains the immunoglobulin domain, 
functions as a homophilic adhesion protein dur-
ing myelin-ensheathing by interacting with identi-
cal domains on the surface of the apposed membrane. 
Genetically engineered mice in which the function of 
P0 has been eliminated have poor motor coordination, 
tremors, and occasional convulsions.
Observation of trembler mouse mutants led to the 
identification of peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22). 
This Schwann cell protein spans the membrane four 
times and is normally present in compact myelin. 
PMP22 is altered by a single amino acid in the mutants. 
A similar protein is found in humans, encoded by a gene 
on chromosome 17.
Mutations of the PMP22 gene on chromosome 17 
produce several hereditary peripheral neuropathies, 
while a duplication of this gene causes one form of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (Figure 7–18). This disease 
is the most common inherited peripheral neuropathy 
and is characterized by progressive muscle weakness, 
greatly decreased conduction in peripheral nerves, and 
cycles of demyelination and remyelination. Because 
both duplicated genes are active, the disease results 
from increased production of PMP22 (a two- to three-
fold increase in gene dosage). Mutations in a number of 
genes expressed by Schwann cells can produce inherited 
peripheral neuropathies.
In the central nervous system, more than half of 
the protein in myelin is the proteolipid protein (PLP), 
which has five membrane-spanning domains. Proteolip-
ids differ from lipoproteins in that they are insoluble in 
water. Proteolipids are soluble only in organic solvents 
because they contain long chains of fatty acids that are 
covalently linked to amino acid residues throughout the 
proteolipid molecule. In contrast, lipoproteins are non-
covalent complexes of proteins with lipids and often 
serve as soluble carriers of the lipid moiety in the blood.
Many mutations of PLP are known in humans as 
well as in other mammals, eg, the jimpy mouse. One 
example is Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a heterogene-
ous X-linked disease in humans. Almost all PLP muta-
tions occur in a membrane-spanning domain of the 
molecule. Mutant animals have reduced amounts of 
(mutated) PLP, hypomyelination, and degeneration and 
death of oligodendrocytes. These observations suggest 
that PLP is involved in the compaction of myelin.
A
Box 7–3  Defects in Myelin Proteins Disrupt Conduction of Nerve Signals (continued)


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    157
B
2
1
Normal
3
Charcot-Marie-Tooth
CMT1A-REP
CMT1A-REP
PMP22
PMP22
Duplication
10 µm
PMP22
11.1
11.2
12
13.1
13.2
13.3
B. The disordered myelination in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease (type 1A) results from increased production of 
peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22).
1. Sural nerve biopsies from a normal individual (repro-
duced, with permission, from A.P. Hays) and from a patient 
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (reproduced, with per-
mission, from Lupski and Garcia 1992). In the patient’s 
biopsy, the myelin sheath is slightly thinner than normal 
and is surrounded by concentric rings of Schwann cell  
processes. These changes are typical of the recurrent 
demyelination and remyelination seen in this  
disorder.
2. The increase in PMP22 is caused by a duplication of a 
normal 1.5-Mb region of the DNA on the short arm of chro-
mosome 17 at 17p11.2-p12. The PMP22 gene is flanked by 
two similar repeat sequences (CMT1A-REP), as shown in 
the normal chromosome 17 on the left. Normal individu-
als have two normal chromosomes. In patients with the 
disease (right), the duplication results in two functioning 
PMP22 genes, each flanked by a repeat sequence. The 
normal and duplicated regions are shown in the expanded 
diagrams indicated by the dashed lines. (The repeats are 
thought to have given rise to the original duplication, which 
was then inherited. The presence of two similar flanking 
sequences with homology to a transposable element is 
believed to increase the frequency of unequal crossing 
over in this region of chromosome 17 because the repeats 
enhance the probability of mispairing of the two parental 
chromosomes in a fertilized egg.)
3. Although a large duplication (3 Mb) cannot be detected 
in routine examination of chromosomes in the light micro-
scope, evidence for the duplication can be obtained using 
fluorescence in situ hybridization. The PMP22 gene is 
detected with an oligonucleotide probe tagged with the 
dye Texas Red. An oligonucleotide probe that hybridizes 
with DNA from region 11.2 (indicated by the green seg-
ment close to the centromere) is used for in situ hybridi-
zation on the same sample. A nucleus from a normal 
individual (left) shows a pair of chromosomes, each with 
one red site (PMP22 gene) for each green site. A nucleus 
from a patient with the disease (right) has one extra red 
site, indicating that one chromosome has one PMP22 
gene and the other has two PMP22 genes. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Lupski et al. 1991.)


===== Page 3 =====
158    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Postsynaptic
cell
Presynaptic
cell
Astrocyte
A
B
C1
C2
Ca2+
Glutamate
Glutamate
transporter
Glutamate
Astrocyte
Ca2+ permeable
AMPA receptor
AMPA receptors
Presynaptic
cell
Postsynaptic
cell
Figure 7–19  Astrocyte processes are intimately associated 
with synapses.
A. Astrocytes occupy discrete volumes. The central astrocyte 
(green) is shown to occupy a volume distinct from its three neigh-
bors (red), with only a small overlap (yellow) at the ends of their 
processes, which are interconnected by gap junctions Bar = 20 μm.  
(Reproduced, with permission, from Bushong et al. 2002. 
Copyright © 2002 Society for Neuroscience.)
B. This high-voltage electron micrograph shows several thick pro-
cesses emanating from the cell body of an astrocyte and branch-
ing into extraordinarily fine processes. The typical envelopment 
of a blood vessel is shown at lower right. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Hama et al. 1994. Copyright © 1994 Wiley.)
C. The processes of astrocytes are intimately associated with 
both presynaptic and postsynaptic elements. 1. The close asso-
ciation between astrocyte processes and synapses is seen in 
this electron micrograph of hippocampal cells. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Ventura and Harris 1999. Copyright © 
1999 Society for Neuroscience.) 2. Glutamate released from 
the presynaptic neuron activates not only receptors on the 
postsynaptic neuron but also AMPA-type (α-amino-3-hydroxy-
5-methylisoxazole-4-propionate) receptors on astrocytes. 
Astrocytes remove glutamate from the synaptic cleft by uptake 
through high-affinity transporters. (Adapted from Gallo and  
Chittajallu 2001.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    159
nearby neuronal activity by triggering the release of 
nutrients and regulating blood flow. An increase in 
Ca2+ in astrocytes leads to the secretion of signals that 
enhance synaptic function and even behavior. Thus 
astrocyte–neuron signaling contributes to normal neu-
ral circuit functioning.
Astrocytes also are important for the development 
of synapses. Their appearance at synapses in the post-
natal brain coincides with periods of synaptogenesis 
and synapse maturation. Astrocytes prepare the sur-
face of the neuron for synapse formation and stabi-
lize newly formed synapses. For example, astrocytes 
secrete several synaptogenic factors, including throm-
bospondins, hevin, and glycipans, that promote the 
formation of new synapses. Astrocytes can also help 
remodel and eliminate excess synapses during devel-
opment by phagocytosis (Chapter 48). In the adult CNS, 
astrocytes continue to phagocytose synapses, and as 
this phagocytosis is dependent on neuronal activity, it  
is possible that this remodeling of synapses contributes 
to learning and memory. In pathological states, such as 
chromatolysis produced by axonal damage, astrocytes 
and presynaptic terminals temporarily retract from the 
damaged postsynaptic cell bodies. Astrocytes release 
neurotrophic and gliotrophic factors that promote the 
development and survival of neurons and oligoden-
drocytes. They also protect other cells from the effects 
of oxidative stress. For example, the glutathione perox-
idase in astrocytes detoxifies toxic oxygen free radicals 
released during hypoxia, inflammation, and neuronal 
degeneration.
Finally, astrocytes ensheathe small arterioles and 
capillaries throughout the brain, forming contacts 
between the ends of astrocyte processes and the basal 
lamina around endothelial cells. The CNS is seques-
tered from the general circulation so that macromol-
ecules in the blood do not passively enter the brain 
and spinal cord (the blood–brain barrier). The barrier is 
largely the result of tight junctions between endothe-
lial cells and cerebral capillaries, a feature not shared 
by capillaries in other parts of the body. Nevertheless, 
endothelial cells have a number of transport properties 
that allow some molecules to pass through them into 
the nervous system. Because of the intimate contacts 
of astrocytes and blood vessels, the transported mol-
ecules, such as glucose, can be taken up by astrocyte 
end-feet.
Following brain injury and disease, astrocytes 
undergo a dramatic transformation called reactive astro-
cytosis, which involves changes in gene expression, 
morphology, and signaling. The functions of reactive 
astrocytes are complex and poorly understood, as they 
both hinder and support CNS recovery. Recent studies 
have found evidence for at least two kinds of reactive 
astrocytes; one type helps to promote repair and recov-
ery, whereas another is harmful, actively contributing 
to the death of neurons after acute CNS injury; how-
ever there are likely other subtypes. These neurotoxic 
reactive astrocytes are prominent in patients with Alz-
heimer disease and other neurodegenerative diseases 
and thus are an attractive target for new therapies. An 
interesting question is why the brain ever generates a 
neurotoxic reactive astrocyte. Quite possibly, removal 
of injured or sick neurons allows synapses to reorgan-
ize to help preserve neural circuit function. In addi-
tion, removal of virally infected neurons could help 
limit the spread of viral infections.
Microglia Have Diverse Functions  
in Health and Disease
Microglia compose about 10% of glia in the CNS and 
exist in multiple morphological states in the healthy 
and damaged brain. Despite being described by Rio 
Hortega over 100 years ago, the functions of micro-
glia are poorly understood compared to other cell 
types. Unlike neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendro-
cytes, microglia do not belong to the neuroectodermal 
lineage. Long thought to derive from the bone mar-
row, recent fate mapping studies reveal that microglia 
are in fact derived from myeloid progenitors in the 
yolk sac.
Microglia colonize brain very early in embryonic 
development and reside in all regions of the brain 
throughout life (Figure 7–20). During development, 
microglia help sculpt developing neural circuits by 
engulfing pre- and postsynaptic structures (Figure 
7–21), and emerging evidence suggests microglia may 
modulate other aspects of brain development and 
brain homeostasis. Recent in vivo imaging studies 
have revealed dynamic interactions between micro-
glia and neurons. In the healthy adult cerebral cortex, 
microglia processes continuously survey their sur-
rounding extracellular environment and contact neu-
rons and synapses, but the functional significance of 
this activity remains unknown.
Following injury and disease, microglia undergo a 
dramatic increase in the motility of their processes and 
changes in morphology and gene expression and can 
be rapidly recruited to sites of damage where they can 
have beneficial roles. For example, they serve to bring 
lymphocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes into the 
CNS and expand the lymphocyte population, impor-
tant immunological activities in infection, stroke, and 
immunologic demyelinating disease. They also protect 
the brain by phagocytosing debris as well as unwanted 


===== Page 5 =====
160    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–21  Microglia interact with and sculpt synaptic ele-
ments in the healthy brain. Two-photon imaging in the olfac-
tory bulb of adult mice shows microglial processes expressing 
a fractalkine receptor–GFP fusion (CX3CR1-GFP) (green) con-
necting to tdTomato-labeled neurons (red). (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Hong and Stevens 2016.)
Figure 7–20  Large numbers of microglia reside in the 
mammalian central nervous system. The micrograph on 
the left shows microglia (in brown, immunocytochemistry) in 
the cerebral cortex of an adult mouse. The blue blobs are the 
nuclei of nonmicroglial cells. The microglial cells have fine, lacy 
processes, as shown in the higher magnification micrograph 
on the right. (Reproduced, with permission, from Berry et al. 
2002.)
and dying cells and toxic proteins, actions that are criti-
cal for preventing further damage and maintaining 
brain homeostasis. Although critical for the immune 
response to infection or trauma, microglia also con-
tribute to pathological neuroinflammation by releas-
ing cytokines and neurotoxic proteins and by inducing 
neurotoxic reactive astrocytes. They also contribute to 
synapse loss and dysfunction in models of Alzheimer 
disease and neurodegenerative disease.
Choroid Plexus and Ependymal Cells Produce 
Cerebrospinal Fluid
The function of neurons and glia is tightly regulated 
by the extracellular environment of the CNS. Intersti-
tial fluid (ISF) fills spaces between neurons and glia in 
the parenchyma. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) bathes the 
brain’s ventricles, the subarachnoid space of the brain 
and spinal cord, and the major cisterns of the CNS. The 
ISF and CSF deliver nutrients to cells in the CNS, main-
tain ion homeostasis, and serve as a removal system 
for metabolic waste products. In conjunction with the 
meningeal layers that surround the brain and spinal 
cord, the CSF provides a cushion that protects CNS 
tissues from mechanical damage. The fluid environ-
ment of the CNS is maintained by endothelial cells of 
the blood–brain barrier and choroid plexus epithelial 
cells of the blood–CSF barrier. These barriers not only 
serve to regulate the extracellular environment of the 
brain and spinal cord but also relay critical information 
between the CNS and the periphery.
The cells of the choroid plexus and the ependymal 
layer contribute to CSF production, composition, and 
dynamics. The choroid plexuses appear as epithelial 
invaginations soon after neural tube closure where 
the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles will eventually 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    161
Figure 7–22  Ependyma and choroid plexus.
A. The ependyma is a single layer of ciliated, cuboidal cells 
lining the cerebral ventricles (V). The lower image, a high mag-
nification of the ependymal lining (rectangle in upper image), 
shows the cilia on the ventricular side of the ependymal cells.
B. The choroid plexus is continuous with the ependyma but 
projects into the ventricles, where it covers thin blood vessels 
and forms a highly branched papillary structure. This is the site 
of cerebrospinal fluid formation. High magnification (lower 
image) shows the blood vessel core (BV) and overlying choroid 
plexus (CP). The arrow denotes the direction of fluid flow from 
capillary into ventricle during the formation of cerebrospinal 
fluid.
form. Through embryonic development, the choroid 
plexuses mature, each forming a ciliated cuboidal epi-
thelial layer that encapsulates a stromal and immune 
cell network and an extensive capillary bed. The 
ependyma is a single layer of ciliated cuboidal cells, a 
type of glia cell that lines the ventricles of the brain. At 
several places in the lateral and fourth ventricles, spe-
cialized ependymal cells form the epithelial layer that 
surrounds the choroid plexus (Figure 7–22B).
The choroid plexus produces most of the CSF that 
bathes the brain. Loose junctions between ependymal 
cells provide access for CSF to the brain’s interstitial 
space. Ciliary motion in the ependymal cells helps 
to move CSF through the ventricular system (Figure 
7–22A), facilitating long-range delivery of molecules to 
other cells in the CNS and transport of waste from the 
CNS to the periphery.
The choroid plexus transports fluid and sol-
utes from the serum into the CNS to generate CSF. 
The fenestrated capillaries that traverse the choroid 
plexus allow free passage of water and small mol-
ecules from the blood into the stromal space of the 
choroid plexus. The choroid plexus epithelial cells, 
however, form tight junctions, preventing further 
unregulated movement of these molecules into the 
brain. Instead, import of water, ions, metabolites, and 
protein mediators that compose the CSF is tightly 
regulated by transporters and channels in the choroid 
plexus epithelium. Active transport mechanisms in 
the epithelium are bidirectional, additionally mediat-
ing the flux of molecules from the CSF back into the 
peripheral circulation.
The choroid plexus epithelial cells also synthesize 
and secrete many proteins into the CSF. In the healthy 
A  Ependyma
V
V
BV
CP
B  Choroid plexus


===== Page 7 =====
162    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
embryonic and postnatal brain, these proteins modu-
late development of neural stem cells and may regulate 
processes such as cortical plasticity. The choroid plexus 
epithelial cell secretome can also be altered by inflam-
matory signals from the periphery or from within the 
brain, with consequences for neuronal function during 
infection and in aging. Functional roles for other cho-
roid plexus–derived factors in the healthy and diseased 
brain—including microRNAs, long noncoding RNAs, 
and extracellular vesicles—are beginning to emerge, 
further underlining the important contribution of this 
structure to brain development and homeostasis.
Highlights
  1.  The morphology of neurons is elegantly suited 
to receive, conduct, and transmit information in 
the brain. Dendrites provide a highly branched, 
elongated surface for receiving signals. Axons 
conduct electrical impulses rapidly over long dis-
tances to their synaptic terminals, which release 
neurotransmitters onto target cells.
  2.  Although all neurons conform to the same basic 
cellular architecture, different subtypes of neurons 
vary widely in their specific morphological features, 
functional properties, and molecular identities.
  3.  Neurons in different locations differ in the com-
plexity of their dendritic trees, extent of axon 
branching, and the number of synaptic termi-
nals that they form and receive. The functional 
significance of these morphological differences 
is plainly evident. For example, motor neurons 
must have a more complex dendritic tree than 
sensory neurons, as even simple reflex activ-
ity requires integration of many excitatory and 
inhibitory inputs. Different types of neurons use 
different neurotransmitters, ion channels, and 
neurotransmitter receptors. Together, these bio-
chemical, morphological, and electrophysiologi-
cal differences contribute to the great complexity 
of information processing in the brain.
  4.  Neurons are among the most highly polarized 
cells in our body. The considerable size and 
complexity of their dendritic and axonal com-
partments represent significant cell biological 
challenges for these cells, including transport 
of various organelles, proteins, and mRNA over 
long distances (up to a meter for some axons). 
Most neuronal proteins are synthesized in the cell 
body, but some synthesis occurs in dendrites and 
axons. The newly synthesized proteins are folded 
with the assistance of chaperones, and their 
final structure is often modified by permanent 
or reversible posttranslational modifications. 
The final destination of a protein in the neuron 
depends on signals encoded in its amino acid 
sequence.
  5.  Transport of proteins and mRNA occurs with 
great specificity and results in the vectorial 
transport of selected membrane components. 
The cytoskeleton provides an important frame-
work for the transport of organelles to different 
intracellular locations in addition to controlling 
axonal and dendritic morphology.
  6.  All these fundamental cell biological processes 
are profoundly modifiable by neuronal activ-
ity, which produces the dramatic changes in cell 
structure and function by which neural circuits 
adapt to experience (learning).
  7.  The nervous system also contains several types of 
glial cells. Oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells 
produce the myelin insulation that enables axons 
to conduct electrical signals rapidly. Astrocytes 
and nonmyelinating Schwann cells ensheathe 
other parts of the neuron, particularly synapses. 
Astrocytes control extracellular ion and neuro-
transmitter concentrations and actively partici-
pate in the formation and function of synapses. 
Microglia resident immune cells and phagocytes 
dynamically interact with neurons and glial cells 
and have diverse roles in health and disease.
  8.  The cells of the choroid plexus and the ependy-
mal layer contribute to CSF production, composi-
tion, and dynamics.
  9.  New advances in genomics and single-cell RNA 
sequencing are beginning to define the immense 
diversity of cell types, not only among neurons 
but also among glial cells.
10.  Recent progress in genetics, cell biology, and in 
vivo microscopy (two-photon microscopy, light-
sheet microscopy) is providing new insights into 
the unique mechanisms by which neurons estab-
lish and maintain their polarity throughout an 
individual’s life span.
11.  These new insights provide important clues into 
the cell biological steps, including for example 
defects in axon transport, that trigger neurode-
generative diseases such as Huntington, Parkin-
son, and Alzheimer disease.
Beth Stevens 
Franck Polleux 
Ben A. Barres 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    163
Selected Reading
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Walter P 
(eds). 2002. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th ed. New York: 
Garland.
Chung WS, Allen NJ, Eroglu C. 2015. Astrocytes control syn-
apse formation, function, and elimination. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol 7:a020370.
Damkier HH, Brown P, Praetorius J. 2013. Cerebrospinal fluid 
secretion by the choroid plexus. Physiol Rev 93:1847–1892.
Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, Griffin JW, Low PA, Poduslo JF 
(eds). 1993. Peripheral Neuropathy, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Saunders.
Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, Lambert EH, Bunge R (eds). 1984. 
Peripheral Neuropathy, 2nd ed., Vols. 1, 2. Philadelphia: 
Saunders.
Glickman MH, Ciechanover A. 2002. The ubiquitin-proteasome 
proteolytic pathway: destruction for the sake of con-
struction. Physiol Rev 82:373–428.
Hartl FU. 1996. Molecular chaperones in cellular protein 
folding. Nature 381:571–579.
Kapitein LC, Hoogenraad CC. 2015. Building the neuronal 
microtubule cytoskeleton. Neuron 87:492–506.
Kelly RB. 1993. Storage and release of neurotransmitters. Cell 
72:43–53.
Kreis T, Vale R (eds). 1999. Guidebook to the Cytoskeletal and 
Motor Proteins, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Lun MP, Monuki ES, Lehtinen MK. 2015. Development and 
functions of the choroid plexus-cerebral fluid system. 
Nature Rev Neurosci 16:445–457.
Nigg EA. 1997. Nucleocytoplasmic transport: signals, mech-
anisms and regulation. Nature 386:779–787.
Pemberton LF, Paschal BM. 2005. Mechanisms of receptor-
mediated nuclear import and nuclear export. Traffic 
6:187–198.
Rothman JE. 2002. Lasker Basic Medical Research Award: the 
machinery and principles of vesicle transport in the cell. 
Nat Med 8:1059–1062.
Schafer DP, Stevens B. 2015. Microglia function in central 
nervous system development and plasticity. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol 7:a020545.
Schatz G, Dobberstein B. 1996. Common principles of protein 
translocation across membranes. Science 271:1519–1526.
Schwartz JH. 2003. Ubiquitination, protein turnover, and 
long-term synaptic plasticity. Sci STKE 190:26.
Siegel GJ, Albers RW, Brady S, Price DL (eds). 2005. Basic 
Neurochemistry: Molecular, Cellular, and Medical Aspects, 7th 
ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Signor D, Scholey JM. 2000. Microtubule-based transport 
along axons, dendrites and axonemes. Essays Biochem 
35:89–102.
St Johnston D. 2005. Moving messages: the intracellu-
lar localization of mRNAs. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6: 
363–375.
Stryer L. 1995. Biochemistry, 4th ed. New York: Freeman.
Tahirovic S, Bradke F. 2009. Neuronal polarity. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Biol 1:a001644.
Zhou L, Griffin JW. 2003. Demyelinating neuropathies. Curr 
Opin Neurol 16:307–313.
References
Barnes AP, Polleux F. 2009. Establishment of axon-dendrite polar-
ity in developing neurons. Ann Rev Neurosci 32:347–381.
Berry M, Butt AM, Wilkin G, Perry VH. 2002. Structure and 
function of glia in the central nervous system. In: Graham 
DI and Lantos PL (eds). Greenfield’s Neuropathology. 7th 
ed., pp. 104–105. London: Arnold.
Bershadsky AD, Vasiliev JM. 1988. Cytoskeleton. New York: 
Plenum.
Brendecke SM, Prinz M. 2015. Do not judge a cell by its 
cover—diversity of CNS resident, adjoining and infiltrat-
ing myeloid cells in inflammation. Semin Immunopathol 
37:591–605.
Bushong EA, Martone ME, Jones YZ, Ellisman MH. 2002. 
Protoplasmic astrocytes in CA1 stratum radiatum occupy 
separate anatomical domains. J Neurosci 22:183–192.
Charcot J-M, Marie P. 1886. Sur une forme particulière 
d’atrophie musculaire progressive, souvent familiale, 
débutant par les pieds et les jambes et atteignant plus tard 
les mains. Rev Med 6:97–138.
Christopherson KS, Ullian EM, Stokes CC, et al. 2005. Throm-
bospondins are astrocyte-secreted proteins that promote 
CNS synaptogenesis. Cell 120:421–433.
Chung WS, Clarke LE, Wang GX, et al. 2013. Astrocytes medi-
ate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK 
pathways. Nature 504:394–400.
Ciechanover A, Brundin P. 2003. The ubiquitin proteasome 
system in neurodegenerative diseases: sometimes the 
chicken, sometimes the egg. Neuron 40:427–446.
Cooney JR, Hurlburt JL, Selig DK, Harris KM, Fiala JC. 2002. 
Endosomal compartments serve multiple hippocampal 
dendritic spines from a widespread rather than a local 
store of recycling membrane. J Neurosci 22:2215–2224.
De Camilli P, Moretti M, Donini SD, Walter U, Lohmann SM. 
1986. Heterogeneous distribution of the cAMP receptor 
protein RII in the nervous system: evidence for its intra-
cellular accumulation on microtubules, microtubule-
organizing centers, and in the area of the Golgi complex.  
J Cell Biol 103:189–203.
Divac I, LaVail JH, Rakic P, Winston KR. 1977. Heterogene-
ous afferents to the inferior parietal lobule of the rhesus 
monkey revealed by the retrograde transport method. 
Brain Res 123:197–207.
Duxbury MS, Whang EE. 2004. RNA interference: a practical 
approach. J Surg Res 117:339–344.
Esiri MM, Hyman BT, Beyreuther K, Masters C. 1997. Ageing 
and dementia. In: DI Graham, PL Lantos (eds). Greenfield’s 
Neuropathology, 6th ed. Vol II. London: Arnold.
Gallo V, Chittajallu R. 2001. Neuroscience. Unwrapping 
glial cells from the synapse: what lies inside? Science 
292:872–873.
Giraudo CG, Hu C, You D, et al. 2005. SNAREs can promote 
complete fusion and hemifusion as alternative outcomes. 
J Cell Biol 170:249–260.
Goldberg AL. 2003. Protein degradation and protection against 
misfolded or damaged proteins. Nature 426:895–899.
Görlich D, Mattaj IW. 1996. Nucleocytoplasmic transport. 
Science 271:1513–1518.


===== Page 9 =====
164    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Hama K, Arii T, Kosaka T. 1994. Three-dimensional organiza-
tion of neuronal and glial processes: high voltage electron 
microscopy. Microsc Res Tech 29:357–367.
Harris KM, Jensen FE, Tsao B. 1992. Three-dimensional struc-
ture of dendritic spines and synapses in rat hippocampus 
(CA1) at postnatal day 15 and adult ages: implications 
for the maturation of synaptic physiology and long-term 
potentiation. J Neurosci 12:2685–2705.
Harris KM, Stevens JK. 1989. Dendritic spines of CA1 pyram-
idal cells in the rat hippocampus: serial electron micros-
copy with reference to their biophysical characteristics.  
J Neurosci 9:2982–2997.
Hirokawa N. 1997. The mechanisms of fast and slow trans-
port in neurons: identification and characterization of the 
new Kinesin superfamily motors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
7:605–614.
Hirokawa N, Pfister KK, Yorifuji H, Wagner MC, Brady ST, 
Bloom GS. 1989. Submolecular domains of bovine brain 
kinesin identified by electron microscopy and monoclo-
nal antibody decoration. Cell 56:867–878.
Hoffman PN, Lasek RJ. 1975. The slow component of axonal 
transport: identification of major structural polypeptides 
of the axon and their generality among mammalian neu-
rons. J Cell Biol 66:351–366.
Hong S, Stevens B. 2016. Microglia: phagocytosing to clear, 
sculpt and eliminate. Dev Cell 38:126–128.
Ko CO, Robitaille R. 2015. Perisynaptic Schwann cells at the 
neuromuscular synapse: adaptable, multitasking glial 
cells. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7:a020503.
Lemke G. 2001. Glial control of neuronal development. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 24:87–105.
Liddelow SA,Guttenplan KA, Clarke LE, et al. 2016 Neuro-
toxic reactive astrocytes are induced by activated micro-
glia. Nature 541:481–487.
Lupski JR, de Oca-Luna RM, Slaugenhaupt S, et al. 1991. 
DNA duplication associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease type 1A. Cell 66:219–232.
Lupski JR, Garcia CA. 1992. Molecular genetics and neuro-
pathology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A. Brain 
Pathol 2:337–349.
Ma Z, Stork T, Bergles DE, Freeman MR. 2016. Neuromod-
ulators signal through astrocytes to alter neural circuit 
activity and behaviour. Nature 539:428–432.
Maday S, Twelvetrees AE, Moughamian AJ, Holzbaur EL. 
2014. Axonal transport: cargo-specific mechanisms of 
motility and regulation. Neuron 84:292–309.
McNew JA, Goodman JM. 1996. The targeting and assem-
bly of peroxisomal proteins: some old rules do not apply. 
Trends Biochem Sci 21:54–58.
Mirra SS, Hyman BT. 2002. Aging and dementia. In: DI Graham, 
PL Lantos (eds). Greenfield’s Neuropathology, 7th ed., Vol. 2, 
p. 212. London: Arnold.
Ochs S. 1972. Fast transport of materials in mammalian nerve 
fibers. Science 176:252–260.
Peles E, Salzer JL. 2000. Molecular domains of myelinated 
axons. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:558–565.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster H de F. 1991. The Fine Structure of 
the Nervous System, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Raine CS. 1984. Morphology of myelin and myelination. In: P 
Morell (ed). Myelin. New York: Plenum Press.
Ransohoff RM, Cardona AE. 2010. The myeloid cells of the 
central nervous system parenchyma. Nature 468:253–262.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1901] 1988. Studies on the human cerebral 
cortex. IV. Structure of the olfactory cerebral cortex of 
man and mammals. In: J DeFelipe, EG Jones (eds, transl). 
Cajál on the Cerebral Cortex, pp. 289–362. New York: Oxford 
Univ. Press.
Ramón y Cajal S. [1909] 1995. Histology of the Nervous System 
of Man and Vertebrates. N Swanson, LW Swanson (transl). 
Vols. 1, 2. New York: Oxford Univ. Press.
Readhead C, Popko B, Takahashi N, et al. 1987. Expression of a 
myelin basic protein gene in transgenic Shiverer mice: cor-
rection of the dysmyelinating phenotype. Cell 48:703–712.
Roa BB, Lupski JR. 1994. Molecular genetics of Charcot-
Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Adv Human Genet 22:117–152.
Schafer DP, Lehrman EK, Kautzman AG, et al. 2012. Micro-
glia sculpt postnatal neural circuits in an activity and 
complement-dependent manner. Neuron 74:691–705.
Schnapp BJ, Reese TS. 1982. Cytoplasmic structure in rapid-
frozen axons. J Cell Biol 94:667–679.
Silva-Vargas V, Maldonado-Soto AR, Mizrak D, Codega P, 
Doetsch F. 2016. Age-dependent niche signals from the 
choroid plexus regulate adult neural stem cells. Cell Stem 
Cell 19:643–652.
Sorra KE, Harris KM. 1993. Occurrence and three-dimensional 
structure of multiple synapses between individual radia-
tum axons and their target pyramidal cells in hippocam-
pal area CA1. J Neurosci 13:3736–3748.
Sossin W. 1996. Mechanisms for the generation of synapse 
specificity in long-term memory: the implications of a 
requirement for transcription. Trends Neurosci 19:215–218.
Takei K, Mundigl O, Daniell L, De Camilli P. 1996. The syn-
aptic vesicle cycle: a single vesicle budding step involving 
clathrin and dynamin. J Cell Biol 1335:1237–1250.
Ventura R, Harris KM. 1999. Three-dimensional relation-
ships between hippocampal synapses and astrocytes.  
J Neurosci 19:6897–6906.
Weiss P, Hiscoe HB. 1948. Experiments on the mechanism of 
nerve growth. J Exp Zool 107:315–395.
Wells DG, Richter JD, Fallon JR. 2000. Molecular mechanisms 
for activity-regulated protein synthesis in the synapto-
dendritic compartment. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:132–137.
Williams PL, Warwick R, Dyson M, Bannister LH (eds). 1989. 
Gray’s Anatomy, 37th ed., pp 859–919. Edinburgh: Church-
ill Livingstone.
Zemanick MC, Strick PL, Dix RD. 1991. Direction of transneu-
ronal transport of herpes simplex virus 1 in the primate 
motor system is strain-dependent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
88:8048–8051.


