===== Page 1 =====
1508    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 61–1  The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Neu-
rons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus synthe-
size and release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), the key 
regulatory peptide in the hormonal cascade activated by stress. 
The CRH neurons have a circadian pattern of secretion, and the 
stimulatory effects of stress on CRH synthesis and secretion 
are superimposed on this basal circadian pattern. Excitatory  
fibers from the amygdala convey information about stressful 
stimuli that activates CRH neurons; inhibitory fibers descend 
from the hippocampus onto the paraventricular nucleus. CRH 
enters the hypophyseal portal system and stimulates the 
corticotropic cells in the anterior pituitary that synthesize and 
release adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). The released 
ACTH enters the systemic circulation and stimulates the adre-
nal cortex to release glucocorticoids. In humans, the major 
glucocorticoid is cortisol; in rodents, it is corticosterone. Both 
cortisol and synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexamethasone 
act at the level of the pituitary and hypothalamus to inhibit 
further release of ACTH and CRH, respectively. The feedback 
inhibition by glucocorticoids is attenuated in major depression 
and the depressed phase of bipolar disorder. (Adapted, with 
permission, from Nestler et al. 2015.)
effects of depression, such as increased release of stress 
hormones (see below) and decreased motivation to 
engage in rehabilitative regimens.
Depression and Stress Share Overlapping 
Neural Mechanisms
Depression and responses to stress exhibit complex 
but significant interactions. As already noted, severe 
childhood adversity is a developmental risk factor for 
depression; moreover, depressive episodes may be ini-
tiated by a stressful experience. Conversely, the expe-
rience of depression is itself stressful because of the 
suffering it causes and its negative effects on function-
ing. Symptomatically, depression shares several physi-
ological features with chronic stress, including changes 
in appetite, sleep, and energy. Both major depression 
and chronic stress are associated with persistent acti-
vation of the HPA axis (Figure 61–1).
Many but not all individuals with major depres-
sion and many in the depressed phase of bipolar dis-
order exhibit excess synthesis and secretion of the 
glucocorticoid stress hormone cortisol and the fac-
tors that regulate it, corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). In a 
healthy state, a transient increase in cortisol secretion, 
as occurs in response to acute stress, shifts the body to 
a catabolic state (making glucose available to confront 
the stressor or threat), increases subjective energy lev-
els, sharpens cognition, and may increase confidence. 
However, a chronic increase in glucocorticoids may 
contribute to depression-like symptoms. For example, 
many people with Cushing disease (in which pituitary 
tumors secrete excess ACTH, leading to excess cortisol) 
experience symptoms of depression.
Feedback mechanisms within the HPA axis nor-
mally permit cortisol (or exogenously administered 
glucocorticoids) to inhibit CRH and ACTH secretion 
and therefore to suppress additional cortisol synthesis 
and secretion. In approximately half of people with 
major depression, this feedback system is impaired; 
their HPA axis becomes resistant to suppression even 
by potent synthetic glucocorticoids such as dexa-
methasone. Although readily measurable disturbances 
of the HPA axis have not proven sensitive or specific 
enough to be used as a diagnostic test for depression, 
the observed abnormalities suggest strongly that a 
pathologically activated stress response is often an 
important component of depression.
The relationship of stress with depression has 
led to the development of several chronic stress para-
digms in rodent models of depression. The reliance on 
Pituitary
Glucocorticoids
ACTH
CRH
Adrenal 
cortex
–
–
Regulation 
of brain and 
peripheral 
function
Hippocampus
Amygdala
+
_
Paraventricular
nucleus
Hypothalamus
Glucocorticoids
Dexamethasone
Attenuated 
in depression


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1509
stress-induced syndromes in these animal models has 
been strengthened by the observation that many anti-
depressant drugs reverse stress-induced changes in 
physiology or behavior in these animals. However, the 
degree to which animals subjected to diverse chronic 
stressors actually model the disease mechanisms under-
lying depression in human beings remains unknown. 
Concern about overreliance on stress-based and other 
rodent models is indicated by the failure to identify new 
antidepressant mechanisms despite more than 50 years 
of trying. Drug screens using such models have only 
identified molecules with actions similar to prototype 
antidepressant drugs that were first identified by their 
unexpected psychotropic effects on humans.
Dysfunctions of Human Brain Structures 
and Circuits Involved in Mood and Anxiety 
Disorders Can Be Identified by Neuroimaging
Investigation of human brain regions and the neural 
circuitry involved in mood and anxiety disorders has 
relied on noninvasive structural and functional neuro-
imaging, neurophysiologic testing, and postmortem 
analyses. More recently, information is being gleaned 
from neuroimaging of patients being treated with deep 
brain stimulation.
Identification of Abnormally Functioning  
Neural Circuits Helps Explain Symptoms  
and May Suggest Treatments
Functional neuroimaging and electrophysiological 
studies are being pursued in order to elucidate abnor-
malities in circuit activity and in patterns of intrinsic 
connectivity in mood and anxiety disorders. Given the 
heterogeneity of major depression, bipolar disorder, 
and anxiety disorders defined by current diagnostic 
methods, it has been challenging to identify robust and 
replicable abnormalities. In addition, the use of diverse 
cognitive and emotional tasks to experimentally probe 
mood and anxiety disorders has limited researchers’ 
ability to replicate and confirm findings. Overcoming 
the resulting uncertainties will require larger numbers 
of subjects, application of data standards that permit 
meta-analyses, and increasingly, methods such as use 
of the PRSs to stratify subjects.
Despite current limitations, fMRI and electro-
physiological studies of mood and anxiety disorders 
have begun to provide initial empirical leads about 
circuit abnormalities in mood and anxiety disorders. 
Resting-state fMRI studies comparing subjects with 
major depression and healthy control subjects suggest 
differences in patterns of intrinsic connectivity, specifi-
cally within neural circuits that regulate “top down” 
control of cognition and emotion—the “cognitive con-
trol network”—and in circuits that process significant 
emotional and motivational stimuli—”the salience net-
work” (Figure 61–2). Despite the need for replication, 
these findings are noteworthy because they are con-
sistent with results from task-based imaging studies of 
humans (eg, studies of fear conditioning) and animal 
studies that investigate responses to aversive stimuli.
In healthy human subjects, regions of the amygdala 
are activated by threatening stimuli and during fear 
conditioning, such as pairing a previously neutral tone 
with a mild shock. Beginning with the work of Charles 
Darwin, human faces expressing fear have been recog-
nized to elicit anxiety responses across diverse human 
cultures, presumably as a mechanism to communicate 
the presence of danger among members of a group.
The effects of fearful and other emotion-expressing 
faces on measurements of autonomic activity and brain 
activity measured by fMRI or by electroencephalogra-
phy have been studied in subjects with anxiety disor-
ders or with major depression. In one such paradigm, 
fearful faces are shown very briefly (33 ms) while the 
subject is in an MRI scanner. This presentation is fol-
lowed by a neutral face (referred to as backward mask-
ing). Under such circumstances, subjects report that 
they have no awareness of having seen the fearful face. 
Yet they exhibit an altered galvanic skin response, a 
measure of sympathetic activation, as well as activa-
tion of the basal amygdala, the amygdala region that 
processes sensory inputs and that responds selectively 
to threat. Several functional neuroimaging studies of 
individuals with PTSD, other anxiety disorders, and 
major depression have demonstrated heightened 
activity in the amygdala, activation even to innocuous 
stimuli, and persistence of amygdala activity in con-
trast to normal patterns of adaptation (Figure 61–3).
Functional neuroimaging studies of anxiety disor-
ders and major depression have also found decreased 
activity in prefrontal cortical regions that are intercon-
nected with the basal amygdala. Studies of animals 
with prefrontal cortical lesions demonstrate that pro-
jections from the prefrontal cortex to the basal amyg-
dala are necessary for cognitive control over aversive 
information. In individuals suffering from anxiety dis-
orders or major depression, reduced activation of the 
prefrontal cortex by aversive stimuli is consistent with 
cognitive testing that demonstrates decreased cogni-
tive control and might contribute to excessive and per-
sistent anxiety and other negative emotions.
Electrophysiological and functional neuroimaging 
studies of both major depression and bipolar disorder 


===== Page 3 =====
1510    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 61–3  Amygdala activation in response to a masked 
presentation of a fearful stimulus. A human subject observes 
projected images while being scanned by magnetic resonance 
imaging. When a fearful face is presented for a very brief time 
followed by presentation of a neutral face, a protocol called 
backward masking, the subject is not consciously aware of 
the fearful face. Under these conditions, the basolateral region 
of the amygdala is more strongly activated in individuals with 
anxiety disorder than in normal individuals. (Reproduced, with 
permission, from Etkin et al. 2004.)
Salience
processing
Lateral
parietal
dACC
dACC
SN/VTA
VLPFC
DLPFC
PAG
HT
HT
TP
FI
FI
AI
AI
SLEA
dCN
Put
AntTHAL
Pre-SMA
DMPFC
dmTHAL
Executive
control
2
10
2
8
Figure 61–2  Mood disorders involve independent neural 
networks associated with processing of emotional salience 
and cognitive control. Statistical analysis (independent compo-
nent analysis) applied to resting-state functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging data identifies separable networks that compute 
emotional salience (red-orange) and regulate cognitive control/
executive function (blue). The emotional salience network links 
dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and frontoinsular cortex 
(FI) with subcortical structures involved in emotion. The cogni-
tive control network links the dorsolateral prefrontal (DLPFC) 
and parietal cortices and several subcortical structures. The 
brain regions shown to be networked in this study have been 
implicated in major depression by multiple independent studies. 
(Abbreviations: AI, anterior insula; antTHAL, anterior thalamus; 
dCN, dorsal caudate nucleus; DMPFC, dorsomedial prefrontal 
cortex; dmTHAL, dorsomedial thalamus; HT, hypothalamus; 
PAG, periaqueductal gray matter; Pre-SMA, pre–supplementary 
motor area; Put, putamen; SLEA, sublenticular extended amyg-
dala; SN/VTA, substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area of 
the midbrain; TP, temporal pole; VLPFC, ventrolateral prefrontal 
cortex.) (Reproduced, with permission, from Seeley et al. 2007. 
Copyright © 2007 Society for Neuroscience.)
Basolateral region 
of the amygdala
Amygdala


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1511
Figure 61–4  Activity in the rostral anterior (subgenual)  
cingulate cortex is increased by sadness and decreased by 
successful treatment of major depression with an antidepres-
sant. (Reproduced, with permission, from Mayberg et al. 1997.)
Left. Healthy volunteers provided a script of their saddest 
memory that was later used to generate transient sadness 
while undergoing positron emission tomography (PET). The 
rostral anterior cingulate cortex was activated (red pseudo-color 
in the sagittal section of the human brain) was activated when 
the sad story was read. Cg25 is an alternative nomenclature 
for the cingulate gyrus, Brodmann area 25. The PET ligand was 
oxygen-15–labeled water, used to measure cerebral blood flow 
as a proxy for brain activity.
Right. Elevated metabolism in the rostral anterior cingulate cor-
tex was confirmed in subjects with major depression. Follow-
ing successful treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant, brain activity in Cg25 decreased 
(blue pseudo-color in the sagittal section of the human brain). 
The PET ligand was 2-deoxyglucose, used to measure cerebral 
metabolism as a proxy for brain activity.
have shown abnormal functioning of the rostral and 
ventral subdivisions of the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC), a region of prefrontal cortex that participates 
in the emotional salience network. The rostral and 
ventral ACC have extensive connections with the hip-
pocampus, amygdala, orbital prefrontal cortex, ante-
rior insula, and nucleus accumbens and are involved in 
the integration of emotion, cognition, and autonomic 
nervous system function. The caudal subdivision of 
the ACC is involved in cognitive processes involved 
in control of behavior; it has connections with dorsal 
regions of the prefrontal cortex, secondary motor cor-
tex, and posterior cingulate cortex.
Although abnormal function in both subdivisions 
of the ACC has been observed in depressive episodes, 
the most consistent abnormality observed in major 
depression and in the depressed phase of bipolar dis-
order is increased activity in the rostral and ventral 
subdivisions, especially in the subgenual region ven-
tral to the genu (or “knee”) of the corpus callosum. In 
a study using positron emission tomography, effective 
treatment of major depression with selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor antidepressants was correlated with 
decreased activity in the rostral ACC, whereas self-
induced sadness in healthy subjects increased activity 
(Figure 61–4). Based on such studies, the rostral ante-
rior (subgenual) cingulate cortex has been used as a 
target for electrode placement in deep brain stimula-
tion for treatment-resistant major depression, which 
is operationally defined as depressive illness that has 
Induced sadness in healthy subjects
Depression recovery with SSRI
Cg25
Cg25
been unresponsive to antidepressant medication and 
psychotherapy.
Functional abnormalities of brain reward circuitry 
may also play a role in the symptoms of mood disor-
ders. The reward circuitry comprises the dopaminergic 
projections from the ventral tegmental area of the mid-
brain to forebrain targets, including the nucleus accum-
bens, habenula, prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and 
amygdala (Chapter 43). Under normal conditions, these 
pathways are involved in the valuation of rewards (eg, 
palatable food, sexual activity, and social interactions) 
and in motivating the necessary behavior to obtain 
them. Reward processing appears to be abnormal in 
depression, based on such symptoms as decreased 
interest in previously pleasurable activities, decreased 
motivation, and, when depression is severe, the inabil-
ity to experience pleasure (anhedonia). Although less 
well studied, reward processing is also likely abnormal 
in mania, which is characterized by excessive engage-
ment in goal-directed behaviors, even when they are 
maladaptive, such as uncontrolled spending, danger-
ous drug use, and promiscuous sexual activity.
In a recent analysis of resting-state fMRI, data 
showed that patients with major depression could 
be stratified based on connectivity patterns that cor-
related with their degree of anhedonia and anxiety. 
However, although modulation of the reward cir-
cuitry has been considered as a possible treatment for 
major depression, it has proven difficult in practice. 
For example, drugs known to activate this circuitry by 


===== Page 5 =====
1512    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
increasing synaptic dopamine, such as amphetamine 
and cocaine, pose a high risk of overuse and addic-
tion. More recently, tests of drugs that release reward 
circuits from inhibitory control, such as kappa opiate 
receptor antagonists, have been initiated in patients 
with major depression.
A Decrease in Hippocampal Volume Is Associated 
With Mood Disorders
The best-established structural abnormality in mood 
disorders is decreased hippocampal volume in indi-
viduals with major depression compared with healthy 
subjects. Recent studies of patients with major depres-
sion and bipolar disorder have found hippocampal 
volume loss in unmedicated subjects in regions of the 
cerebral cortex associated with the control of emo-
tion. Such studies, which still need replication, show 
both overlapping and nonoverlapping patterns of vol-
ume loss in patients with major depression compared 
with bipolar disorder. Volume reductions observed in 
patients with major depression correlate with the dura-
tion of depressive episodes when controlling for dura-
tion of medication use. These findings suggest that in 
major depression the volume losses result from persis-
tent illness and do not represent an antecedent risk fac-
tor. Some researchers have hypothesized that elevated 
cortisol levels in patients with major depression might 
be associated with reduced hippocampal volumes.
Reduced hippocampal volume has also been 
reported in cases of PTSD. In contrast with major 
depression, studies of monozygotic twins discordant 
for PTSD suggest that small hippocampi precede onset 
of the disorder and may thus represent a risk factor 
instead of a result of the disorder.
The acquired loss of hippocampal volume in major 
depression could result from loss of dendrites and 
dendritic spines, from decreased cell numbers (neu-
rons or glia), or both. Given the relationship of stress 
and depression, excessive cortisol secretion could play 
a causal role in either type of loss. A decrease in hip-
pocampal cell number could be explained by the fact 
that stress and elevated glucocorticoid levels suppress 
adult hippocampal neurogenesis, as shown in studies 
of several animal species.
In several mammals, including humans, new gran-
ule cells within the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus 
are produced during adult life. Studies of rodents have 
shown that these new neurons can be incorporated 
into functional neural circuits where they initially 
exhibit heightened structural and synaptic plasticity. A 
role for cell death as a balance to adult neurogenesis is 
less well studied.
In rodents, stressful or aversive treatments or 
administration of glucocorticoids inhibits the prolif-
eration of granule cell precursors and thus suppresses 
normal rates of neurogenesis in the hippocampus. 
Antidepressants, including the selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, exert an opposite effect, increasing 
the rate of neurogenesis. Thus, excess secretion of glu-
cocorticoid stress hormones, as occurs in depression, 
could cause hippocampal volume loss by inhibiting 
neurogenesis over time. Because glucocorticoid recep-
tors in the hippocampus are required for inhibitory 
feedback to hypothalamic neurons that synthesize and 
release CRH, impairments of hippocampal function 
could further impair feedback regulation of the HPA 
axis, creating a vicious cycle.
The hippocampus permits the brain to resolve 
differences among closely related stimuli (pattern 
separation) and provides contextual information that 
facilitates interpretation of the survival significance of a 
stimulus. Such information is needed by the organism 
to accurately identify threats that are signaled within 
a stream of complex sensory inputs. In animal stud-
ies, hippocampal lesions increase anxiety responses; 
it is thought that the resulting impairment of pattern 
separation and processing of contextual information 
permits threat-related memories to generalize inappro-
priately and thus to become associated with innocuous 
stimuli. Physiological and behavioral evidence suggests 
that newborn neurons within the dentate gyrus of the 
hippocampus play a particularly important role in pat-
tern separation. Thus, inhibition of neurogenesis might 
contribute to anxiety symptoms that often accompany 
major depression, and abnormally low hippocampal 
volumes might increase the risk of PTSD.
Major Depression and Anxiety Disorders  
Can Be Treated Effectively
Major depressive disorder can be treated effectively 
with antidepressant drugs, cognitive psychotherapy, 
and electroconvulsive therapy. Major depressive dis-
order refractory to other interventions is being treated 
experimentally with deep brain stimulation targeted 
to the subgenual prefrontal cortex and other targets, 
including the nucleus accumbens.
Current Antidepressant Drugs Affect 
Monoaminergic Neural Systems
Named for their first clinical indication, the antidepres-
sant drugs have broader utility than suggested by their 
name. Indeed, antidepressants are also the first-line 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1513
Figure 61–5  The major serotonergic systems in the brain 
arise in the raphe nuclei of the brain stem. Serotonin is syn-
thesized in a group of brain stem nuclei called the raphe nuclei. 
These neurons project throughout the neuraxis, ranging from the 
forebrain to the spinal cord. The serotonergic projections are 
the most massive and diffuse of the monoaminergic systems, 
with single serotonergic neurons innervating hundreds of tar-
get neurons. (Adapted, with permission, from Heimer 1995.)
A. A sagittal view of the brain illustrates the raphe nuclei. In 
the brain, these nuclei form a fairly continuous collection of cell 
groups close to the midline of the brain stem and extending 
along its length. In the drawing here, they are shown in more 
distinct rostral and caudal groups. The rostral raphe nuclei pro-
ject to a large number of forebrain structures.
B. This coronal view of the brain illustrates some of the major 
structures innervated by serotonergic raphe nuclei neurons.
drugs for the treatment of anxiety disorders. Along 
with frequent co-occurrence and sharing of risk factors 
and some neural circuits, the overlap in effective treat-
ment modalities is further evidence that mood and 
anxiety disorders are related.
All widely used antidepressant drugs increase 
activity in monoaminergic systems in the brain, most 
significantly serotonin and norepinephrine, although 
some antidepressants exert modest effects on dopamine 
as well. The relevant monoamine neurotransmitters— 
serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine—are syn-
thesized by cells that reside within brain stem nuclei 
(Chapter 40). Serotonergic and noradrenergic neurons 
in the pons and medulla project widely to highly diverse 
terminal fields in brain regions that include the hypo-
thalamus, hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia, and 
cerebral cortex (Figures 61–5 and 61–6). Dopaminergic 
A  Pathways
B  Targets
Neocortex
Nucleus
accumbens
(ventral
striatum)
Midbrain
Neocortex
Caudate nucleus
and putamen
Globus
pallidus
Pons
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Amygdala
Striatum
Hippocampus
To
hippocampus
To spinal
cord
Deep
cerebellar
nuclei
Rostral
raphe
nuclei
Caudal
raphe
nuclei
Cerebellar
cortex
Olfactory and 
entorhinal
cortices
Hypothalamus
Raphe nuclei
Medial
forebrain
bundle
Thalamus
Cingulate
gyrus
Hippocampus
neurons in the ventral tegmental area and substantia 
nigra pars compacta of the midbrain project to some-
what less widespread areas. Ventral tegmental neu-
rons project to the hippocampus, amygdala, nucleus 
accumbens, and prefrontal cortex; substantia nigra 
neurons innervate the caudate and putamen. The 
widely divergent projections of these monoaminer-
gic neurons permit them to influence functions such 
as arousal, attention, vigilance, motivation, and other 
cognitive and emotional states that require integration 
of multiple brain regions.
Serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine are syn-
thesized from amino acid precursors and packaged 
into synaptic vesicles for release. Monoamines in the 
cytoplasm that are outside of vesicles are metabolized 
by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO), which 
is associated with the outer leaflet of mitochondrial 


===== Page 7 =====
1514    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 61–6  The major noradrenergic projection of the fore-
brain arises in the locus ceruleus. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Heimer 1995.)
A. Norepinephrine is synthesized in several brain stem nuclei, 
the largest of which is the nucleus locus ceruleus, a pig-
mented nucleus located just beneath the floor of the fourth 
ventricle in the rostrolateral pons. A lateral midsagittal view 
demonstrates the course of the major noradrenergic (NA) 
pathways from the locus ceruleus and lateral brain stem teg-
mentum. Axons from the locus ceruleus project rostrally into 
the forebrain and also into the cerebellum and spinal cord; 
axons from noradrenergic nuclei in the lateral brain stem teg-
mentum project to the spinal cord, hypothalamus, amygdala, 
and ventral forebrain.
B. A coronal section shows the major targets of neurons from 
the locus ceruleus.
A  Pathways
B  Targets
Neocortex
Amygdala
Hypothalamus
Hippocampus
To
hippocampus
To spinal
cord
Lateral
tegmental
NA cell
system
Locus
ceruleus
Cerebellar
cortex
Thalamus
Cingulate
gyrus
Neocortex
Pons
Nuclei of
locus ceruleus
Medial
forebrain
bundle
Hippocampus
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
membranes. After vesicular release, monoamine neu-
rotransmitters bind synaptic receptors to exert their 
biological effect or are cleared from the synapse by 
specific transporter proteins located on the presynaptic 
cell membrane.
The most widely used antidepressant drugs fall 
into several major groupings, which affect monoam-
inergic neurons and their targets (Figure 61–7). The 
MAO inhibitors discovered in the 1950s, such as phen-
elzine and tranylcypromine, are effective against both 
depression and anxiety disorders but are rarely used 
today because of their side effects. MAO inhibitors 
block the capacity of MAO to break down norepineph-
rine, serotonin, or dopamine in presynaptic terminals, 
thus making extra neurotransmitter available for pack-
aging into vesicles and for release.
Two forms of MAO, types A and B, are found in the 
brain. Type A is also found in the gut and liver, where it 
catabolizes bioactive amines that are present in foods. 
Inhibition of MAO-A permits bioactive amines such 
as tyramine to enter the bloodstream from foods that 
contain it in high concentrations, such as aged meats 
and cheeses. Transporters shuttle these amines into 
the terminals of sympathetic neurons, where they can 
displace endogenous vesicular norepinephrine and 
epinephrine into the cytoplasm, leading to nonvesicu-
lar release that causes significant elevations of blood 
pressure.
The tricyclic antidepressants, also first identified 
in the mid-1950s, include imipramine, amitriptyline, 
and desipramine; these block the norepinephrine 
transporter (NET), the serotonin reuptake transporter 
(SERT), or both. These drugs are effective in treating 
both depression and anxiety disorders. However, in 
addition to their therapeutic targets, the older tricy-
clic drugs also block many neurotransmitter receptors, 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 61 / Disorders of Mood and Anxiety    1515
including the muscarinic acetylcholine, histamine H1, 
and α1 noradrenergic receptors, producing a panoply 
of side effects.
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) 
such as fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine, first 
approved in the 1980s, have no greater efficacy than 
the older tricyclic antidepressants and MAO inhibi-
tors but are widely used because they have milder 
side effects and are far safer if taken in overdose. As 
their name implies, they selectively inhibit SERT. They 
are effective for major depressive disorder and many 
anxiety disorders. In high doses, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors are also effective for symptoms of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Selective norepineph-
rine and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
have also been developed; these drugs have side effect 
profiles similar to those of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors but are useful for some patients who do not 
benefit from inhibition of SERT alone.
Despite knowledge of the initial molecular targets 
that mediate the effects of antidepressant drugs, MAO 
or monoamine transporters, the ultimate molecular 
mechanisms by which they relieve depression remain 
unknown. One major challenge to understanding the 
therapeutic action of these drugs is the delay in their 
therapeutic effects. Although antidepressant drugs 
bind to and inhibit MAO, NET, or SERT with their first 
dose, several weeks of treatment are typically required 
to observe a lifting of depressive symptoms.
Several hypotheses have been put forward to 
explain this delay. One is that a slow buildup of newly 
synthesized proteins alters the responsiveness of neu-
rons in a manner that treats the depression. Another is 
that increases in the levels of synaptic transmission of 
serotonin or norepinephrine rapidly increase plasticity 
in different emotion-processing circuits and that the 
latency to therapeutic benefit reflects the time it takes 
for new experiences to alter synaptic weights. A third 
hypothesis is that antidepressant efficacy is mediated 
in part by enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis. 
Narrowing down the possible therapeutic mecha-
nisms is challenging because of the lack of good ani-
mal models of depression. Without an animal model, 
it is not possible to know which of the many observ-
able molecular, cellular, and synaptic changes cause 
depression or underlie the therapeutic actions of effec-
tive antidepressants.
Ketamine Shows Promise as a Rapidly Acting Drug 
to Treat Major Depressive Disorder
Ketamine, which blocks the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) glutamate receptor, is currently used in 
pediatric anesthesia for its ability to produce dissocia-
tive experiences as well as analgesia. It has been stud-
ied in randomized clinical trials with subjects suffering 
from major depression. In the trials, ketamine was 
administered by intravenous infusion; it produced 
an antidepressant effect within 2 hours, a significant 
advantage over existing antidepressant drugs that 
typically take weeks to show benefit. The therapeu-
tic effects of ketamine last for approximately 7 days, 
after which second and third doses may continue to be 
effective. If such results become widely replicated, ket-
amine would represent the first antidepressant drug 
that does not exert its primary action on monoamine 
neurotransmission. Studies to identify mechanisms 
by which ketamine relieves depression, like those for 
older antidepressants, are challenging in part because 
of the lack of good animal models of depression.
At higher doses, ketamine is misused as a recrea-
tional drug to produce euphoria, dissociation, deper-
sonalization, and hallucinations. Ketamine has also 
been used in laboratory settings to induce cognitive 
symptoms reminiscent of schizophrenia in human 
subjects. Although the advantages of a rapidly acting 
antidepressant would be significant, for example in 
treating acutely suicidal individuals, the unwanted psy-
chotropic effects of ketamine make its use problematic. 
Attempts to develop alternative NMDA receptor block-
ers in which the antidepressant effects might be sepa-
rated from psychotropic side effects are under way.
Psychotherapy Is Effective in the Treatment of 
Major Depressive Disorder and Anxiety Disorders
Short-term symptom-focused psychotherapies have 
been developed for depression and anxiety and tested 
in clinical trials. The best-studied psychotherapies are 
the cognitive behavioral therapies. Cognitive therapies 
that might be used to treat major depression focus on 
identifying and correcting excessively negative inter-
pretations of events and of interactions with other 
people. For example, many depressed people exhibit 
a strong attentional bias toward negative information, 
automatically interpret neutral events as negative, 
and read evidence of disapproval into the behavior of 
others. Such automatic negative thinking, which can 
initiate or perpetuate depressed mood, can be much 
improved through cognitive psychotherapies.
Therapies with a more behavioral component 
have proven useful in the treatment of anxiety disor-
ders such as phobias or PTSD. In exposure therapy, 
the affected individual is directed to vividly recollect 
phobic stimuli that trigger anxiety or avoidance. The 
therapist provides a safe context for such experiences 


===== Page 9 =====
1516    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
A  Serotonergic neurons
Tryptophan
Inhibition of synthesis
(p-chlorophenylalanine)
1
2
5
6
Interference with
vesicular storage
(reserpine)
Inhibition of MAO
(phenelzine, 
tranylcypromine)
MAO inhibitors
MAO inhibitors
Tricyclics and
selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors
Depressant
Antidepressant
No effect on mood
5-OH-Tryptophan
5-HT
5-HT
5-HIAA
MAO
5-HT
5-HT
5-HT receptor
Inhibition of reuptake
(imipramine,
amitryptyline, ﬂuoxetine,
sertraline)
Stimulation of 5-HT
receptors as partial 
agonist (lysergic acid
diethylamide)
3
4
Stimulation of
autoreceptor as agonist
(8-hydroxy-dipropylamino-
tetraline)
Stimulation of 
α2-adrenergic receptor
agonist (clonidine)
B  Noradrenergic neurons
Tyrosine
Inhibition of synthesis
(α-methyltyrosine)
1
2
6a
5
Interference with
vesicular storage
(reserpine)
Inhibition of NE reuptake
(desiprimine, reboxetine)
DOPA
Dopamine
NE
COMT
NM
Deaminated
products
Receptor
Inactivation inhibitor
Tricyclics and selective
NE reuptake inhibitors
6b
Inhibition of MAO
(phenelzine, 
tranylcypromine)
Inhibition of COMT
(tropolone)
Blockade of β-adrenergic
receptors (propranolol)
Blockade of α-adrenergic
receptors 
(phenoxybenzamine) 
Reversal of normal 
direction of transport to 
produce NE efﬂux 
(amphetamines,
methylphenidate)
NE
MAO
5-HT
transporter
NE
transporter
3
4


