===== Page 1 =====
652    Part IV / Perception
sensory afferent neurons but is instead computed by 
the auditory system from representations of the physi-
cal cues.
Sounds Convey Multiple Types of Information 
to Hearing Animals
Hearing helps to alert animals to the presence of 
unseen dangers or opportunities and, in many species, 
also serves as a means for communication. Information 
about where sounds arise and what they mean must 
be extracted from the representations of the physical 
characteristics of sound at each of the ears. To under-
stand how animals process sound, it is useful first to 
consider which cues are available.
Most vertebrates take advantage of having two 
ears for localizing sounds in the horizontal plane. 
Sound sources at different positions in that plane affect 
the two ears differentially: Sound arrives earlier and 
is more intense at the ear nearer the source (Figure 
28–1A). Interaural time and intensity differences carry 
information about where sounds arise.
The size of the head determines how interaural 
time delays are related to the location of sound sources; 
the neuronal circuitry determines the precision with 
which time delays are resolved. Because air pressure 
waves travel at roughly 340 m/s in air, the maximal 
interaural delay in humans is approximately 600 μs; in 
small birds, the greatest delay is only 35 μs. Humans 
can resolve the location of a sound source directly 
ahead to within approximately 1 degree, correspond-
ing to an interaural time difference of 10 μs. Interau-
ral time differences are particularly well conveyed by 
neurons that encode relatively low frequencies. These 
neurons can fire at the same position in every cycle of 
the sound and in this way encode the interaural time 
difference as an interaural phase difference. Sounds of 
high frequencies produce sound shadows or intensity 
differences between the two ears. For many mammals 
with small heads, high-frequency sounds provide the 
primary cue for localizing sound in the horizontal 
plane.
Mammals can localize sounds in the vertical plane 
and with a single ear using spectral filtering. High-
frequency sounds, with wavelengths that are close to 
or smaller than the dimensions of the head, shoulders, 
and external ears, interact with those parts of the body 
to produce constructive and destructive interference, 
introducing broad spectral peaks and deep, narrow 
spectral notches whose frequency changes with the 
location of the sound (Figure 28–1B). High-frequency 
sounds from different origins are filtered differently 
because in mammals the shape of the external ear differs 
back-to-front as well as top-to-bottom. Animals learn to 
use these spectral cues to locate sound sources. If the 
shape of the ear is experimentally altered, even adult 
humans can learn to make use of a new pattern of spec-
tral cues. If animals lose hearing in one ear, they lose 
interaural timing and intensity cues and must depend 
completely on spectral cues for localizing sounds.
How do we make sense of the complex and chang-
ing sounds that we hear? Most natural sounds contain 
energy over a wide range of frequencies and change 
rapidly with time. The information used to recognize 
sounds varies among animal species, and depends on 
listening conditions and experience. Human speech, 
for example, can be understood in the midst of noise, 
over electronic devices that distort sounds, and even 
through cochlear implants. One reason for its robust-
ness is that speech contains redundant cues: The vocal 
apparatus produces sounds in which multiple param-
eters covary. At the same time, this makes the task of 
understanding how animals recognize patterns a com-
plicated one. It is not clear which cues are used by ani-
mals under various conditions.
Music is a source of pleasure to human beings. 
Musical instruments and human voices produce 
sounds that have energy at the fundamental frequency 
that corresponds to its perceived pitch, as well as at 
multiples of that frequency, giving sounds a quality 
that allows us, for example, to distinguish a flute from 
a violin when their pitch is the same. Musical pitches 
are largely in the low-frequency range in which audi-
tory nerve fibers fire in phase with sounds. In music, 
sounds are combined simultaneously to produce 
chords and successively to produce melodies. Eupho-
nious, pleasant chords elicit regular, periodic firing in 
cochlear nerve fibers. In dissonant sounds, there is less 
regularity both in the sound itself and in the firing of 
auditory nerve fibers; the component frequencies are 
so close that they interfere with one another instead of 
periodically reinforcing one another.
The Neural Representation of Sound in Central 
Pathways Begins in the Cochlear Nuclei
The neural pathways that process acoustic informa-
tion extend from the ear to the brain stem, through the 
midbrain and thalamus, to the cerebral cortex (Figure 
28–2). Acoustic information is conveyed from cells in 
the cochlear ganglion (see Figure 26–17) to the cochlear 
nuclei in the brain stem. There information is received 
by several different types of neurons, most of which 
are arranged tonotopically.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    653
Figure 28–1  Cues for localizing sound sources in the hori-
zontal plane.
A. Interaural time and intensity differences are cues for local-
izing sound sources in the horizontal plane, or azimuth. A sound 
arising in the horizontal plane arrives differently at the two 
ears: Sounds arrive earlier and are louder at the ear nearer the 
source. A sound that arises directly in the front or back travels 
the same distance to the right and left ears and thus arrives 
at both ears simultaneously. Interaural time and intensity do 
not vary with the movement of sound sources in the vertical 
plane, so it is impossible to localize a pure sinusoidal tone in 
the vertical plane. In humans, the maximal interaural time dif-
ference is approximately 600 μs. High-frequency sounds, with 
short wavelengths, are deflected by the head, producing a 
sound shadow on the far side. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Geisler 1998.)
B. Mammals can localize broadband sounds in both the vertical 
and horizontal planes on the basis of spectral filtering. When a 
noise that has equal energy at all frequencies over the human 
hearing range (white noise) is presented through a speaker, the 
ear, head, and shoulders cancel energy at some frequencies 
and enhance others. The white noise that is emitted from the 
speaker has a flat power spectrum, but by the time the noise 
has reached the bottom of the ear canal, its spectrum is no 
longer flat.
   In the figure, the sound energy at each frequency at the  
eardrum relative to that of the white noise is shown by the 
traces beside each speaker; these traces plot the relative 
sound magnitude in decibels against spectral frequency 
(head-related transfer function). The small plot in the upper 
right compares two head-related transfer functions: one for a 
noise that arises low and in front of a listener (blue) and one 
for a noise from behind the listener’s head (brown).  
Head-related transfer functions have deep notches at frequen-
cies greater than 8 kHz, whose frequencies vary depending 
on where the sounds arose. Sounds that lack energy at high 
frequencies and narrowband sounds are difficult to localize 
in the vertical plane. Since spectral filtering also varies in the 
horizontal plane, it provides the only location cue to animals 
that have lost hearing in one ear.
   You can test the salience of these spectral cues with a simple 
experiment. Close your eyes as a friend jingles keys directly in 
front of you at various elevations. Compare your ability to local-
ize sounds under normal conditions and when you distort the 
shape of both ears by pushing them with your fingers from the 
back. (Data from D. Kistler and F. Wightman.)
20
0.2
1
10
–40
–20
0
20
B  Sound localization using spectral ﬁltering
A  Sound localization using interaural difference
Frequency (kHz)
Magnitude (dB)
Horizontal plane
Vertical 
plane
2
–20
200
0
180
20
160
40
140
60
120
80
100
–40
220
–60
240
1
The axons of the different types of neurons take 
different routes to the brain stem and midbrain, 
where they terminate on separate targets. Some of the 
pathways from the cochlear nuclei to the contralateral 
inferior colliculus are direct; others involve one or two 
synaptic stages in brain stem auditory nuclei. From 
the bilateral inferior colliculi, acoustic information 
flows two ways: to the ipsilateral superior colliculus, 
where it participates in orienting the head and eyes 
in response to sounds, and to the ipsilateral thala-
mus, the relay to auditory areas of the cerebral cortex. 
The afferent auditory pathways from the periphery 
to higher brain regions include efferent feedback at 
many levels.


===== Page 3 =====
654    Part IV / Perception
Figure 28–2  The central auditory pathways 
extend from the brain stem through the 
midbrain and thalamus to the auditory  
cortex.  The fibers in the cochlear nerve  
(cranial nerve VIII) terminate in the cochlear 
nuclei of the brain stem. The neurons of these 
nuclei project in several parallel pathways to 
the inferior colliculus. Their axons exit through 
the trapezoid body, intermediate acoustic stria, 
or dorsal acoustic stria. Some cells terminate 
directly in the inferior colliculus. Others contact 
cells in the superior olivary complex and in the 
nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, which in turn 
project to the inferior colliculus. Neurons of 
the inferior colliculus project to the superior 
colliculus and to the medial geniculate nucleus 
of the thalamus. Thalamic neurons project to 
the auditory cortex. The cochlear nuclei and the 
ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus are the 
only central auditory neurons that receive mon-
aural input. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Brodal 1981.)
Medial geniculate nucleus
(thalamus)
Inferior colliculus
To superior colliculus
Nuclei of the
lateral lemniscus
Superior olivary
nuclei 
Primary auditory
cortex
Midbrain
Pons
Pons
Midbrain
Dorsal
acoustic
stria
Intermediate
acoustic stria
Trapezoid body
N. VIII
Cochlear
nuclei
Medulla


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    655
The Cochlear Nerve Delivers Acoustic Information 
in Parallel Pathways to the Tonotopically Organized 
Cochlear Nuclei
The afferent nerve fibers from cochlear ganglion cells 
are bundled in the cochlear or auditory component of 
the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII) and 
terminate exclusively in the cochlear nuclei. The coch-
lear nerve in mammals contains two groups of fibers: a 
large number (95%) of myelinated fibers that receives 
input from inner hair cells and a small number (5%) 
of unmyelinated fibers that receive input from outer 
hair cells.
The larger, more numerous, myelinated fibers 
are much better understood than the unmyelinated  
fibers. Each type detects energy over a narrow range 
of frequencies; the tonotopic array of cochlear nerve 
fibers thus carries detailed information about how 
the frequency content of sounds varies from moment 
to moment. The unmyelinated fibers terminate both 
on the large neurons in the ventral cochlear nuclei 
and also on the small granule cells that surround the 
ventral cochlear nuclei. Because it is difficult to record 
from these tiny fibers, the information they convey to 
the brain is not well understood. The unmyelinated 
fibers integrate information from a relatively wide 
region of the cochlea but are not responsive to sound. 
It has been suggested that these fibers respond to coch-
lear damage and contribute to hyperacusis—pain after 
exposure to loud sounds that damages the cochlea.
Two features of the cochlear nuclei are important. 
First, these nuclei are organized tonotopically. Fib-
ers that carry information from the apical end of the 
cochlea, which detects low frequencies, terminate ven-
trally in the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei; those 
that carry information from the basal end of the coch-
lea, which detects high frequencies, terminate dor-
sally (Figure 28–3). Second, each cochlear nerve fiber 
innervates several different areas within the cochlear 
nuclei, contacting various types of neurons that have 
distinct projection patterns to higher auditory centers. 
As a result, the auditory pathway comprises at least 
four parallel ascending pathways that simultaneously 
extract different acoustic information from the signals 
carried by cochlear nerve fibers. Parallel circuits are a 
general feature of vertebrate sensory systems.
The Ventral Cochlear Nucleus Extracts Temporal 
and Spectral Information About Sounds
The principal cells of the unlayered ventral coch-
lear nucleus sharpen temporal and spectral informa-
tion and convey it to higher centers of the auditory 
pathway. Three types of neurons are intermingled 
and form separate pathways through the brain stem 
(Figure 28–4).
Bushy cells project bilaterally to the superior oli-
vary complex. This pathway has two parts. One 
courses through the medial superior olive and com-
pares the time of arrival of sounds at the two ears; the 
other travels through the medial nucleus of the trape-
zoid body and the lateral superior olive and compares 
interaural intensity. Large spherical bushy cells sense 
low frequencies and project bilaterally to the medial 
superior olive, forming a circuit that detects interaural 
time delay and contributes to the localization of low-
frequency sounds in the horizontal plane. The small 
spherical bushy cells and globular bushy cells sense 
higher frequencies. Small spherical bushy cells excite 
the lateral superior olive ipsilaterally. The globular 
bushy cells, through calyceal endings, excite neurons 
in the contralateral medial nucleus of the trapezoid 
body that in turn inhibit principal cells of the lateral 
superior olive. Neurons in the lateral superior olive 
integrate the ipsilateral excitation and contralateral 
inhibition to measure interaural intensity and to local-
ize sources of high-frequency sounds in the horizontal 
plane (see Figure 28–6).
Stellate cells terminate widely. They excite neurons 
in the ipsilateral dorsal cochlear nucleus, the medial 
olivocochlear efferent neurons in the ventral nucleus 
of the trapezoid body, the periolivary nuclei in the 
vicinity of the ipsilateral lateral superior olive, and the 
contralateral ventral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, 
inferior colliculus, and thalamus. The tonotopic array 
of stellate cells encodes the spectrum of sounds.
Octopus cells excite targets in the contralateral 
paraolivary nucleus and terminate in large excitatory 
calyceal endings on neurons of the ventral nucleus of 
the lateral lemniscus, which in turn provide sharply 
timed glycinergic inhibition to the inferior colliculus. 
Octopus cells detect onsets of sounds that allow ani-
mals to detect brief gaps. They mark the spectral com-
ponents that come from one source that necessarily 
start together.
The differences in the integrative tasks performed 
by these pathways through the ventral cochlear 
nucleus are reflected in cell morphology. The shapes of 
their dendrites reflect the way they collect information 
from cochlear nerve fibers. The dendrites of the sharply 
tuned bushy and stellate cells receive input from rela-
tively few cochlear nerve fibers, whereas those of the 
broadly tuned octopus cells, in contrast, lie perpen-
dicular to the path of cochlear nerve fibers, poised to 
receive input from many cochlear nerve fibers. Many 
of the inputs to bushy cells are from unusually large 


===== Page 5 =====
656    Part IV / Perception
Figure 28–3  The dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei.
A. Stimulation with three frequencies of sound vibrates the 
schematically uncoiled basilar membrane at three positions, 
exciting distinct populations of hair cells and their afferent 
nerve fibers.
B. Cochlear nerve fibers project in a tonotopic pattern to the 
cochlear nuclei. Those encoding the lowest frequencies (red) 
terminate most ventrally, whereas those encoding higher fre-
quencies (yellow) terminate more dorsally. The cochlear nuclei 
include the ventral and dorsal nuclei. Each afferent fiber enters 
at the nerve root and splits into branches that run anteriorly (the 
ascending branch) and posteriorly (the descending branch). The 
ventral cochlear nucleus is thus divided functionally into anter-
oventral and posteroventral divisions.
High
frequencies
Low
frequencies
A
Dorsal
Posteroventral
Anteroventral
Cochlear
nerve
B
terminals that envelop the bushy cell bodies, meeting 
their need for large synaptic currents. The need for 
large synaptic currents in octopus cells is met by sum-
ming inputs from large numbers of small terminals.
The biophysical properties of neurons determine 
how synaptic currents are converted to voltage changes 
and over how long a time synaptic inputs are inte-
grated. Octopus and bushy cells in the ventral cochlear 
nucleus are able to respond with exceptionally rapid 
and precisely timed synaptic potentials. These neu-
rons have a prominent, low-voltage-activated K+ con-
ductance that confers a low input resistance and rapid 
responsiveness and prevents repetitive firing (Figure 
28–4C). The large synaptic currents that are required 
to trigger action potentials in these leaky cells are 
delivered through rapidly gated, high-conductance, 
AMPA-type (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-
4-propionate) glutamate receptors at many synaptic 
release sites. In contrast, stellate cells, in which even 
relatively small depolarizing currents produce large 
protracted voltage changes, generate slower excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in response to synap-
tic currents, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-type 
glutamate receptors enhance those responses.
The Dorsal Cochlear Nucleus Integrates Acoustic 
With Somatosensory Information in Making Use of 
Spectral Cues for Localizing Sounds
Among vertebrates, only mammals have dorsal coch-
lear nuclei. The dorsal cochlear nucleus receives input 
from two systems of neurons that project to different 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    657
layers (Figure 28–4A,B). Its principal cells, fusiform 
cells, integrate those two systems of inputs and con-
vey the result directly to the contralateral inferior 
colliculus.
The outermost molecular layer is the terminus of 
a system of parallel fibers, the unmyelinated axons 
of granule cells that are scattered in and around the 
cochlear nuclei. This system transmits somatosensory, 
vestibular, and auditory information from widespread 
regions of the brain to the molecular layer.
The deep layer receives acoustic information. 
Not only cochlear nerve fibers but also stellate cells 
of the ventral cochlear nucleus terminate in the deep 
layer. Acoustic inputs are tonotopically organized in 
isofrequency laminae that run at right angles to parallel 
fibers.
Fusiform cells, the principal cells of the dor-
sal cochlear nucleus, integrate the two systems of 
inputs. Parallel fibers in the molecular layer excite 
fusiform cells through spines on apical dendrites in 
the molecular layer. Parallel fibers also terminate on 
spines of dendrites of cartwheel cells, interneurons 
that bear a strong resemblance to cerebellar Purkinje 
cells, which in turn inhibit fusiform cells. Cochlear 
nerve fibers and stellate cells in the ventral cochlear 
nucleus excite fusiform cells and inhibitory interneu-
rons via synapses on the smooth basal dendrites in 
the deep layer.
Recent experiments suggest that the circuits of the 
dorsal cochlear nucleus distinguish between unpre-
dictable and predictable sounds. An animal’s own 
chewing or licking sounds, for example, are predicta-
ble and canceled through these circuits. The changes in 
spectral cues that arise when animals move their heads 
or ears or shoulders, changing the angle of incidence of 
sounds to the ears, are unpredictable, especially when 
an external sound source is moving. Somatosensory 
and vestibular information about the position of the 
head and ears, as well as descending information from 
higher levels of the nervous system about the animal’s 
own movements, pass through the molecular layer to 
modulate acoustic information that arrives in the deep 
layer.
The Superior Olivary Complex in Mammals 
Contains Separate Circuits for Detecting 
Interaural Time and Intensity Differences
In many vertebrates, including mammals and birds, 
neurons in the superior olivary complex compare the 
activity of cells in the bilateral cochlear nuclei to locate 
sound sources. Separate circuits detect interaural time 
and intensity differences and project to the inferior 
colliculi.
The Medial Superior Olive Generates a Map of 
Interaural Time Differences
Differences in arrival times at the ears are not represented 
at the cochlea. Instead, they are first represented in the 
medial superior olive where a map of interaural phase 
is created by a comparison of the timing of action 
potentials in the responses to sounds from the two 
ears. Sounds arrive at the near ear before they arrive 
at the far ear, with interaural time differences being 
directly related to the location of sound sources in the 
horizontal plane (Figure 28–5A).
Cochlear nerve fibers tuned to frequencies below  
4 kHz and their bushy cell targets encode sounds by 
firing in phase with the pressure waves. This property 
is known as phase-locking. Although individual neu-
rons may fail to fire at some cycles, some set of neurons 
fires with every cycle. In so doing, these neurons carry 
information about the timing of inputs with every 
cycle of the sound. Sounds arriving from one side 
evoke phase-locked firing that is consistently earlier at 
the near ear than at the far ear, resulting in consistent 
interaural phase differences (Figure 28–5A).
In 1948, Lloyd Jeffress suggested that an array of 
detectors of coincident inputs from the two ears, trans-
mitted through delay lines comprised of axons with 
systematically differing lengths, could form a map of 
interaural time differences and thus a map of the loca-
tion of sound sources (Figure 28–5B). In such a circuit, 
conduction delays compensate for the earlier arrival 
at the near ear. Interaural time delays increase system-
atically as sounds move from the midline to the side, 
resulting in coincident firing further toward the edge 
of the neuronal array.
Such neuronal maps have been found in the 
barn owl in the homolog of the medial superior oli-
vary nucleus. Mammals and chickens use a variant 
of this input arrangement. The principal neurons of 
the medial superior olive form a sheet of one or a few 
cells’ thickness on each side of the midline. Each neu-
ron has two tufts of dendrites, one extending to the 
lateral face of the sheet, and the other projecting to 
the medial face of the sheet (Figure 28–5C). The den-
drites at the lateral face are contacted by the axons of 
large spherical bushy cells from the ipsilateral cochlear 
nucleus, whereas the dendrites at the medial face are 
contacted by large spherical bushy cells of matching 
best frequency from the contralateral cochlear nucleus. 
The axons of bushy cells terminate in the contralateral 


===== Page 7 =====
658    Part IV / Perception
A B
Intrinsic properties
Octopus
Bushy
Stellate
Fusiform
0.4 nA
–0.4 nA
ms
0
20
40
60
ms
10
0
5
15
20
80
100
EPSPs
5 mV
10 mV
200µm
Anteroventral
cochlear nucleus
Dorsal
cochlear nucleus
(layered)
Posteroventral
cochlear nucleus
(unlayered)
To intermediate
acoustic stria
Cochlear
nerve 
Bushy
cell
Stellate
cell
Granule cell
layer 
C
Anteroventral
cochlear nucleus
Posteroventral
cochlear nucleus
A
Rostral
Dorsal
Cochlear
nerve
To trapezoid
body 
B
Octopus
cell
To dorsal 
acoustic stria
Fusiform
cell


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 28 / Auditory Processing by the Central Nervous System    659
Figure 28–4  (Opposite) Different types of cells in the coch-
lear nuclei extract distinct types of acoustic information 
from cochlear nerve fibers.
A. The differing sizes and shapes of terminals along the length 
of each cochlear nerve fiber in the ventral cochlear nucleus of 
a newborn dog reflect differences in their postsynaptic targets. 
The large end bulbs form synapses on bushy cells; smaller 
boutons contact stellate and octopus cells. The nerve fibers 
shown here are color-coded as in Figure 28–3: the yellow fiber 
encodes the highest frequencies and the red fiber the lowest. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Cajal 1909.)
B. A layer of mouse granule cells (light brown) separates the 
unlayered ventral cochlear nucleus (pink) from the layered 
dorsal nucleus (tan and light brown). In the dorsal cochlear 
nucleus, the cell bodies of fusiform and granule cells are inter-
mingled in a region between the outermost molecular layer and 
the deep layer. Cochlear nerve fibers, color-coded for frequency 
as in Figure 28–3, terminate in both nuclei but with different 
patterns of convergence on the principal cells. Each bushy, 
stellate, and fusiform cell receives input from a few auditory 
nerve fibers and is sharply tuned, whereas individual octopus 
cells are contacted by many auditory nerve fibers and are 
broadly tuned.
C. Differences in the intrinsic electrical properties of the 
principal cells of mouse cochlear nuclei are reflected in the 
patterns of voltage change in the cells. When steadily depo-
larized, stellate and fusiform cells fire repetitive action poten-
tials, whereas repetitive firing in bushy and octopus cells is 
prevented by low-voltage-activated conductances. The low 
input resistance of bushy and octopus cells in the depolar-
ized voltage range makes depolarizing voltage changes 
rapid but also small; the rise and fall of voltage changes in 
stellate and fusiform cells is slower. Synaptic potentials, 
too, are different. The brief synaptic potentials in bushy and 
octopus cells require larger synaptic currents but encode the 
timing of auditory nerve inputs more faithfully than do the 
longer-lasting synaptic potentials in stellate or fusiform cells. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from N. Golding.)
medial superior olive with delay lines just as Jeffress 
had suggested, but the branches that terminate in the 
ipsilateral medial superior olive are of equal length 
(see Figure 28–5C).
The conduction delays are such that each medial 
superior olive receives coincident excitatory inputs 
from the two ears only when sounds come from the 
contralateral half of space. As sound sources move 
from the midline to the most lateral point on the con-
tralateral side of the head, the earlier arrival of sounds 
at the contralateral ear needs to be compensated by 
successively longer delay lines. This results in inputs 
from the two ears coinciding at successively more 
posterior and lateral regions of the medial superior 
olive. Inhibition superimposed on these excitatory 
inputs plays a significant role in sharpening the map 
of interaural phase.
In encoding interaural phase, individual neu-
rons in the medial superior olive provide ambiguous 
information about interaural time differences. Phase 
ambiguities are resolved when sounds have energy at 
multiple frequencies, as natural sounds almost always 
do. The sheet of neurons of the medial superior olive 
forms a representation of interaural phase along the 
rostrocaudal and lateromedial dimensions. The array 
of bushy cell inputs also imposes a tonotopic organi-
zation in the dorsoventral dimension. Sounds that 
contain energy at multiple frequencies evoke maxi-
mal coincident firing in a single dorsoventral column 
of neurons that localizes sound sources unambigu-
ously. The beauty of using interaural phase to encode 
interaural time disparities is that the brain receives 
information about interaural time differences not just 
at the beginning and end of the sound but with every 
cycle of an ongoing sound.
Principal cells of the medial superior olive also 
receive sharply timed inhibition driven by sounds 
from both the ipsilateral and contralateral sides 
through the lateral and medial nuclei of the trapezoid 
body, respectively. Remarkably, the inhibition through 
pathways from both sides precedes the arrival of exci-
tation and sharpens the summation of excitation even 
though inhibition is mediated through a pathway that 
has an additional synapse. The great conduction speed 
through the disynaptic pathway through the medial 
nucleus of the trapezoid body is made possible by the 
large axons of globular bushy cells and the large calyceal 
terminals of Held that activate neurons in the medial 
nucleus of the trapezoid body with short and con-
sistently timed delays. The pathway that brings ipsi-
lateral inhibition through the lateral nucleus of the 
trapezoid body is less well understood.
Each medial superior olive thus forms a map of 
the location of sound sources in the contralateral hemi-
field. The striking difference between this spatial repre-
sentation of stimuli and those in other sensory systems 
is that it is not the result of the spatial arrangement of 
inputs, like retinotopic or somatosensory maps, but is 
inferred by the brain from computations made in the 
afferent pathways.
The Lateral Superior Olive Detects Interaural 
Intensity Differences
Sounds with wavelengths that are similar to or smaller 
than the head are deflected by the head, causing the 


===== Page 9 =====
660    Part IV / Perception
Bushy cell
in cochlear 
nucleus
Cochlear 
nerve
ITD
Coincidence 
detectors
Delay line from right
Time
Right ear
Left ear
A  Phase-locked ﬁring in bushy cells
Right nerve
Left nerve
B  Mapping of ITD onto array of neuronal 
 
coincidence neurons
ITD>0
ITD=0
ITD<0
C  Bilateral medial superior olivary nuclei
Delay line from left


