===== Page 1 =====
47
The Growth and Guidance of Axons
We begin the chapter by discussing how certain 
neuronal processes become axons and others den-
drites. We then describe the growing axon, which 
may have to travel a long distance and ignore many 
inappropriate neuronal partners before terminating in 
just the right region and recognizing its correct syn-
aptic targets. We consider the strategies by which the 
axon overcomes these challenges. Finally, we illustrate 
general features of axonal guidance by describing the 
development of two well-studied axonal pathways: 
one that conveys visual information from the retina to 
the brain and another that conveys cutaneous sensory 
information from the spinal cord to the brain.
Differences Between Axons and Dendrites 
Emerge Early in Development
The processes of neurons vary enormously in their 
length, thickness, branching pattern, and molecular 
architecture. Nonetheless, most neuronal processes fit 
into one of two functional categories: axons and den-
drites. More than a century ago, Santiago Ramón y 
Cajal hypothesized that this distinction underlies the 
ability of neurons to transmit information in a par-
ticular direction, an idea he formalized as the law of 
dynamic polarization. Cajal wrote that “the transmis-
sion of the nerve impulse is always from the dendritic 
branches and the cell body to the axon.” In the decades 
before electrophysiological methods were up to the 
task, this law provided a means of analyzing neural 
circuits histologically. Although exceptions have been 
found, Ramón y Cajal’s law remains a basic principle 
Differences Between Axons and Dendrites Emerge  
Early in Development
Dendrites Are Patterned by Intrinsic and Extrinsic Factors
The Growth Cone Is a Sensory Transducer and  
a Motor Structure
Molecular Cues Guide Axons to Their Targets
The Growth of Retinal Ganglion Axons Is Oriented in a 
Series of Discrete Steps
Growth Cones Diverge at the Optic Chiasm
Gradients of Ephrins Provide Inhibitory Signals  
in the Brain
Axons From Some Spinal Neurons Are Guided  
Across the Midline
Netrins Direct Developing Commissural Axons  
Across the Midline
Chemoattractant and Chemorepellent Factors  
Pattern the Midline
Highlights
I
n the two preceding chapters,  we saw how 
neurons are generated in appropriate numbers, at 
correct times, and in the right places. These early 
developmental steps set the stage for later events that 
direct neurons to form functional connections with tar-
get cells. To form connections, neurons have to extend 
long processes—axons and dendrites—which per-
mit connectivity with postsynaptic cells and synaptic 
input from other neurons. In this chapter, we examine 
how neurons elaborate axons and dendrites and how 
axons are guided to their targets.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1157
that relates structure to function in the nervous system 
and highlights the importance of knowing how neu-
rons acquire their polarized form.
Progress in understanding how neuronal polariza-
tion occurs comes in large part from studies of neu-
rons taken from the rodent brain and grown in tissue 
culture. Hippocampal neurons grown in isolation 
develop processes reminiscent of those seen in vivo: 
a single, long, cylindrical axon and several shorter, 
tapered dendrites (Figure 47–1A). As cytoskeletal and 
synaptic proteins are differentially targeted to these 
components, axons and dendrites acquire distinctive 
molecular profiles. For example, a particular form of 
the Tau protein is localized in axons and the MAP2 
protein in dendrites (Figure 47–1B)
Cultured neurons are especially useful for develop-
mental studies because they initially show no obvious 
sign of polarization and acquire their specialized features 
gradually in a stereotyped sequence of cellular steps. 
This sequence begins with extension of several short pro-
cesses, each equivalent to the others. Soon thereafter, one 
process is established as an axon and the remaining pro-
cesses acquire dendritic features (Figure 47–1A).
How does this occur? Cytoskeletal proteins that 
maintain elongated processes and drive growth are 
central to this process. If the actin filaments in an early 
neurite are destabilized, the cytoskeleton becomes 
reconfigured in a way that commits the neurite to 
becoming the axon; secondarily, the remaining neur-
ites react by becoming dendrites. If the nascent axon 
is removed, one of the remaining neurites quickly 
assumes an axonal character. This sequence suggests 
that axonal specification is a key event in neuronal 
polarization and that signals from newly formed axons 
both suppress the generation of additional axons and 
promote dendrite formation.
The nature of the axonally derived signal that 
represses other axons is not known, but some insight 
into signals that control cytoskeletal arrangements has 
come from the study of a group of proteins encoded 
by the Par complex genes. As first shown in the nem-
atode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, Par proteins are 
involved in diverse aspects of cytoskeletal reorganiza-
tion, including the polarization of neuronal processes. 
Mammalian forebrain neurons lacking Par3, Par4, Par6, 
or relatives of Par1 grow multiple processes that are 
intermediate in length between axons and dendrites 
and bear markers of both processes (Figure 47–1B).
Although neurons grown in culture are similar to 
those in the brain, they are deprived of key extrinsic 
cues and signals. Cultured neurons become randomly 
arranged with respect to each other, whereas in many 
regions of the developing brain, neurons line up in 
rows, with their dendrites pointing in the same direc-
tion (Figure 47–2A). As the neurons migrate to their 
destinations (Chapter 46), axons and dendrites often 
grow as extensions of their trailing and leading pro-
cesses, respectively. This difference in vivo and in vitro 
implies that extrinsic signals regulate the polarization 
machinery. In the developing brain, the local release 
of semaphorins and other axonal guidance factors, 
discussed later in the chapter, may help to orient den-
drites (Figure 47–2C). The job of the Par protein com-
plex is to link these extracellular signals to the cellular 
machinery that rearranges the cytoskeleton, a process 
achieved in part through the regulation of proteins that 
modify actin or tubulin function. In fact, both the Tau 
protein in axons and the MAP2 protein in dendrites 
associate with and affect microtubules. Cytoskeletal 
differences also contribute to other mechanisms that 
amplify distinctions between axons and dendrites, 
such as polarized trafficking of molecules and genera-
tion of a specialized initial segment in axons.
If local signals are needed to polarize neurons in 
the brain, how is polarity established in the uniform 
environment of a tissue culture? One possible explana-
tion is that minor variations in the intensity of signal-
ing within a neuron, or in signals from its immediate 
environment, will activate Par proteins in one small 
domain of the neuron, triggering the nearest cell 
process to become an axon. If, by happenstance, one 
process grows slightly faster than its neighbors or 
encounters an environment that speeds neurite exten-
sion (Figure 47–2B), its chances of becoming an axon 
increase markedly. Presumably, this proto-axonal process 
emits signals that decrease the chance of other processes 
following suit, forcing them to become dendrites.
Dendrites Are Patterned by Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Factors
Once polarization occurs, dendrites grow and mature, 
acquiring the structural features that distinguish them 
from axons. Nascent dendrites form branched arbors, 
with their branches generally being more numerous 
and closer to the cell body than those of axons. In addi-
tion, small protrusions called spines extend from the 
distal branches of many dendrites. Finally, some den-
dritic branches are retracted or “pruned” to give the 
arbor its final and definitive shape (Figure 47–3).
Although the core features of dendrite formation 
are common to many neurons, there is striking varia-
tion in their number, shape, and branching pattern 
among neuronal types. Indeed, the shape of dendritic 
arbors is one of the main ways in which neurons can 


===== Page 3 =====
Lamellipodia 
formation
Neurite formation
One neurite becomes an axon
Other neurites become dendrites
Lamellipodium
Axon
Immature 
neurites
Dendrites
A  Developmental stages of a neuron grown in culture
B  SAD kinases are required for neuronal polarization 
Stage 1
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 2
Control
SAD kinase mutant
Axon marker, Tau
Dendrite marker, Map2
Figure 47–1  The differentiation of axons and dendrites 
marks the emergence of neuronal polarity.
A. Four stages in the polarization of a hippocampal neuron 
grown in tissue culture. (Adapted, with permission, from Kaech 
and Banker 2006. Copyright © 2007 Springer Nature.)
B. Hippocampal neurons grown in culture possess multiple 
short, thick dendrites that are enriched in the microtubule-
associated protein MAP2. They also possess a single long axon 
that is marked by a dephosphorylated form of the microtubule-
associated protein tau (left). A cultured neuron isolated from 
a mutant mouse lacks expression of a Par family gene (SAD 
kinase). The neuron generates neurites that express both tau 
and MAP2, markers of axons and dendrites, respectively. The 
length and diameter of these neurites are intermediate in size 
between those of axons and dendrites (right). (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Kishi et al. 2005.)


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1159
Figure 47–2  Extracellular factors determine whether neu-
ronal processes become axons or dendrites.
A. Cortical pyramidal neurons in vivo display a common axonal 
and dendritic orientation.
B. Neurons growing on laminin acquire polarity. When a cortical 
neuron extends a process from a less attractive substrate onto 
laminin, the process grows faster and usually becomes an axon. 
(Image reproduced, with permission, from Paul Letourneau.)
C. In the developing neocortex, semaphorin-3A (Sema 3A) is 
secreted by cells near the pial surface. Semaphorin-3A is an 
attractant for growing dendrites, helping to establish neuronal 
polarity and orientation. The parallel orientation of cortical 
pyramidal neurons is disrupted in mutant mice lacking func-
tional semaphorin-3A. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Polleux, Morrow, and Ghosh 2000. Copyright © 2000 Springer 
Nature.)
Sema 3A 
Dendrites
Axons
Laminin
C
Wild 
type
Sema 3A 
mutant
B
A


===== Page 5 =====
1160    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Figure 47–3  Dendritic branching develops in a series of 
steps.  The outgrowth of dendrites involves the formation 
of elaborate branches from which spines develop. Certain 
branches and spines are later pruned to achieve the mature 
pattern of dendrite arborization. (Image of spines at right repro-
duced, with permission, from Stefan W. Hell.)
Branching
Initiation
Outgrowth
Spine formation
Stopping/pruning
be classified. Cerebellar Purkinje cells can be distin-
guished from granule cells, spinal motor neurons, and 
hippocampal pyramidal neurons simply by looking 
at the pattern of their dendrites. These variations are 
critical for the distinct functions of different neuronal 
types. For example, the size of a dendritic arbor and 
the density of its branches are main determinants of 
the number of synapses it receives.
How is dendritic pattern established? Neurons must 
have intrinsic information about their shape because the 
patterns in tissue culture are strikingly reminiscent of 
those in vivo (Figure 47–4). The transcriptional programs 
that specify neuronal subtype (Chapter 46) presumably 
also encode information about neuronal shape. In both 
invertebrates and vertebrates, some transcription fac-
tors are selectively expressed by specific neuronal types 
and appear to be devoted to controlling the size, shape, 
and complexity of their dendritic arbors. They do so 
by coordinating the expression of downstream genes, 
including those encoding components of the cytoskel-
etal apparatus and membrane proteins that mediate 
interactions with neighboring cells.
A second mechanism for establishing the pattern 
of dendritic arbors is the recognition of one dendrite by 
others of the same cell. In some neurons, dendrites are 
spaced evenly with respect to each other, an arrange-
ment that allows them to sample inputs efficiently 
without major gaps or clumps (Figure 47–5A). In 
many cases, this process, called self-avoidance, occurs 
through a mechanism in which branches belonging to 
the same neuron repel each other. Several cell-surface 
adhesion molecules have now been found that medi-
ate self-avoidance by interacting in a way that results 
in repulsion (Figure 47–5D). Although it seems coun-
terintuitive that an adhesive interaction between adja-
cent membranes would lead to repulsion rather than 
attachment, the consequences of most intercellular 
interactions are determined by the signaling they initi-
ate rather than by adhesion per se, as we will see later 
in this chapter.
The dendrites of neighboring neurons also provide 
cues. In many cases, the dendrites of a particular neu-
ron type cover a surface with minimal overlap, a spac-
ing pattern called tiling (Figure 47–5B). The tiling of 
dendrites is conceptually related to self-avoidance, but 
in tiling, the inhibitory dendritic interactions are among 
neurons of a particular type, whereas in self-avoidance, 
they are among sibling dendrites of a single neuron. 
Tiling allows each class of neuron to receive informa-
tion from the entire surface or area it innervates. Tiling 
of a region by the dendrites of one class of neuron also 
avoids the confusion that could arise if the dendrites of 
many different neurons occupied the same area.
A particularly interesting situation is one in which 
dendrites engage in self-avoidance but synapse on the 
dendrites of other cells of the same type. In this situa-
tion, dendrites face the challenging task of distinguish-
ing nominally identical dendrites from dendrites of 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1161
Figure 47–4  The morphologies of 
neurons are preserved in dissoci-
ated cell culture. Cerebellar Purkinje 
neurons and hippocampal pyramidal 
neurons have distinctive patterns of 
dendritic branching. These basic pat-
terns are recapitulated when these 
two classes of neurons are isolated 
and grown in dissociated cell culture. 
(Image upper left: Dr. David Becker; 
upper right reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Yoshio Hirabayashi; lower 
left reproduced, with permission, 
from Terry E. Robinson; lower right 
reproduced, with permission, from 
Kelsey Martin.)
In the brain
Grown in culture
Purkinje
cell
Pyramidal
cell
nominally identical cells (Figure 47–5C). Two groups 
of molecules have been identified that mediate this 
self-/non–self-discrimination: clustered protocadher-
ins in mammals and DS-CAMs in Drosophila. Although 
they are unrelated structurally, they share several fea-
tures (Figure 47–5D).
First, both are encoded by large, complex genes that 
generate large numbers of isoforms. Drosophila Dscam1 
encodes around 38,000 distinct proteins through alterna-
tive splicing, and the clustered protocadherins encode 
around 60 proteins that can assemble into thousands of 
distinct multimers. Second, nearly all of the isoforms 
bind homophilically; for example, protocadherin γa1 on 
the surface of one dendrite binds well to protocadherin 
γa1 on a neighboring membrane, but poorly if at all to 
other isoforms. Third, in ways that remain incompletely 
understood, each neuron within a population expresses 
a random subset of all possible Dscam1 or protocad-
herin isoforms. Given the large number of isoforms, 
it is unlikely that individual neurons express identical 
sets of isoforms on their cell surface. The upshot is that 
dendrites of each neuron in a population bind homo-
philically to sibling dendrites, leading to repulsion and 
self-avoidance, whereas they bind poorly to dendrites 
of neighboring neurons, enabling other recognition sys-
tems to foster synaptogenesis.
Together, the mechanisms we have described, and 
many others, establish an overall arborization pattern 
through a combination of intrinsic and extracellular 
mechanisms. For dendrites, the extrinsic patterning 
signals determine neuronal morphology. For axons, 
which we consider next, the signals guide the axons to 
their targets.
The Growth Cone Is a Sensory Transducer  
and a Motor Structure
Once an axon forms, it begins to grow toward its syn-
aptic target. The key neuronal element responsible for 
axonal growth is a specialized structure at the tip of the 
axon called the growth cone. Both axons and dendrites 


===== Page 7 =====
1162    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
A
D
B
C
Protocadherins
DNA
Protein
Binding
No binding
Binding
No binding
Pcdh-alpha (14)
Pcdh-beta (22)
Pcdh-gamma (22)
Constant exons
Variable exons
DSCAM1
Exon4 (12)
Exon6 (48)
Exon9 (33)
Alternate exons
Figure 47–5  Interactions among dendritic branches pattern 
dendritic arbors.
A. Self-avoidance among sibling dendrites leads to even  
spacing of branches, minimizing gaps and clumps. In retinal 
starburst amacrine cells, self-avoidance fails when gamma  
protocadherins are lost.
B. Tiling of dendrites is conceptually similar to self-avoidance 
but applies to groups of neurons. It ensures that neighboring 
neurons of a single type cover territory efficiently.
C. Self-/non-self–discrimination allows sibling dendrites to avoid 
each other while interacting freely with dendrites of other neu-
rons of the same type.
D. Generation of numerous adhesion molecules from a single 
genomic complex by promoter choice at the mouse clustered 
protocadherin (Pcdh) locus (left) and by alternative splicing at 
the Drosophila DSCAM1 locus (right).
use growth cones for elongation, but those linked to 
axons have been studied more intensively.
Ramón y Cajal discovered the growth cone and had 
the key insight that it was responsible for axonal path-
finding. With static images alone for inspiration (Figure 
47–6A), he envisioned the growth cone to be “endowed 
with exquisite chemical sensitivity, rapid ameboid 
movements and a certain motive force, thanks to which 
it is able to proceed forward and overcome obstacles 
met in its way . . . until it reaches its destination.”
Many studies over the past century have con-
firmed Ramón y Cajal’s intuition. We now know 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 47 / The Growth and Guidance of Axons    1163
Figure 47–6  Neuronal growth cones.
A. Drawings of growth cones by Santiago Ramón y Cajal, who 
discovered these cellular structures and inferred their function.
B. Growth cones visualized in dye-labeled retinal ganglion neurons 
in the mouse. Note the similarities with Cajal’s drawings. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Carol Mason and Pierre Godement.)
C. The three main domains of the growth cone—filopodia, 
lamellipodia, and a central core—are shown by whole-mount 
scanning electron microscopy. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Bridgman and Dailey 1989. Permission conveyed through 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.)
D. The growth cone of a neuron from Aplysia in which actin and 
tubulin have been visualized. Actin (purple) is concentrated in 
lamellipodia and filopodia, whereas tubulin and microtubules 
(aquamarine) are concentrated in the central core. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Paul Forscher and Dylan Burnette.)
2 µm
Filopodium
Lamellipodium
C
A
D
B
that the growth cone is both a sensory structure that 
receives directional cues from the environment and a 
motor structure whose activity drives axon elongation. 
Ramón y Cajal also pondered “what mysterious forces 
precede the appearance of these processes . . . promote 
their growth and ramification . . . and finally establish 
those protoplasmic kisses . . . which seem to constitute 
the final ecstasy of an epic love story.” In more modern 
and prosaic terms, we now know that the growth cone 
guides the axon by transducing positive and nega-
tive cues into signals that regulate the cytoskeleton, 
thereby determining the course and rate of axonal 
growth toward its targets, where it will form synapses.
Growth cones have three main compartments. 
Their central core is rich in microtubules, mitochondria, 
and other organelles. Long slender extensions called 


===== Page 9 =====
1164    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
filopodia project from the body of the growth cone. 
Between the filopodia lie lamellipodia, which are also 
motile and give the growth cone its characteristic ruf-
fled appearance (Figure 47–6C,D).
Growth cones sense environmental signals through 
their filopodia: rod-like, actin-rich, membrane-limited 
structures that are highly motile. Their surface mem-
branes bear receptors for the molecules that serve as 
directional cues for the axon. Their length—tens of 
micrometers in some cases—permits the filopodia to 
sample environments far in advance of the central core 
of the growth core. Their rapid movements permit 
them to compile a detailed inventory of the environ-
ment, and their flexibility permits them to navigate 
around cells and other obstacles.
When filopodia encounter signals in the envi-
ronment, the growth cone is stimulated to advance, 
retract, or turn. Several motors power these orienting 
behaviors. One source of power is the movement of 
actin along myosin, an interaction similar to the one 
that powers the contraction of skeletal muscle fibers, 
although the actin and myosin of neurons are different 
from those in muscle. The assembly of actin monomers 
into polymeric filaments also contributes a propulsive 
force for filopodial extension. As the actin filaments 
are constantly depolymerized at the base of filopodia, 
the balance of polymerization and depolymerization 
enables the filopodia to move forward without becom-
ing longer. Depolymerization slows during periods of 
growth cone advance, leading to greater net forward 
motion. The movement of membranes along the sub-
strate provides yet another source of forward motion.
The contribution of each type of molecular motor 
to the advance of the growth cone is likely to vary from 
one situation to another. Nevertheless, the final step 
involves the flow of microtubules from the central core 
of the growth cone into the newly extended tip, thus 
moving the growth cone ahead and leaving in its wake 
a new segment of axon. New lamellipodia and filopo-
dia form in the advancing growth cone and the cycle 
repeats (Figure 47–7).
Accurate pathfinding can occur only if the growth 
cone’s motor action is linked to its sensory function. 
Therefore, it is crucial that the recognition proteins on 
the filopodia are signal-inducing receptors and not 
merely binding moieties that mediate adhesion. The 
binding of a ligand to its receptor affects growth in 
diverse ways. In some cases, it engages the cytoskele-
ton directly, through the intracellular domain of recep-
tors (Figure 47–7). Integrin receptors couple to actin 
in growth cones when they bind molecules associated 
with the surface of adjoining cells or the extracellular 
matrix, thereby influencing motility.
Of equal if not greater importance is the ability 
of ligand binding to stimulate the formation, accu-
mulation, and even breakdown of soluble intracel-
lular molecules that function as second messengers. 
These second messengers affect the organization of 
the cytoskeleton, and in this way regulate the direction 
and rate of movement of the growth cone.
One important second messenger is calcium. The 
calcium concentration in growth cones is regulated 
by the activation of receptors on filopodia, and this 
affects the organization of the cytoskeleton, which in 
turn modulates motility. Growth cone motility is opti-
mal within a narrow range of calcium concentrations, 
called a set point. Activation of filopodia on one side of 
the growth cone leads to a concentration gradient of 
calcium across the growth cone, providing a possible 
basis for changes in the direction of growth.
Other second messengers that link receptors and 
motor molecules include cyclic nucleotides, which 
modulate the activity of enzymes such as protein 
kinases, protein phosphatases, and rho-family guano-
sine triphosphatases (GTPases). In turn, these messen-
gers and enzymes regulate the activity of proteins that 
regulate the polymerization and depolymerization of 
actin filaments, thereby promoting or inhibiting axonal 
extension.
The critical role of intracellular signals in growth 
cone motility and orientation can be demonstrated 
using embryonic neurons grown in culture. Applica-
tion of growth factors to one side of a growth cone 
activates receptors locally and leads to extension and 
turning of the growth cone toward the source of the 
signal. In essence, the factor attracts the growth cone. 
Yet when cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) 
levels in the neuron are decreased, the same stimulus 
acts as a repellent and the growth cone turns away 
from the signal (Figure 47–8A). Other repulsive factors 
can become attractive when levels of the second mes-
senger cyclic guanosine 3’,5’-monophosphate (cGMP) 
are raised.
Recently, another mechanism for coupling guid-
ance molecules to growth cone behavior has come to 
light. It was long thought that all neuronal protein 
synthesis occurs in the cell body, but we now know 
that growth cones (as well as some dendrites) con-
tain the machinery for protein synthesis, including a 
subset of messenger RNAs. Initial evidence that these 
molecules play an important role came from experi-
ments in which axons were severed from their parent 
cell body. The growth cones continued to advance for 
a few hours; they could be stimulated to turn toward 
or away from local depots of guidance molecules, and 
these behaviors were abolished by inhibitors of protein 


