===== Page 1 =====
780    Part V / Movement
Damage to the Central Nervous System 
Produces Characteristic Alterations in  
Reflex Responses
Stretch reflexes are routinely used in clinical examina-
tions of patients with neurological disorders. They are 
typically elicited by sharply tapping the tendon of a 
muscle with a reflex hammer. Although the responses 
are often called tendon reflexes or tendon jerks, the 
receptor that is stimulated, the muscle spindle, actu-
ally lies in the muscle rather than the tendon. Only 
the primary sensory fibers in the spindle participate 
in the tendon reflex, for these are selectively activated 
by a rapid stretch of the muscle produced by the  
tendon tap.
Measuring alterations in the strength of the stretch 
reflex can assist in the diagnosis of certain conditions 
and in localizing injury or disease in the central nerv-
ous system. Absent or hypoactive stretch reflexes often 
indicate a disorder of one or more of the components 
of the peripheral reflex pathway: sensory or motor 
axons, the cell bodies of motor neurons, or the mus-
cle itself (Chapter 57). Nevertheless, because the excit-
ability of motor neurons is dependent on descending 
excitatory and inhibitory signals, absent or hypoactive 
stretch reflexes can also result from lesions of the cen-
tral nervous system. Hyperactive stretch reflexes, con-
versely, always indicate that the lesion is in the central 
nervous system.
Interruption of Descending Pathways to the Spinal 
Cord Frequently Produces Spasticity
The force with which a muscle resists being length-
ened depends on the muscle’s intrinsic elasticity, or 
stiffness. Because a muscle has elastic elements in 
series and parallel that resist lengthening, it behaves 
like a spring (Chapter 31). In addition, connective tis-
sue in and around the muscle may also contribute to 
its stiffness. These elastic elements may be pathologi-
cally altered following brain and spinal cord injury 
and thereby cause contractures and abnormal joint 
positions. However, there is also a neural contribution 
to the resistance of a muscle to stretch; the feedback 
loop inherent in the stretch reflex pathway acts to resist 
lengthening of the muscle.
Spasticity is characterized by hyperactive tendon 
jerks and an increase in resistance to rapid stretching 
of the muscle. Slow movement of a joint elicits only 
passive resistance, which is caused by the elastic prop-
erties of the joint, tendon, muscle, and connective tis-
sues. As the speed of the stretch is increased, resistance 
to the stretch rises progressively. This phasic relation 
is what characterizes spasticity; an active reflex con-
traction occurs only during a rapid stretch, and when 
the muscle is held in a lengthened position, the reflex 
contraction subsides.
Spasticity is seen following lesion of descending 
motor pathways caused by stroke, injuries of the brain 
or spinal cord, and degenerative diseases such as mul-
tiple sclerosis. It is also seen in individuals with brain 
damage that occurs before, during, or shortly after 
birth, resulting in cerebral palsy.
Spasticity is not seen immediately following 
lesions of descending pathways, but develops over 
days, weeks, and even months. This parallels plastic 
changes at multiple sites in the stretch reflex circuitry. 
Sensory group Ia axons release more transmitter sub-
stance when active, and the alpha motor neurons 
change their intrinsic properties and their morphology 
(dendritic sprouting and denervation hypersensitivity) 
so that they become more excitable. Changes in excita-
tory and inhibitory interneurons that project to the 
motor neurons also take place and probably contribute 
to the increased excitability.
Whatever the precise mechanisms that produce 
spasticity, the effect is a strong facilitation of transmis-
sion in the monosynaptic reflex pathway. It is not the 
only reflex pathway affected by lesions of descend-
ing motor pathways. Pathways involving group I/II 
interneurons and sensory fibers from skin are also 
affected and exhibit the symptomatology observed in 
patients with central motor lesions. In the clinic, spas-
ticity is therefore used in a broader sense and does not 
only relate to stretch reflex hyperexcitability. It is still 
debated whether reflex hyperexcitability contributes to 
the movement disorder following lesion of descending 
pathways or whether it may be a pertinent adaptation 
that helps to activate the muscles when descending 
input is diminished.
Lesion of the Spinal Cord in Humans Leads to a 
Period of Spinal Shock Followed by Hyperreflexia
Damage to the spinal cord can cause large changes 
in the strength of spinal reflexes. Each year, approxi-
mately 11,000 Americans sustain spinal cord injuries, 
and many more suffer from strokes. More than half of 
these injuries produce permanent disability, including 
impairment of motor and sensory functions and loss of 
voluntary bowel and bladder control. Approximately 
250,000 people in the United States today have some 
permanent disability from spinal cord injury.
When the spinal cord is completely transected, 
there is usually a period immediately after the 
injury when all spinal reflexes below the level of the 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    781
transection are reduced or completely suppressed, a 
condition known as spinal shock. During the course of 
weeks and months, spinal reflexes gradually return, 
often greatly exaggerated. For example, a light touch 
to the skin of the foot may elicit strong flexion with-
drawal of the leg.
Highlights
1.	 Reflexes are coordinated, involuntary motor 
responses initiated by a stimulus applied to 
peripheral receptors.
2.	 Many groups of interneurons in spinal reflex 
pathways are also involved in producing complex 
movements such as walking and transmitting vol-
untary commands from the brain.
3.	 Some components of reflex responses, particu-
larly those involving the limbs, are mediated by 
supraspinal centers, such as brain stem nuclei, the 
cerebellum, and the motor cortex.
4.	 Reflexes are smoothly integrated into centrally 
generated motor commands because of the con-
vergence of sensory signals onto spinal and 
supraspinal interneuronal systems involved in 
initiating movements. Establishing the details of 
these integrative events is one of the major chal-
lenges of contemporary research on sensory-
motor integration in the spinal cord.
5.	 Because of the role of supraspinal centers in spinal 
reflex pathways, injury to or disease of the central 
nervous system often results in significant altera-
tions in the strength of spinal reflexes. The pattern 
of changes provides an important aid to diagnosis 
of patients with neurological disorders.
 Jens Bo Nielsen  
 Thomas M. Jessell 
Selected Reading
Alstermark B, Isa T. 2012. Circuits for skilled reaching and 
grasping. Annu Rev Neurosci 35:559–578.
Baldissera F, Hultborn H, Illert M. 1981. Integration in spinal 
neuronal systems. In: JM Brookhart, VB Mountcastle, VB 
Brooks, SR Geiger (eds). Handbook of Physiology: The Nervous 
System, pp. 509–595. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological 
Society.
Boyd IA. 1980. The isolated mammalian muscle spindle. 
Trends Neurosci 3:258–265.
Fetz EE, Perlmutter SI, Orut Y. 2000. Functions of spinal 
interneurons during movement. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
10:699–707.
Jankowska E. 1992. Interneuronal relay in spinal pathways 
from proprioceptors. Prog Neurobiol 38:335–378.
Nielsen JB. 2016. Human spinal motor control. Annu Rev 
Neurosci 39:81–101.
Pierrot-Deseilligny E, Burke D. 2005. The Circuitry of the 
Human Spinal Cord. Its Role in Motor Control and Movement 
Disorders. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Prochazka A. 1996. Proprioceptive feedback and movement 
regulation. In: L Rowell, JT Sheperd (eds). Handbook of 
Physiology: Regulation and Integration of Multiple Systems, 
pp. 89–127. New York: American Physiological Society.
Windhorst U. 2007. Muscle proprioceptive feedback and spi-
nal networks. Brain Res Bull 73:155–202.
Wolpaw JR. 2007. Spinal cord plasticity in acquisition 
and maintenance of motor skills. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 
189:155–169.
References
Appenteng K, Prochazka A. 1984. Tendon organ firing dur-
ing active muscle lengthening in normal cats. J Physiol 
(Lond) 353:81–92.
Brown MC, Matthews PBC. 1966. On the sub-division of the 
efferent fibres to muscle spindles into static and dynamic 
fusimotor fibres. In: BL Andrew (ed). Control and Inner-
vation of Skeletal Muscle, pp. 18–31. Dundee, Scotland: 
University of St. Andrews.
Crago A, Houk JC, Rymer WZ. 1982. Sampling of total mus-
cle force by tendon organs. J Neurophysiol 47:1069–1083.
Gossard JP, Brownstone RM, Barajon I, Hultborn H. 1994. 
Transmission in a locomotor-related group Ib pathway 
from hind limb extensor muscles in the cat. Exp Brain Res 
98:213–228.
Granit R. 1970. Basis of Motor Control. London: Academic.
Hagbarth KE, Kunesch EJ, Nordin M, Schmidt R, Wallin EU. 
1986. Gamma loop contributing to maximal voluntary 
contractions in man. J Physiol (Lond) 380:575–591.
Hoffmann P. 1922. Untersuchungen über die Eigenreflexe (Seh-
nenreflexe) menschlicher Muskeln. Berlin: Springer.
Hulliger M. 1984. The mammalian muscle spindle and its cen-
tral control. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol 101:1–110.
Hunt CC, Kuffler SW. 1951. Stretch receptor discharges dur-
ing muscle contraction. J Physiol (Lond) 113:298–315.
Liddell EGT, Sherrington C. 1924. Reflexes in response to 
stretch (myotatic reflexes). Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
96:212–242.
Marsden CD, Merton PA, Morton HB. 1981. Human postural 
responses. Brain 104:513–534.
Matthews PBC. 1972. Muscle Receptors. London: Edward 
Arnold.
Mendell LM, Henneman E. 1971. Terminals of single Ia fibers: 
location, density, and distribution within a pool of 300 
homonymous motoneurons. J Neurophysiol 34:171–187.


===== Page 3 =====
782    Part V / Movement
Pearson KG, Collins DF. 1993. Reversal of the influence of 
group Ib afferents from plantaris on activity in model 
gastrocnemius activity during locomotor activity. J Neu-
rophysiol 70:1009–1017.
Prochazka A, Hulliger M, Trend P, Dürmüller N. 1988. 
Dynamic and static fusimotor set in various behavioural 
contexts. In: P Hnik, T Soukup, R Vejsada, J Zelena (eds). 
Mechanoreceptors: Development, Structure and Function, 
pp. 417–430. New York: Plenum.
Schieppati M. 1987. The Hoffmann reflex: a means of assess-
ing spinal reflex excitability and its descending control in 
man. Prog Neurobiol 28:345–376.
Schmidt RF. 1983. Motor systems. In: RF Schmidt, G Thews 
(eds), MA Biederman-Thorson (transl). Human Physiology, 
pp. 81–110. Berlin: Springer.
Sherrington CS. 1906. Integrative Actions of the Nervous System. 
New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press.
Swett JE, Schoultz TW. 1975. Mechanical transduction in 
the Golgi tendon organ: a hypothesis. Arch Ital Biol 
113:374–382.
Vallbo ÅB. 1981. Basic patterns of muscle spindle discharge 
in man. In: A Taylor, A Prochazka (eds). Muscle Receptors 
and Movement, pp. 263–275. London: Macmillan.
Vallbo ÅB, Hagbarth KE, Torebjörk HE, Wallin BG. 1979. 
Somatosensory, proprioceptive, and sympathetic activity 
in human peripheral nerves. Physiol Rev 59:919–957.
Wickens DD. 1938. The transference of conditioned excita-
tion and conditioned inhibition form one muscle group 
to the antagonist muscle group. J Exp Psychol 22:101–123.


===== Page 4 =====
33
Locomotion
L
ocomotion is one of the most fundamental 
of animal behaviors and is common to all mem-
bers of the animal kingdom. As one might expect 
of such an essential behavior, the neural mechanisms 
responsible for the basic alternating rhythmicity that 
underlies locomotion are highly conserved throughout 
the animal kingdom, from invertebrates to vertebrates, 
and from the early vertebrates to primates. However, 
while the basic locomotor-generating circuits have 
been conserved, the evolution of limbs, and then of 
ever more complex patterns of behavior, has resulted 
in the development of progressively more complex 
spinal and supraspinal circuits (Figure 33–1).
Scientists have been intrigued with the neural 
mechanisms of locomotion since the beginning of the 
20th century, when pioneering work by Charles Sher-
rington and Thomas Graham Brown showed that the 
isolated spinal cord of the cat is able to generate the 
basic aspects of locomotor activity and subsequently 
that this capacity was intrinsic to the spinal cord. 
Throughout the 20th century, major advances were made 
in detailing both the rhythm- and pattern-producing 
capacities of the spinal cord, leading ultimately to the 
groundbreaking concept of a central pattern genera-
tor for locomotion in the spinal cord. This single con-
cept, more than any other, has driven research into 
the mechanisms underlying locomotor control since 
the 1970s, allowing a detailed electrophysiological 
examination of the neuronal mechanisms involved in 
the control of locomotion that is not possible for most 
other motor acts.
Most research throughout the 20th century on the 
spinal mechanisms mediating locomotion was per-
formed on the cat, which remains an important model 
Locomotion Requires the Production of a Precise and 
Coordinated Pattern of Muscle Activation
The Motor Pattern of Stepping Is Organized at  
the Spinal Level
The Spinal Circuits Responsible for Locomotion Can Be 
Modified by Experience
Spinal Locomotor Networks Are Organized Into 
Rhythm- and Pattern-Generation Circuits
Somatosensory Inputs From Moving Limbs Modulate 
Locomotion
Proprioception Regulates the Timing and Amplitude  
of Stepping
Mechanoreceptors in the Skin Allow Stepping to Adjust 
to Unexpected Obstacles
Supraspinal Structures Are Responsible for Initiation and 
Adaptive Control of Stepping
Midbrain Nuclei Initiate and Maintain Locomotion and 
Control Speed
Midbrain Nuclei That Initiate Locomotion Project to 
Brain Stem Neurons
The Brain Stem Nuclei Regulate Posture  
During Locomotion
Visually Guided Locomotion Involves the Motor Cortex
Planning of Locomotion Involves the Posterior Parietal Cortex
The Cerebellum Regulates the Timing and Intensity of 
Descending Signals
The Basal Ganglia Modify Cortical and Brain Stem Circuits
Computational Neuroscience Provides Insights Into 
Locomotor Circuits
Neuronal Control of Human Locomotion Is Similar to  
That of Quadrupeds
Highlights


===== Page 5 =====
784    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–1  The locomotor system. Multiple regions of the 
central nervous system interact to initiate and regulate loco-
motion. Locomotor networks in the spinal cord—the central 
pattern generators (CPGs)—generate the precise timing and 
patterning of locomotion. Proprioceptive sensory feedback 
modulates the activity of the locomotor CPG. The initiation 
of locomotion is mediated by neurons in the mesencephalic 
locomotor region (MLR) that project to neurons in the medial 
reticular formation (MRF) in the lower brain stem, which in turn 
project to the spinal cord. Descending fibers from the  
vestibular nuclei, pontomedullary reticular formation, and the 
red nucleus (brain stem nuclei) maintain equilibrium and  
modulate the ongoing locomotor activity. Cortical activity  
from the posterior parietal cortex (not illustrated) and the  
motor cortex is involved in the planning and execution of  
visually guided locomotion, while the basal ganglia (not illus-
trated) and cerebellum are important for the selection and  
coordination of locomotor activity.
Visual
signals
Adjustment
Spinal
locomotor
system
Limb
movement
Spinocerebellar
pathways
Visual
cortex
Afferent
signals
Activation
Visual guidance
Cerebellum
Motor
cortex
MRF
MLR
Brain stem
nuclei
for studying many aspects of locomotor control. How-
ever, the complexity of the spinal circuits in mammals 
led to the search for simpler preparations that would 
allow a better understanding of the synaptic connectiv-
ity and neuronal properties responsible for the genera-
tion of locomotion. This search led to the development of 
the lamprey and the tadpole models (Box 33–1; Figures 
33–2 and 33–3). Experiments using these species have 
led to a detailed understanding of the neuronal circuits 
responsible for generating swimming. Influential work 
on understanding the processes underlying locomotion 
has also come from other experimental models, includ-
ing mouse, rat, turtle, salamander, and zebrafish.
More recently, the development of molecular-
genetic techniques has provided a powerful tool to 
probe the spinal circuits responsible for locomotion in 
preparations as diverse as zebrafish and mouse. These 
techniques have allowed researchers to explore more 
thoroughly both the neuronal circuits in the mamma-
lian spinal cord responsible for rhythmic, alternating 
patterns of activity that define over-ground locomo-
tion and those responsible for swimming.
The rhythmic pattern of activity is only one ele-
ment of the complex locomotor behavior observed in 
most vertebrates, especially mammals, which have 
evolved to allow them to move quickly and elegantly. 
This flexibility is provided via feedback and feedfor-
ward modification of the locomotor patterns generated 
by spinal networks.
Feedback information from the body and limbs 
in the form of cutaneous and proprioceptive inputs 
is important for regulating aspects of the locomotor 
cycle, including bending of the body, stride length, 
and the force produced during propulsion. This infor-
mation is equally critical in assuring that animals can 
rapidly and efficiently react to unexpected pertur-
bations in the environment, such as when hitting a 
branch during walking or stepping on an unstable 
surface.
Feedforward information from supraspinal 
systems modifies activity according to the goals of 
the animal and the environment in which it moves. 
Information from defined structures in the brain 
stem is important for both the initiation of locomo-
tion and for regulating general aspects of locomotor 
activity, including the speed of locomotion, level of 
muscle activity, and interlimb coupling in animals 
with limbs. Information from cortical structures 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    785
The neuronal control of locomotion is studied experi-
mentally in diverse vertebrate species that produce 
swimming or over-ground locomotion, or both. The pre-
vailing experimental models used for studying swim-
ming are the lamprey, the tadpole, and the zebrafish; for 
over-ground locomotion, the cat, rat, or mouse; and for 
both swimming and locomotion, the turtle, salamander, 
and frog.
Semi-intact preparations—in which influences from 
parts of the brain, all supraspinal inputs, and/or affer-
ent inputs to the spinal cord have been removed—are 
also commonly used in studies of the neuronal control 
of locomotion in vertebrates (Figure 33–2A). Finally, 
in vitro preparations of the spinal cord or of the brain 
stem and spinal cord from young animals or adult and 
anoxia-resistant animals are extensively used for circuit 
analysis (Figure 33–2C).
Intact Preparations Are Used to Study the 
Behavioral Output
In intact preparations, locomotion is studied either dur-
ing walking over ground or on a motorized treadmill. 
Chronic electromyographic (EMG) recordings of limb 
muscles, coupled with video recordings of the movement, 
reveal details of the rhythm of locomotion, the pattern of 
muscle or joint activation, and interlimb coordination 
(Figure 33–2B). Such studies allow researchers to under-
stand how normal locomotion behavior is expressed.
These behavioral studies are often combined with 
experimental manipulations that modify the supraspi-
nal or afferent control of locomotion. Such experiments 
may use electrical stimulation or surgical ablation of 
circumscribed areas in the central nervous system, 
genetic inactivation or activation of defined popula-
tions of nerve cells, or perturbation of the afferent input 
to the spinal cord using genetic techniques or electrical 
stimulation. Finally, single-cell activity in the brain can 
be recorded from identified populations of neurons and 
correlated with specific aspects of the locomotor behav-
ior (eg, speed, postural adjustments, gait modifications, 
flexor-extensor muscle activity). Cells are identified by 
their anatomical location, their projection pattern, trans-
mitter content, and molecular markers.
Semi-intact Preparations Are Commonly Used 
to Study the Central Control of Locomotion in 
the Absence of Cortical Influence or Sensory 
Feedback
Decerebrate Preparations
In the decerebrate preparation, the brain stem is com-
pletely transected at the level of the midbrain (Figure 
33–2A), disconnecting rostral brain centers, including 
the cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus, from locomotor-
initiating centers in the brain stem and spinal cord. These 
preparations allow investigation of the role of cerebellum 
and brain stem structures in controlling locomotion in the 
absence of influence from higher brain centers.
Locomotion is generally evoked by electrical 
stimulation of locomotor regions in the brain stem, as 
described in the text. To increase recording stability, the 
animals are often paralyzed by blocking transmission at 
the neuromuscular junction. When locomotion is initi-
ated in such an immobilized preparation, often referred 
to as fictive locomotion, the motor nerves to flexors and 
extensor muscles discharge (recorded as an electroneu-
rogram), but no movement takes place.
Spinal Preparations
In spinal preparations, the spinal cord is completely 
transected, generally at the lower thoracic level, thus 
isolating the spinal segments that control the hindlimb 
musculature from the rest of the central nervous system 
(Figure 33–2A). This procedure allows investigations of 
the spinal locomotor circuits without any influence from 
supraspinal structures.
Two types of spinal preparation are used: acute spinal 
preparations, in which studies are performed immediately 
after the spinalization, and chronic spinal preparations, in 
which the animals are allowed to recover from the surgery 
and are then studied over a period of time.
In acute spinal preparations, locomotion is fre-
quently induced chemically, either by intravenous 
administration of drugs that stimulate monoaminer-
gic and/or serotonergic receptors or by local applica-
tion of glutamatergic receptor agonists. These drugs 
increase the excitability in the spinal locomotor circuits, 
Box 33–1  Preparations Used to Study the Neuronal Control of Locomotion
(continued)
contributes primarily to the planning and execution 
of locomotion in situations in which vision is used 
to make anticipatory modifications of gait. Finally, 
two structures with no direct spinal connections, the 
basal ganglia and the cerebellum, contribute to the 
selection of locomotor activity and to its coordina-
tion (Figure 33–1).
The way in which all of these structures interact 
and permit diverse modes of locomotion is the subject 
of this chapter.


===== Page 7 =====
786    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–2  Selected animal models used to study 
locomotor control systems.
A. Schematic of the cat cerebral hemispheres, brain stem, 
and spinal cord showing the level of transection for spi-
nalization (a′-a) and decerebration (b′-b). Decerebration 
isolates the brain stem and spinal cord from the cerebral 
hemispheres. Transection at a′-a isolates the lumbar spinal 
cord from all descending inputs.
B.  The electromyogram can be used to record locomotor 
activity during actual movement in intact, decerebrate, or 
spinal animals.
mimicking the locomotor-initiating drive from the brain 
stem. Alternatively, locomotion is induced electrically, 
by stimulation of the dorsal roots or dorsal columns. 
Acute spinal preparations are often paralyzed in order 
to increase recording stability from motor neurons and 
interneurons in the spinal cord, as well as to discrimi-
nate between central and peripheral effects.
In chronic spinal preparations, animals are studied 
for weeks or months after transection, often with the aim 
of finding better ways to improve the locomotor capabil-
ity after spinal cord injury. In both young and adult cats 
and in young rodents, the hindlimb locomotor capabil-
ity can often return following training but with no fur-
ther treatment. In all animals, the locomotor capability 
is improved dramatically by drug treatments that acti-
vate the spinal central pattern generator. Electromyo-
graphic activity, together with behavioral measures, can 
be recorded before and after transection (Figure 33–2B).
Box 33–1  Preparations Used to Study the Neuronal Control of Locomotion (continued)
Spinal cord
B  Electromyographic activity
A  Transection
Cerebral hemisphere
Mesencephalic
locomotor
region
a′
a
Nerves to hindlimbs
Nerves to forelimbs
Extensors
Flexors
b
b′
Stance
Swing
Locomotion Requires the Production of a Precise 
and Coordinated Pattern of Muscle Activation
Locomotion requires the production of activity in 
many muscles that need to be coordinated in a precise 
rhythm and pattern. The rhythm defines the frequency 
of the cyclic activity, whereas the pattern defines the 
spatiotemporal activation of muscle groups within a 
cycle. In swimming animals, such as the lamprey or 
the tadpole, locomotion is expressed as a traveling 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 33 / Locomotion    787
C. The isolated lumbar (L1–L6) spinal cord from a newborn 
rat or mouse. Motor activity is recorded in flexor-related 
L2 ventral roots and extensor-related L5 ventral roots on 
either side of the cord. Locomotor-like activity is induced 
by application of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and sero-
tonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) to the bathing solution. 
Flexor-extensor alternation is seen as out-of-phase activ-
ity between L2 and L5 ventral roots on the same side of 
the cord (1 and 4; 2 and 3), and left–right alternations are 
seen as out-of-phase activity between L2–L2 and L5–L5 
ventral roots on either side of the cord (1 and 2; 3 and 4). 
(Adapted, with permission, from Kiehn et al. 1999; data 
from O Kiehn.)
D. In vitro tadpole preparation, in which the spinal cord 
remains in situ, showing ventral root recordings on the right 
side (1) and on the left side (2 and 3). side of the spinal cord. 
The swimming rhythm in the nervous system of the para-
lyzed animal was induced by a brief stimulation of the skin 
on the head. (Data from L Picton and KT Silar.)
In Vitro Preparations Are Used to Study Central 
Organization of Networks
With in vitro preparations, the spinal cord or brain stem 
is removed from the animal and placed in a bath that is 
perfused with artificial cerebrospinal fluid (rodent, lam-
prey, and turtle) (Figure 33–2C). Alternatively, the brain 
stem and spinal cord are left in situ in the animal that is 
paralyzed or immobilized and kept in vitro (tadpole and 
zebrafish) (Figure 33–2D).
In all cases, no rhythmic afferent inputs occur in the 
cord, and motor activity is recorded in peripheral nerves 
or, more often, in the ventral roots where the motor neu-
rons have their axons leaving the spinal cord.
Locomotion is induced chemically, either by appli-
cation of glutamatergic or serotonergic receptor agonists 
or a combination of both, or electrically by stimulating 
the brain stem or peripheral afferents. Rhythm and pat-
tern generation, circuit connectivity, cellular properties 
of interneurons and motor neurons, and circuit neuro-
modulation are studied with conventional electrophysi-
ological methods, imaging, and anatomical tracing, or 
with molecular genetic methods that allow manipula-
tion and recording of identified populations of neurons.
2
C  Isolated spinal cord
D  In situ spinal cord
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
100 ms
Lumbar spinal cord
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
1
2
3
4
3
1
wave of activity (Figure 33–3A) that propagates from 
rostral to caudal body segments during forward pro-
gression. This pattern can be recorded as an electromy-
ogram (EMG) during locomotion in the intact animal  
(Figure 33–3B) and as an electroneurogram in the 
isolated spinal cord (Figure 33–3C). Activity in more 
caudal roots occurs later than that in more rostral roots, 
and the activity on each side of the body is reciprocal.
In limbed animals, the pattern of muscle activity is 
more complex and serves to support the body as well 


===== Page 9 =====
788    Part V / Movement
Figure 33–3  Lamprey swimming.  The lamprey swims by 
means of a wave of muscle contractions traveling down one 
side of the body 180° out of phase with a similar traveling  
wave on the opposite side (A). This pattern is evident in elec-
tromyogram recordings from four locations along the animal 
during normal swimming (B). A similar pattern is recorded from 
four ventral roots in an isolated cord (C). (Data from S Grillner.)
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
3
4
1
2
Rhythm in intact animal
A
B
C
1
3
2
4
Rhythm in isolated cord
as to transport it forward. The general unit of measure 
of locomotion in limbed vertebrates is the step cycle, 
which is defined as the time between any two succes-
sive events (eg, foot or paw contact of a given limb). 
The step cycle is divided into a swing phase, when the 
foot is off the ground and being transferred forward, 
and a stance phase, when the foot is in contact with 
the ground and propelling the body forward. Based 
on measures of changes in joint angle, each of these 
phases can be further divided into a period of flexion 
(F) followed by an initial period of extension (E1) dur-
ing swing and two additional periods of extension (E2 
and E3) during stance (Figure 33–4A; see below).
Muscles within a single limb must be activated 
and coordinated in a precise spatiotemporal pattern 
(Figure 33–4B) so that the relative time of activation of 
different muscles, the duration of their activity, and the 
magnitude of that activity are coordinated to meet the 
demands of the environment (intralimb coordination).
In the hindlimb, swing is initiated by flexion of the 
knee produced by activation of muscles such as the 
semitendinosus, followed shortly by activation of hip 
and ankle flexors (the F phase). The hip flexors con-
tinue to contract throughout swing, but the activity in 
the knee and ankle flexors is arrested as the leg extends 
in preparation for contact with the support surface (the 
E1 phase). Activity in most extensor muscles begins at 
this stage, before the foot contacts the ground. This 
preparatory prestance phase signifies that the extensor 
muscle activity is centrally programmed and not sim-
ply the result of afferent feedback arising from contact 
of the foot with the ground.
Stance begins with contact of the foot or paw 
with the ground. During early stance (the E2 phase), 
the knee and ankle joints flex due to the acceptance 
of the weight of the body, causing extensor muscles 
to lengthen at the same time they are contracting 
strongly (eccentric contraction). The spring-like yield-
ing of these muscles as weight is accepted allows the 
body to move smoothly over the foot and is essential 
for establishing an efficient gait. During late stance (the 
E3 phase), the hip, knee, and ankle all extend as the 
extensor muscles provide a propulsive force to move 
the body forward.
There is also a requirement for interlimb coordination, 
the precise coupling between different limbs. The cou-
pling between the four legs in quadrupeds, for exam-
ple, can vary quite substantially, dependent on both 
the speed of locomotion and the adopted gait (a walk, 
pace, trot, gallop, or bound). This is particularly true 
of the pattern of coupling between muscles of limbs of 
the same side (homolateral limbs) and for the diagonal 
limbs. The relation between limbs can be characterized 
by the phase difference, with 0 reflecting limbs that 
move together in phase and 0.5 limbs that move fully 
out of phase (ie, in opposite directions). During walk-
ing, activity between the homolateral limbs varies by a 
phase value of 0.25, and three legs are always in contact 


