===== Page 1 =====
28    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 2–1  Familial risk of psychiatric disorders provides 
evidence of heritability.
A. Correlations between monozygotic twins for psychiatric dis-
orders are considerably greater than those between dizygotic 
twins. Monozygotic twins share nearly all genes and have a 
high (but not 100%) risk of sharing the disease state. Dizygotic 
twins share 50% of their genetic material. A score of zero rep-
resents no correlation (the average result for two random peo-
ple), whereas a score of 1.0 represents a perfect correlation. 
(Adapted from McGue and Bouchard 1998.)
B. The risk of developing schizophrenia is greater in close rela-
tives of a schizophrenic patient. Like dizygotic twins, parents 
and children, as well as brothers and sisters, share 50% of their 
genetic material. If only a single gene accounted for schizophre-
nia, the risk should be the same for parents, siblings, children, 
and dizygotic twins of patients. The variation between family 
members shows that more complex genetic and environmental 
factors are in play. (Adapted, with permission, from Gottesman II. 
1991.)
Lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia (%)
10
20
30
40
50
0
None (general
population)
Relationship to
schizophrenic individual
Genes
shared
12.5%
(third-degree
relatives)
25%
(second-degree
relatives)
50%
(ﬁrst-degree
relatives)
100%
First cousin
Uncle/aunt
Nephew/niece
Grandchild
Half sibling
Parent
Sibling
Child
Dizygotic twin
Monozygotic twin
2%
1%
2%
4%
5%
6%
6%
9%
13%
17%
48%
A
B
0.2
0.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Schizophrenia
Affective
illness
Panic
disorder
Autism
Autism
spectrum
Attention
deﬁcit
Monozygotic twins
Dizygotic twins
Concordance for disorder


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    29
Figure 2–2  Structure of DNA. Four different nucleotide bases, 
adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G), are 
assembled on a sugar phosphate backbone in the double-stranded 
DNA helix. (Adapted from Alberts et al. 2002.)
3′
3′
5′
5′
5′
3′
5′
3′
5′
3′
Phosphate
Sugar
phosphate
Hydrogen-bonded
base pairs
Sugar-phosphate
backbone
Base
Nucleotide
G
G
C
A
T
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
T
T
G
G
G
G
G
C
T
T
A
G
Building blocks of DNA
Double-stranded DNA
DNA double helix
DNA strand
Sugar
A
T
C
C
C
A
A
G
G
G
G
T
A
C
A
G
A
T
+
5′
N
O
C
H
H
3′
3′
5′
CH3
C
C
O
N
N
N
C
C
N
N
C
N
C
N
C
C
C
C
N
C
O
N
C
O
O
C
N
N
N
C
N
C
N
C
C
Hydrogen
bond
Thymine
Cytosine
Guanine
Adenine
Sugar-
phosphate
backbone
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
T
Many functional RNA transcripts do not encode 
proteins. In fact, in the human genome, over 40,000 
noncoding transcripts have been characterized as 
compared with approximately 20,000 protein-coding 
genes. Such genes include ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) 
and transfer RNAs (tRNAs), essential components of 
the machinery for mRNA translation. Additional non-
coding RNAs (ncRNA) include long noncoding RNAs 
(lncRNAs), arbitrarily defined as longer than 200 bp in 
length, that do not encode proteins but can have roles 
in gene regulation; small noncoding RNAs of several 
types, including small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs), that 
guide mRNA splicing; and microRNAs (miRNAs) that 
pair with complementary sequences in specific mRNAs 
to inhibit their translation.
Each cell in the body contains the DNA for every 
gene but only expresses a specific subset of the genes 
as RNAs. The part of the gene that is transcribed into 
RNA is flanked by noncoding DNA regions that may 
be bound by other proteins, including transcription 
factors, to regulate gene expression. These sequence 
motifs include promoters, enhancers, silencers, and 
insulators, which together allow accurate expression 
of the RNA in the right cells at the right time. Pro-
moters are typically found close to the beginning of 
the region to be transcribed; enhancers, silencers, 
and insulators may reside at a distance from the 
gene being regulated. Each type of cell has a unique 
complement of DNA-binding proteins that interact 
with promoters and other regulatory sequences to 
regulate gene expression and the resulting cellular 
properties.
The brain expresses a greater number of genes 
than any other organ in the body, and within the 
brain, diverse populations of neurons express differ-
ent groups of genes. The selective gene expression 
controlled by promoters, other regulatory sequences, 
and the DNA-binding proteins that interact with them 


===== Page 3 =====
30    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 2–3  Gene structure and expression.
A. A gene consists of coding regions (exons) separated by 
noncoding regions (introns). Its transcription is regulated by 
noncoding regions such as promoters and enhancers that are 
frequently found near the beginning of the gene.
B. Transcription leads to production of a primary single-stranded 
RNA transcript that includes both exons and introns.
C. Splicing removes introns from the immature transcript and 
ligates the exons into a mature messenger RNA (mRNA), 
which is exported from the nucleus of the cell.
D. Translation of the mature mRNA produces a protein product.
permits a fixed number of genes to generate a vastly 
larger number of neuronal cell types and connections 
in the brain.
Although genes specify the initial development 
and properties of the nervous system, the experience 
of an individual and the resulting activity in specific 
neural circuits can itself alter the expression of genes. 
In this way, environmental influences are incorporated 
into the structure and function of neural circuits. Some 
of the principal goals of genetic studies are to unravel 
the ways that individual genes affect biological pro-
cesses, the ways that networks of genes influence each 
other’s activity, and the ways that genes interact with 
the environment.
Genes Are Arranged on Chromosomes
The genes in a cell are arranged in an orderly fashion 
on long, linear stretches of DNA called chromosomes. 
Each gene in the human genome is reproducibly 
located at a characteristic position (locus) on a specific 
chromosome, and this genetic “address” can be used 
to associate biological traits with a gene’s effects. Most 
multicellular animals (including worms, fruit flies, 
and mice, as well as humans) are diploid; every somatic 
cell carries two complete sets of chromosomes, one 
from the mother and the other from the father.
Humans have about 20,000 genes but only 46 
chromosomes: 22 pairs of autosomes (chromosomes 
5′ untranslated
region
3′ untranslated
region
Intron
Intron
Start
Start
Exon
Stop
Stop
Promoter
sequence
A  Gene structure
B  Transcription
C  Splicing
D  Translation
Mature
mRNA
mRNA
Protein
Exon
Exon


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    31
Figure 2–4  A map of normal human chromosomes at 
metaphase illustrates the distinctive morphology of each 
chromosome. Characteristic sizes and characteristic light and 
dark regions allow chromosomes to be distinguished from one 
another. (Adapted, with permission, from Watson, Tooze, and 
Kurtz 1983.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Y
X
that are present in both males and females) and two 
sex chromosomes (two X chromosomes in females, 
one X and one Y chromosome in males) (Figure 2–4). 
Each parent supplies one copy of each autosome 
to the diploid offspring. Each parent also supplies 
one X chromosome to female (XX) offspring, but 
XY males inherit their single X chromosome from 
their mothers and their single Y chromosome from 
their fathers. Sex-linked inheritance was discovered 
in fruit flies by Thomas Hunt Morgan in 1910. This 
pattern of sex-linked inheritance associated with the 
single X chromosome has been highly significant 
in human genetic studies, where certain X-linked 
genetic diseases are commonly observed only in 
males but are genetically transmitted from mothers 
to their sons.
In addition to the genes on chromosomes, a very 
small number of an organism’s genes are transmitted 
through mitochondria, cytoplasmic organelles that carry 
out metabolic processes. Mitochondria in all children 
come from the ovum and therefore are transmitted 
from the mother to the child. Certain human disorders, 
including some neuromuscular degenerative diseases, 
some forms of intellectual disability, and some forms 
of deafness, are caused by mutations in the mitochon-
drial DNA.
The Relationship Between Genotype and 
Phenotype Is Often Complex
The two copies of a particular autosomal gene in 
an individual are called alleles. If the two alleles are 
identical, the individual is said to be homozygous at 
that locus. If the alleles vary because of mutations, 
the individual is heterozygous at that locus. Males 


===== Page 5 =====
32    Part I / Overall Perspective
are hemizygous for genes on the X chromosome. A 
population can have a large number of alleles of a 
gene; for example, a single gene that affects human 
eye color, called OCA2, can have alleles that encode 
shades of blue, green, hazel, or brown. Because of 
this variation, it is important to distinguish the gen-
otype of an organism (its genetic makeup) and the 
phenotype (its appearance). In the broad sense, a gen-
otype is the entire set of alleles forming the genome 
of an individual; in the narrow sense, it is the spe-
cific alleles of one gene. By contrast, a phenotype is 
a description of a whole organism, and is a result of 
the expression of the organism’s genotype in a par-
ticular environment.
If a mutant phenotype is expressed only when 
both alleles of a gene are mutated, the resulting pheno-
type is called recessive. This can occur if individuals are 
homozygous for the mutant allele or if they are carry-
ing a different damaging allele in a given gene on each 
of their chromosomes (so-called compound heterozy-
gote). Recessive mutations usually result from loss or 
reduction of a functional protein. Recessive inheritance 
of mutant traits is commonly observed in humans and 
experimental animals.
If a mutant phenotype results from a combination 
of one mutant and one wild-type allele, the pheno-
typic trait and mutant allele are said to be dominant. 
Some mutations are dominant because 50% of the 
gene product is not enough for a normal phenotype 
(haploinsufficiency). Other dominant mutations lead 
to the production of an abnormal protein or to the 
expression of the wild-type gene product at an inap-
propriate time or place; if this acts antagonistically 
to the normal protein product, it is called a dominant 
negative mutation.
The difference between genotype and pheno-
type is evident when considering the consequences 
of having one normal (wild-type) allele and one 
mutant allele of the same gene. Recent progress in 
gene discovery in a range of neurodevelopmental 
disorders, including autism and epilepsy, has dem-
onstrated that the human genome is more sensitive 
to haploinsufficiency than previously appreciated. 
However, while the complete inactivation of both 
copies of a gene typically has a reliable effect, the 
severity and manifestation of haploinsufficiency 
vary to a greater degree from individual to indi-
vidual, a phenomenon known as variable, partial, or 
incomplete penetrance.
Genetic variations that disturb development, 
cell function, or behavior in humans fall on a con-
tinuum between common alleles (also referred to as 
polymorphisms), which generally have small individual 
effects on biology and behavior, and rare variants, 
which may have larger biological effects (Box 2–1). 
While these categorizations are useful generalizations, 
there are nonetheless important cases in which com-
mon polymorphisms carry large disease risks; a com-
mon variation in the APOE gene, present in 16% of the 
population, results in a four-fold increase in the risk of 
late-onset Alzheimer disease.
Genes Are Conserved Through Evolution
The nearly complete nucleotide sequence of the human 
genome was reported in 2001, and the complete nucle-
otide sequences of many animal genomes have also 
been decoded. Comparisons between these genomes 
lead to a surprising conclusion: the unique human spe-
cies did not result from the invention of unique new 
human genes.
Humans and chimpanzees are profoundly differ-
ent in their biology and behavior, yet they share 99% 
of their protein-coding genes. Moreover, most of the 
approximately 20,000 genes in humans are also pre-
sent in other mammals, such as mice, and over half of 
all human genes are very similar to genes in inverte-
brates such as worms and flies (Figure 2–5). The con-
clusion from this surprising discovery is that ancient 
genes that humans share with other animals are regu-
lated in new ways to produce novel human properties, 
like the capacity to generate complex thoughts and 
language.
Because of this conservation of genes throughout 
evolution, insights from studies of one animal can 
often be applied to other animals with related genes, 
an important fact as animal experiments are often pos-
sible when experiments on humans are not. For exam-
ple, a gene from a mouse that encodes an amino acid 
sequence similar to a human gene usually has a similar 
function to the orthologous human gene.
Approximately one-half of the human genes have 
functions that have been demonstrated or inferred 
from orthologous genes in other organisms (Figure 2–6). 
A set of genes shared by humans, flies, and even uni-
cellular yeasts encodes the proteins for intermediary 
metabolism; synthesis of DNA, RNA, and protein; cell 
division; and cytoskeletal structures, protein transport, 
and secretion.
The evolution from single-cell organisms to mul-
ticellular animals was accompanied by an expan-
sion of genes concerned with intercellular signaling 
and gene regulation. The genomes of multicellular 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 2 / Genes and Behavior    33
Although DNA replication generally is carried out with 
high fidelity, spontaneous errors called mutations do 
occur. Mutations can result from damage to the purine 
and pyrimidine bases in DNA, mistakes during the 
DNA replication process, and recombinations that occur 
during meiosis.
Changes in a single DNA base (also called a point 
mutation) within a coding region fall into five general 
categories:
1.	 A silent mutation changes a base but does not result 
in an obvious change in the encoded protein.
2.	 A missense mutation is a point mutation that results 
in one amino acid in a protein being substituted for 
another; increasingly these are being categorized 
using both informatics and empirical evidence into 
at least two subclasses: mutations that are damag-
ing to protein function and those that may be func-
tionally neutral.
3.	 A nonsense mutation, where a codon (a triplet of 
nucleotides) within the coding region specifying 
a specific amino acid is replaced by a stop codon, 
resulting in a shortened (truncated) protein product.
4.	 A canonical splice site mutation changes a nucleotide 
that specifies the exon/intron boundary.
5.	 A frameshift mutation, in which small insertions or 
deletions of nucleotides change the reading frame, 
leading to the production of a truncated or abnor-
mal protein.
In the current literature, mutations falling into the 
latter four categories (including damaging missense 
mutations) are often referred to as likely gene disrupting 
(LGD) mutations.
The frequency of mutations greatly increases when 
the organism is exposed to chemical mutagens or ion-
izing radiation during experimental genetic studies. 
Chemical mutagens tend to induce point mutations 
involving changes in a single DNA base pair or the dele-
tion of a few base pairs. Ionizing radiation can induce 
large insertions, deletions, or translocations.
In humans, point mutations occur at a low sponta-
neous rate in oocytes and sperm, leading to mutations 
present in the child but not in either parent, called 
de novo mutations. Each generation, between 70 and 
90 single base changes are introduced into the entire 
genome (approximately 3 billion base pairs), of which 
one, on average, will cause a missense or nonsense 
mutation in a protein-coding gene. The number of de 
novo point mutations is increased in the children of 
older fathers, whereas the frequency of larger chromo-
some abnormalities is increased in the children of older 
mothers.
With the sequencing of the human genome in 2001 
and increasingly high-resolution methods to detect 
genetic variation, it is also now clear that point muta-
tions are not the only differences in sequence between 
humans. Certain sequences may be missing or repeated 
several times on a chromosome, and thus can have 
different numbers of copies in different individuals. 
When such variations encompass more than 1000 base 
pairs, they are called copy number variations (CNVs). 
Changes in more than a single base and less than 1000 
base pairs are referred to as insertion/deletions (indels).
The contribution of any genetic variation to a disease 
or syndrome may be referred to as simple (or Mendelian) 
or complex. In general, a simple or Mendelian mutation is 
one that is sufficient to confer a phenotype without addi-
tional genetic risks. This does not imply that everyone 
with the mutation will show exactly the same phenotype. 
However, there is typically a highly reliable relation-
ship between a specific disease allele and a phenotype, 
one that approaches a one-to-one relationship (as seen in 
sickle cell anemia or Huntington disease).
In contrast, a complex genetic disorder is one in 
which genetic risk factors change the probability of a 
disease but are not fully causal. This genetic contribution 
may involve rare mutations, common polymorphisms, or 
both, and is typically quite heterogeneous, with multiple 
different genes and alleles having the capacity to increase 
risk or play a protective role. Most complex disorders also 
involve a contribution from the environment.
Box 2–1  Mutation: The Origin of Genetic Diversity
animals, such as worms, flies, mice, and humans, typi-
cally encode thousands of transmembrane receptors, 
many more than are present in unicellular organisms. 
These transmembrane receptors are used in cell-to-cell 
communication in development, in signaling between 
neurons, and as sensors of environmental stimuli. The 
genome of a multicellular animal also encodes 1,000 or 
more different DNA-binding proteins that regulate the 
expression of other genes.
Many of the transmembrane receptors and DNA-
binding proteins in humans are related to specific 
orthologous genes in other vertebrates and inverte-
brates. By enumerating the shared genetic heritage 
of the animals, we can infer that the basic molecular 


===== Page 7 =====
34    Part I / Overall Perspective
Figure 2–6  The predicted molecular functions of 26,383 
human genes. (Adapted, with permission, from Venter et al. 2001.)
Nucleic acid 
binding (14%)
Signal 
transduction
(16%)
Enzymes 
(10%)
Cell structure
and adhesion
(9%)
Molecular
function 
unknown
(42%)
Other 
various
(5%)
Transporters and 
ion channels (4%)
between mammalian genes and their invertebrate 
counterparts most often result from gene duplica-
tion in mammals or subtle changes in gene expression 
and function, rather than the creation of entirely new 
genes.
Genetic Regulation of Behavior Can Be Studied 
in Animal Models
Because of the evolutionary conservation between 
human and animal genes, studies in animal models 
of the relationships between the genes, proteins, and 
neural circuits that underlie behavior are likely to yield 
insight into these relationships in humans. Two impor-
tant strategies have been applied with great success in 
the study of gene function.
In classical genetic analysis, organisms are first sub-
jected to mutagenesis with a chemical or irradiation 
that induces random mutations and then screened for 
heritable changes that affect the behavior of interest, 
say, sleep. This approach does not impose a bias as 
to the kind of gene involved; it is a random search of 
all possible mutations that cause detectable changes. 
Genetic tracing of heritable changes allows the identi-
fication of the individual genes that are altered in the 
mutant organism. Thus the pathway of discovery in 
classical genetics moves from phenotype to genotype, 
from organism to gene. In reverse genetics, a specific 
gene of interest is targeted for alteration, a genetically 
modified animal is produced, and the animals with 
these altered genes are studied. This strategy is both 
focused and biased—one begins with a specific gene—
and the pathway of discovery moves from genotype to 
phenotype, from gene to organism.
These two experimental strategies and their more 
subtle variations form the basis of experimental genetics. 
Gene manipulation by classical and reverse genetics is 
conducted in experimental animals, not in humans.
A Transcriptional Oscillator Regulates Circadian 
Rhythm in Flies, Mice, and Humans
The first large-scale studies of the influence of genes 
on behavior were initiated by Seymour Benzer and his 
colleagues around 1970. They used random mutagen-
esis and classical genetic analysis to identify mutations 
that affected learned and innate behaviors in the fruit 
fly Drosophila melanogaster: circadian (daily) rhythms, 
courtship behavior, movement, visual perception, and 
memory (Box 2–2 and Box 2–3). These induced muta-
tions have had an immense influence on our under-
standing of the role of genes in behavior.
Figure 2–5  Most human genes are related to genes in 
other species. Less than 1% of human genes are specific to 
humans; other genes may be shared by all living things, by 
all eukaryotes, by animals only, or by vertebrate animals only. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Lander et al. 2001. Copyright 
© 2001 Springer Nature.)
Vertebrate 
animals
only (22%)
Vertebrate and 
invertebrate 
animals (24%)
Humans
only 
(<1%)
Other 
(1%)
Eukaryotes and
prokaryotes (21%)
Animals and other
eukaryotes (32%)
pathways for neuronal development, neurotransmis-
sion, electrical excitability, and gene expression were 
present in the common ancestor of worms, flies, mice, 
and humans. Moreover, studies of animal and human 
genes have demonstrated that the most important 
genes in the human brain are those that are most con-
served throughout animal phylogeny. Differences 


===== Page 8 =====
Random Mutagenesis in Flies
Genetic analysis of behavior in the fruit fly (Drosophila) is 
carried out on flies in which individual genes have been 
mutated. Mutations can be made by chemical mutagene-
sis or by insertional mutagenesis, strategies that can affect 
any gene in the genome. Similar random mutagenesis 
strategies are used to create mutations in the nematode 
worm Caenorhabditis elegans, zebra fish, and mice.
Chemical mutagenesis, for example with ethyl 
methanesulfonate (EMS), typically creates random point 
mutations in genes. Insertional mutagenesis occurs 
when mobile DNA sequences called transposable elements 
randomly insert themselves into other genes.
The most widely used transposable elements in Dros-
ophila are the P elements. P elements may be modified to 
carry genetic markers for eye color, which makes them easy 
to track in genetic crosses, and they may also be modified 
to alter expression of the gene into which they are inserted.
To cause P element transposition, Drosophila strains 
that carry P elements are crossed to those that do not. 
This genetic cross leads to destabilization and transpo-
sition of the P elements in the resulting offspring. The 
mobilization of the P element causes its transposition 
into a new location in a random gene.
Targeted Mutagenesis in Mice
Advances in molecular manipulation of mammalian 
genes have permitted precise replacement of a known 
normal gene with a mutant version. The process of gen-
erating a strain of mutant mice involves two separate 
manipulations. A gene on a chromosome is replaced 
by homologous recombination in a special cell line 
known as embryonic stem cells, and the modified cell 
line is incorporated into the germ cell population of the 
embryo (Figure 2–7).
The gene of interest must first be cloned. The gene 
is mutated, and a selectable marker, usually a drug-
resistance gene, is then introduced into the mutated 
fragment. The altered gene is then introduced into 
embryonic stem cells, and clones of cells that incorpo-
rate the altered gene are isolated. DNA samples of each 
clone are tested to identify a clone in which the mutated 
gene has been integrated into the homologous (normal) 
site, rather than some other random site.
When a suitable clone has been identified, the cells 
are injected into a mouse embryo at the blastocyst stage 
(3 to 4 days after fertilization), when the embryo con-
sists of approximately 100 cells. These embryos are then 
reintroduced into a female that has been hormonally 
prepared for implantation and allowed to come to term. 
The resulting embryos are chimeric mixtures between 
the stem cell line and the host embryo.
Embryonic stem cells in the mouse have the capabil-
ity of participating in all aspects of development, includ-
ing the germline. The injected cells can become germ 
cells and pass on the altered gene to future generations 
of mice. This technique has been used to generate muta-
tions in various genes crucial to development or func-
tion in the nervous system.
Restricting Gene Knockout and Regulating 
Transgenic Expression
To improve the utility of gene knockout technology, 
methods have been developed that restrict deletions 
to cells in a specific tissue or at specific points in an  
animal’s development. One method of regional restriction 
exploits the Cre/loxP system. The Cre/loxP system is a site-
specific recombination system, derived from the P1 phage, 
in which the phage enzyme Cre recombinase catalyzes 
recombination between 34 bp loxP recognition sequences, 
which are normally not present in animal genomes.
The loxP sequences can be inserted into the genome 
of embryonic stem cells by homologous recombination 
such that they flank one or more exons of a gene of 
interest (called a floxed gene). When the stem cells are 
injected into an embryo, one can eventually breed a mouse 
in which the gene of interest is floxed and still functional 
in all cells of the animal.
A second line of transgenic mice can then be gener-
ated that expresses Cre recombinase under the control of 
a neural promoter sequence that is normally expressed 
in a restricted brain region. By crossing the Cre trans-
genic line of mice with the line of mice with the floxed 
gene of interest, the gene will only be deleted in those 
cells that express the Cre transgene.
In the example shown in Figure 2–8A, the gene 
encoding the NR1 (or GluN1) subunit of the N-methyl-
d-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor has been flanked 
with loxP elements and then crossed with a mouse line 
expressing Cre recombinase under control of the CaMKII 
promoter, which normally is expressed in forebrain neu-
rons. In this particular line, expression was fortuitously 
limited to the CA1 region of the hippocampus, result-
ing in selective deletion of the NR1 subunit in this brain 
region (Figure 2–8B). Because the CaMKII promoter only 
activates gene transcription postnatally, early develop-
mental changes are minimized by this strategy.
In addition to regional restriction of gene expres-
sion, control over the timing of gene expression gives the 
investigator an additional degree of flexibility and can 
exclude the possibility that any abnormality observed 
in the phenotype of the mature animal is the result of a 
developmental defect produced by the transgene. This 
can be done in mice by constructing a gene that can be 
turned on or off with a drug.
One starts by creating two lines of mice. Line 1 car-
ries a particular transgene that is under control of the 
promoter tetO, which is ordinarily found only in bac-
teria. This promoter cannot by itself turn on the gene; it 
needs to be activated by a specific transcriptional regu-
lator. Thus the second line of mice expresses a second 
transgene that encodes a hybrid transcription factor, 
Box 2–2  Generating Mutations in Experimental Animals
(continued)


===== Page 9 =====
the tetracycline transactivator (tTA), which recognizes 
and binds to the tetO promoter. Expression of tTA can 
be placed under the control of a promoter in the mouse 
genome that normally drives gene transcription in only 
specific classes of neurons or specific brain regions.
When the two lines of mice are mated, some of the 
offspring will carry both transgenes. In these mice, the 
tTA binds to the tetO promoter and activates the down-
stream transgene. What makes the tTA transcription fac-
tor particularly useful is that it becomes inactivated when 
it binds certain antibiotics, such as tetracycline, allow-
ing transgene expression to be regulated by administer-
ing antibiotics to mice. One can also generate mice that 
express a mutant form of tTA called reverse tTA (rtTA). 
This transactivator will not bind to tetO unless the animal 
is fed doxycycline. In this case, the transgene is always 
turned off unless the drug is given (Figure 2–9).
Altering Gene Function by RNA Interference 
and CRISPR
Finally, genes can be inactivated by targeting them 
with modern molecular tools. One such method is 
RNA interference, which takes advantage of the fact 
that most double-stranded RNAs in eukaryotic cells 
are routinely destroyed; the whole RNA is destroyed 
even if only part of it is double-stranded. By introduc-
ing a short RNA sequence that artificially causes a 
selected mRNA to become double-stranded, research-
ers can activate this process to reduce the mRNA levels 
for specific genes.
Another experimental tool is CRISPR, a method 
in which components of a bacterial immune system 
are deployed in nonbacterial cells to directly attack a 
selected DNA sequence. To target a gene with CRISPR, 
Box 2–2  Generating Mutations in Experimental Animals (continued)
ES cells growing
in tissue culture
A
B
Test for the rare 
colony in which the 
DNA fragment has 
replaced one copy of 
the normal gene 
ES cells with one copy of target 
gene replaced by mutant gene
Introduce a DNA 
fragment containing 
altered gene into 
many cells
Let each cell grow to 
form a colony
Altered version of 
target gene 
constructed by 
genetic engineering
Remove early embryo
from pregnant mouse
Inject ES cells 
into early
embryo
Birth
Test somatic cells of offspring
for presence of altered gene 
and breed selected mice to test 
for gene in germ-line cells
Transgenic mouse with 
one copy of target gene 
replaced by altered gene
in germ line
Implant embryo formed 
partly with ES cells 
into foster mother
Figure 2–7  Creating mutant mice strains. 
(Adapted from Alberts et al. 2002.)
A. Creating mouse stem cells with specific  
targeted mutations.
B. Using altered embryonic stem (ES) cells to  
create genetically modified mice.


