===== Page 1 =====
484    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–12  Peripheral nerve injury activates microglia in 
the dorsal and ventral horns. Schematic drawing and photo-
micrograph illustrate the location where microglia are activated 
after peripheral nerve injury. Activation of microglia in the dorsal 
horn results from damage (arrow) to the peripheral branch of 
primary sensory neurons (orange cells). Microglial activation 
around motor neuron cell bodies in the ventral horn occurs 
because the same injury damages efferent axons of the motor 
neurons (green cells). (Micrograph reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Julia Kuhn.)
Microglia
the area of injury can inappropriately activate dorsal 
horn circuits that have undergone central sensitization.
Four Major Ascending Pathways Convey 
Nociceptive Information From the Spinal Cord 
to the Brain
Four major ascending pathways—the spinothalamic, 
spinoreticular, spinoparabrachial, and spinohypotha-
lamic tracts—contribute sensory information to the 
central processes that generate pain.
The spinothalamic tract is the most prominent 
ascending nociceptive pathway in the spinal cord. It 
includes the axons of nociceptive-specific, thermosen-
sitive, and wide-dynamic-range neurons in laminae 
I and V through VII of the dorsal horn. These axons 
cross the midline of the spinal cord near their segment 
of origin and ascend in the anterolateral white matter 
before terminating in thalamic nuclei (Figure 20–13). 
The spinothalamic tract has a crucial role in the trans-
mission of nociceptive information. Cells at the origin 
of this tract typically have discrete, unilateral receptive 
fields that underlie our ability to localize painful 
stimuli. Not surprisingly, electrical stimulation of the 
tract is sufficient to elicit the sensation of pain; con-
versely, lesioning this tract (anterolateral cordotomy), 
a procedure that is generally only used for intractable 
pain in terminal cancer patients, can result in a marked 
reduction in pain sensation on the side of the body 
contralateral to that of the lesion.
The spinoreticular tract contains the axons of projec-
tion neurons in laminae VII and VIII. This tract ascends 
in the anterolateral quadrant of the spinal cord with 
spinothalamic tract axons, and terminates in both the 
reticular formation and the thalamus. As neurons at 
the origin of the spinoreticular tract generally have 
large, often bilateral receptive fields, this pathway 
has been implicated more in the processing of diffuse, 
poorly localized pains.
The spinoparabrachial tract contains the axons of 
projection neurons in laminae I and V. Information 
transmitted along this tract is thought to contribute 
to the affective component of pain. This tract projects 
in the anterolateral quadrant of the spinal cord to the 
parabrachial nucleus at the level of the pons (Figure 
20–13). This pathway has extensive collaterals to the 
mesencephalic reticular formation and periaqueductal 
gray matter. Parabrachial neurons project to the amyg-
dala, a critical nucleus of the limbic system, which reg-
ulates emotional states (Chapter 42).
The spinohypothalamic tract contains the axons of 
neurons found in spinal cord laminae I, V, VII, and VIII. 
These axons project to hypothalamic nuclei that serve as 
autonomic control centers involved in the regulation of 
the neuroendocrine and cardiovascular responses that 
accompany pain syndromes (Chapter 41).
Several Thalamic Nuclei Relay Nociceptive 
Information to the Cerebral Cortex
The thalamus contains several relay nuclei that partici-
pate in the central processing of nociceptive informa-
tion. Two of the most important regions of the thalamus 
are the lateral and medial nuclear groups. The lateral 
nuclear group comprises the ventroposterolateral (VPL), 
ventroposteromedial (VPM) and posterior/pulvinar 
nuclei. The VPL and VPM, respectively, receive inputs 
via the spinothalamic tract from nociception-specific 
and wide-dynamic-range neurons in laminae I and V 
of the dorsal horn and via the trigeminothalamic tract 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    485
Figure 20–13  Major ascending pathways that transmit noci-
ceptive information. Sensory discriminative features of the 
pain experience are transmitted from the spinal cord to the ven-
troposterolateral thalamus via the spinothalamic tract (brown). 
From there, information is transmitted predominantly to the 
somatosensory cortex. A second pathway, (the spinoparabra-
chial tract (red), carries information from the spinal cord to the 
parabrachial nucleus of the dorsolateral pons. These neurons 
in turn target limbic forebrain regions, including the insular and 
anterior cingulate cortex, which process emotional features of 
the pain experience.
Spinal cord
Pons
Noxious 
stimulus
Somatosensory cortex
(postcentral gyrus)
Anterior cingulate 
cortex
Thalamus
Nociceptors
Insular 
cortex
Parabrachial 
nucleus
Amygdala
from the trigeminal nucleus caudalis, the trigeminal 
homolog of the dorsal horn that processes nociceptive 
information from orofacial regions. The lateral thalamus 
processes information about the precise location of an 
injury, information usually conveyed to consciousness 
as acute pain. Consistent with this view, neurons in 
the lateral thalamic nuclei have small receptive fields, 
matching those of the presynaptic spinal neurons.
A cerebrovascular infarct that destroys the lat-
eral thalamus can produce a central neuropathic pain 
condition called the Dejerine-Roussy (thalamic pain) 
syndrome. Patients with this syndrome experience 
spontaneous burning pain as well as abnormal sensa-
tions (called dysesthesias) contralateral to the infarct. 
Electrical stimulation of the thalamus can also result 
in intense pain. In one dramatic clinical case, electri-
cal stimulation of the thalamus rekindled sensations of 
angina pectoris that were so realistic that the anesthe-
siologist thought the patient was experiencing a heart 
attack. This and other clinical observations suggest 
that in chronic neuropathic pain conditions there is a 
fundamental change in thalamic and cortical circuitry. 
This hypothesis is consistent with studies demonstrat-
ing that the topographic map of the body in the thal-
amus and somatosensory cortex is not fixed, but can 
change with use and disuse. Loss of a limb can lead to 
shrinking and even disappearance of the cortical rep-
resentation of the limb. Abnormal reorganization likely 
contributes to the phantom limb pain (Figure 20–14).
The medial nuclear group of the thalamus com-
prises the medial dorsal and central lateral nucleus of 
the thalamus and the intralaminar complex. Its major 
input is from neurons in laminae VII and VIII of the 
dorsal horn. The pathway to the medial thalamus 
was the first spinothalamic projection evident in the 
evolution of mammals and is therefore known as the 
paleospinothalamic tract. It is also sometimes referred to 
as the spinoreticulothalamic tract because it includes 
indirect connections through the reticular formation of 
the brain stem. The projection from the lateral thala-
mus to the ventroposterior lateral and medial nuclei 
is most developed in primates, and thus is termed the 
neospinothalamic tract. Many neurons in the medial 
thalamus respond optimally to noxious stimuli and 
project to many regions of the limbic system, including 
the anterior cingulate cortex.
The Perception of Pain Arises From and Can Be 
Controlled by Cortical Mechanisms
Anterior Cingulate and Insular Cortex Are 
Associated With the Perception of Pain
Imaging studies now show that no single area of the 
cortex is responsible for pain perception. Rather, many 
regions are activated when an individual experiences 
pain. In the somatosensory cortex, neurons typically 
have small receptive fields and may not contribute 
greatly to the diffuse perception of aches and pains 
that characterize most clinical syndromes. The ante-
rior cingulate gyrus and insular cortex also contain 
neurons that are activated strongly and selectively by 
noxious somatosensory stimuli (Box 20–1).


===== Page 3 =====
486    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–14  Changes in neural activation 
in phantom limb pain.
A. The domain of cerebral cortex activated by 
ascending spinal sensory inputs is expanded 
in patients with phantom limb pain.
B. Functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) of patients with phantom limb pain 
and healthy controls during a lip-pursing task. 
In amputees with phantom limb pain, cortical 
representation of the mouth has extended 
into the regions of the hand and arm. In 
amputees without pain, the areas of primary 
somatosensory and motor cortices that are 
activated are similar to those in healthy con-
trols (image not shown). (Adapted, with per-
mission, from Flor, Nokolajsen, and Jensen 
2006. Copyright © 2006 Springer Nature.)
Normal
Phantom limb
Normal
Phantom limb
B  Regions of cortex active during lip pursing task
Spinal 
cord
Mouth
Mouth
Arm
Hand
A  Cortical representation of ascending spinal input
The anterior cingulate gyrus is part of the lim-
bic system and is involved in processing emotional 
states associated with pain. The insular cortex 
receives direct projections from the thalamus as well 
as from the amygdala. Neurons in the insular cortex 
process information about the internal state of the 
body and contribute to the autonomic component 
of pain responses. Importantly, neurosurgical proce-
dures that ablate the cingulate cortex or the pathway 
from the frontal cortex to the cingulate cortex reduce 
the affective features of pain without eliminating 
the ability to recognize the intensity and location of the 
injury. Patients with lesions of the insular cortex 
present the striking syndrome of asymbolia for pain. 
They perceive noxious stimuli as painful and can 
distinguish sharp from dull pain but fail to display 
appropriate emotional responses. These observa-
tions implicate the insular cortex as an area in which 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    487
Thunberg’s illusion, first demonstrated in 1896, is a 
strong, often painful heat felt after placing the hand on a 
grill of alternating warm and cool bars (Figure 20–15A).
One hypothesis proposes that this illusory sensa-
tion occurs as a result of differential grill responses of 
two classes of spinothalamic tract neurons, one sensitive 
to innocuous and another to noxious cold. This finding 
has led to a model of pain perception based on a central 
disinhibition or unmasking process in the cerebral cor-
tex. The model predicts perceptual similarities between 
grill-evoked and cold-evoked pain, a prediction that 
has been verified psychophysically. The thalamocortical 
integration of pain and temperature stimuli may explain 
the burning sensation felt when nociceptors are acti-
vated by cold.
To identify the anatomical site of the unmasking 
phenomenon described above, positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET) was used to compare the cortical areas acti-
vated by Thunberg’s grill with those activated by cool, 
warm, noxious cold, and noxious heat stimuli separately. 
All thermal stimuli activate the insula and somatosen-
sory cortices. The anterior cingulate cortex is activated by 
Thunberg’s grill and by noxious heat and cold, but not by 
discrete warm and cool stimuli (Figure 20–15B).
Box 20–1  Localizing Illusory Pain in the Cerebral Cortex
Figure 20–15A  Thunberg’s thermal grill.  The stimulus 
surface (20 × 14 cm) is made of 15 sterling silver bars, 
each 1 cm wide, set approximately 3 mm apart. Under-
neath each bar are three longitudinally spaced thermoelec-
tric (Peltier) elements (1 cm2), and on top of each bar is a 
thermocouple. Alternate (even- and odd-numbered) bars 
can be controlled independently. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Craig and Bushnell 1994. Copyright © 1994 
AAAS.)
Figure 20–15B  Cortical areas 
activated by Thunberg’s grill.  The 
anterior cingulate and insula regions 
of the cerebral cortex are activated 
when the hand is placed on the grill 
but not when warm and cool stimuli 
are applied separately. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Craig AD,  
Reiman EM, Evans A, et al. 1996. 
Functional imaging of an illusion of 
pain. Nature 384:258–260. Copyright 
© 1996 Springer Nature.)
A
Anterior cingulate
B
Insula
Noxious
cold
Grill
(cool and warm)
Noxious
heat
Warm
Cool


===== Page 5 =====
488    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–16  The gate control theory of pain.  The gate-
control hypothesis was proposed in the 1960s to account for 
the fact that activation of low-threshold primary afferent fibers 
can attenuate pain. The hypothesis focused on the interaction 
of neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord: the nociceptive 
(C) and nonnociceptive (Aa) sensory neurons, projection neu-
rons, and inhibitory interneurons. In the original version of the 
model, as shown here, the projection neuron is excited by both 
classes of sensory neurons and inhibited by interneurons in the 
superficial dorsal horn. The two classes of sensory fibers also 
terminate on the inhibitory interneurons; the C fibers indirectly 
inhibit the interneurons, thus increasing the activity of the pro-
jection neurons (thereby “opening the gate”), whereas the Aβ 
fibers excite the interneurons, thus suppressing the output of 
the projection neurons (and “closing the gate”).
the sensory, affective, and cognitive components of 
pain are integrated.
Pain Perception Is Regulated by a Balance of 
Activity in Nociceptive and Nonnociceptive 
Afferent Fibers
Many projection neurons in the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord respond selectively to noxious inputs, but 
others receive convergent inputs from both nocicep-
tive and nonnociceptive afferents. The concept that the 
convergence of sensory inputs onto spinal projection 
neurons regulates pain processing first emerged in the 
1960s.
Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall proposed that 
the relative balance of activity in nociceptive and non-
nociceptive afferents might influence the transmission 
and perception of pain. In particular, they proposed 
that activation of nonnociceptive sensory neurons, by 
engaging inhibitory interneurons in the dorsal horn, 
closes a “gate” for afferent transmission of nociceptive 
signals that can be opened by the activation of nocicep-
tive sensory neurons. In the original and simplest form 
of this gate-control theory, the interaction between 
large and small fibers occurred at the first possible site 
of convergence on projection neurons in the dorsal 
horn of the spinal cord (Figure 20–16). We now know 
that such interactions can also occur at many supraspi-
nal relay centers.
–
–
+
+
Aβ ﬁber (nonnociceptive)
Projection
neuron
C ﬁber (nociceptive)
Inhibitory
interneuron
+
The concept of convergence of different sensory 
modalities has provided an important basis for the 
design of new pain therapies. Viewed in its broadest 
sense, the convergence of high- and low-threshold 
inputs at spinal or supraspinal sites provided a plau-
sible explanation for several empirical observations 
about the perception of pain. The shaking of the hand 
that follows a hammer blow or burn is a reflexive 
behavior and may alleviate pain by activating large-
diameter afferent fibers that suppress the transmission 
of information about noxious stimuli.
The idea of convergence also helped to promote 
the use of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimula-
tion (TENS) and spinal cord stimulation for the relief 
of pain. With TENS, stimulating electrodes placed at 
peripheral locations activate large-diameter afferent 
fibers that innervate areas that overlap but also sur-
round the region of injury and pain. The region of the 
body in which pain is reduced maps to those segments 
of the spinal cord in which nociceptive and nonnocic-
eptive afferents from that body region terminate. This 
makes intuitive sense: You do not shake your left leg to 
relieve pain in your right arm.
Electrical Stimulation of the Brain  
Produces Analgesia
Several sites of endogenous pain regulation are located 
in the brain. One effective means of suppressing nocic-
eption involves stimulation of the periaqueductal gray 
region, the area of the midbrain that surrounds the 
third ventricle and the cerebral aqueduct. In experi-
mental animals, stimulation of this region elicits a pro-
found and selective analgesia. This stimulation-produced 
analgesia is remarkably modality-specific; animals still 
respond to touch, pressure, and temperature within 
the body area that is not sensitive to pain. Stimulation-
evoked analgesia has proved to be an effective way 
of relieving pain in a limited number of human pain 
conditions.
Stimulation of the periaqueductal gray matter 
blocks spinally mediated withdrawal reflexes that 
are normally evoked by noxious stimulation. Few of 
the neurons in the periaqueductal gray matter project 
directly to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. Most 
make excitatory connections with neurons of the ros-
troventral medulla, including serotonergic neurons 
in a midline region called the nucleus raphe mag-
nus. The axons of these serotonergic neurons project 
through the dorsal region of the lateral funiculus to the 
spinal cord, where they form inhibitory connections 
with neurons in laminae I, II, and V of the dorsal 
horn (Figure 20–17). Stimulation of the rostroventral 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    489
medulla thus inhibits the firing of many classes of dor-
sal horn neurons, including projection neurons of the 
major ascending pathways that convey afferent nocic-
eptive signals to the brain.
A second major monoaminergic descending sys-
tem can also suppress the activity of nociceptive neu-
rons in the dorsal horn. This noradrenergic system 
Figure 20–17  Descending monoaminergic pathways regu-
late nociceptive relay neurons in the spinal cord. A seroton-
ergic pathway arises in the nucleus raphe magnus and projects 
through the dorsolateral funiculus to the dorsal horn of the 
spinal cord. A noradrenergic system arises in the locus ceruleus 
and other nuclei in the pons and medulla. (See Figure 40–11A 
for the locations and projections of monoaminergic neurons.) 
In the spinal cord, these descending pathways inhibit nocicep-
tive projection neurons through direct connections as well as 
through interneurons in the superficial layers of the dorsal horn. 
Both the serotonergic nucleus raphe magnus and noradrener-
gic nuclei receive input from neurons in the periaqueductal gray 
region. Sites of opioid peptide expression and actions of exog-
enously administered opioids are shown.
Nucleus
raphe magnus
Serotonergic
pathway
Locus
ceruleus
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Site of opiate-
induced analgesia
Site of analgesia 
blockade
(using naloxone)
Noradrenergic
pathway
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Spinal
cord
originates in the locus ceruleus and other nuclei of the 
medulla and pons (Figure 20–17). Through direct and 
indirect synaptic actions, these projections inhibit neu-
rons in laminae I and V of the dorsal horn.
Opioid Peptides Contribute to Endogenous 
Pain Control
Since discovery of the opium poppy by the Sumerians 
in 3300 BC, the plant’s active ingredients, opiates such 
as morphine and codeine, have been recognized as 
powerful analgesic agents. Over the past two decades, 
we have begun to understand many of the molecular 
mechanisms and neural circuits through which opi-
ates exert their analgesic actions. In addition, we have 
come to realize that the neural networks involved in 
stimulation-produced and opiate-induced analgesia 
are intimately related.
Two key discoveries led to these advances. The 
first was the recognition that morphine and other opi-
ates interact with specific receptors on neurons in the 
spinal cord and brain. The second was the isolation 
of endogenous neuropeptides with opiate-like activi-
ties at these receptors. The observation that the opiate 
antagonist, naloxone, blocks stimulation-produced 
analgesia provided the first clue that the brain contains 
endogenous opioids.
Endogenous Opioid Peptides and Their Receptors 
Are Distributed in Pain-Modulatory Systems
Opioid receptors fall into four major classes: mu (μ), 
delta (δ), kappa (κ), and orphanin FQ. The genes 
encoding each of these receptor types constitute a sub-
family of G protein–coupled receptors. The μ receptors 
are particularly diverse; numerous μ receptor isoforms 
have been identified, many with different patterns of 
expression. This finding has prompted a search for 
analgesic drugs that target specific isoforms.
The opioid receptors were originally defined on 
the basis of the binding affinity of different agonist 
compounds. Morphine and other opioid alkaloids are 
potent agonists at μ receptors, and there is a tight cor-
relation between the potency of an analgesic and its 
affinity of binding to μ receptors. Mice in which the 
gene for the μ receptor has been inactivated are insen-
sitive to morphine and other opiate agonists. Many 
opiate antagonist drugs, such as naloxone, also bind to 
the μ receptor and compete with morphine for receptor 
occupancy without activating receptor signaling.
The μ receptors are highly concentrated in the 
superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord, the ventral 


===== Page 7 =====
490    Part IV / Perception
Table 20–1  Four Major Classes of Endogenous Opioid 
Peptides
Propeptide
Peptide(s)
Preferential 
receptor
POMC
β-Endorphin
Endomorphin-1
Endomorphin-2
μ/δ
μ
μ
Proenkephalin
Met-enkephalin
Leu-enkephalin
δ
δ
Prodynorphin
Dynorphin A
Dynorphin B
κ
κ
Pro-orphanin FQ
Orphanin FQ
Orphan receptor
POMC, pro-opiomelanocortin.
medulla, and the periaqueductal gray matter—important 
anatomical sites for the regulation of pain. Neverthe-
less, like other classes of opioid receptors, they are also 
found at many other sites in the central and periph-
eral nervous systems. Their widespread distribution 
explains why systemically administered morphine 
influences many physiological processes in addition to 
the perception of pain.
The discovery of opioid receptors and their expres-
sion by neurons in the central and peripheral nervous 
systems led to the definition of four major classes of 
endogenous opioid peptides, each interacting with a 
specific class of opioid receptors (Table 20–1).
Three classes—the enkephalins, β-endorphins, 
and dynorphins—are the best characterized. These 
opioid peptides are formed from large polypeptide 
precursors by enzymatic cleavage (Figure 20–18) 
and encoded by distinct genes. Despite differences 
in amino acid sequence, each contains the sequence  
Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe. β-Endorphin is a cleavage product of 
a precursor that also generates the active peptide adren-
ocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Both β-endorphin 
and ACTH are synthesized by cells in the pituitary and 
are released into the bloodstream in response to stress. 
Dynorphins are derived from the polyprotein product 
of the dynorphin gene.
Members of the four classes of opioid peptides are 
distributed widely in the central nervous system, and 
individual peptides are located at sites associated with 
the processing or modulation of nociceptive informa-
tion. Neuronal cell bodies and axon terminals contain-
ing enkephalin and dynorphin are found in the dorsal 
horn of the spinal cord, particularly in laminae I and 
II, as well as in the rostral ventral medulla and the 
periaqueductal gray matter. Neurons that synthesize 
β-endorphin are confined primarily to the hypothala-
mus; their axons terminate in the periaqueductal gray 
region and on noradrenergic neurons in the brain stem. 
Orphanin FQ appears to participate in a broad range of 
other physiological functions.
Morphine Controls Pain by Activating  
Opioid Receptors
Microinjection of low doses of morphine, other opi-
ates, or opioid peptides directly into specific regions of 
the rat brain produces a powerful analgesia. The peri-
aqueductal gray region is among the most sensitive 
sites, but local administration of morphine into other 
regions, including the spinal cord, also elicits a power-
ful analgesia.
Systemic morphine-induced analgesia can be 
blocked by injection of the opiate antagonist nalox-
one into the periaqueductal gray region or the nucleus 
raphe magnus (Figure 20–17). In addition, bilateral 
transection of the dorsal lateral funiculus in the spinal 
cord blocks analgesia induced by central administra-
tion of morphine. Thus, the central analgesic actions of 
morphine involve the activation of descending path-
ways to the spinal cord, the same descending pathways 
that mediate the analgesia produced by electrical brain 
stimulation and morphine.
In the spinal cord, as elsewhere, morphine acts by 
mimicking the actions of endogenous opioid peptides. 
The superficial dorsal horn of the spinal cord contains 
interneurons that express enkephalin and dynor-
phin, and the terminals of these neurons lie close to 
synapses formed by nociceptive sensory neurons and 
spinal projection neurons (Figure 20–19A). Moreover, 
the μ, δ, and κ receptors are located on the terminals 
of the nociceptive sensory neurons as well as on the 
dendrites of dorsal horn neurons that receive afferent 
nociceptive input, thus placing endogenous opioid 
peptides in a strategic position to regulate sensory 
input. The C-fiber nociceptors, which mediate slow 
persistent pain or “second pain,” have more μ recep-
tors than the Aδ nociceptors, which mediate fast and 
acute pain or “first pain” (Figure 20–1). This may help 
to explain why morphine is more effective in the treat-
ment of persistent rather than acute pains.
Opioids (both opiates and opioid peptides) regu-
late nociceptive transmission at synapses in the dor-
sal horn through two main mechanisms. First, they 
increase membrane K+ conductances in dorsal horn 
neurons, hyperpolarizing the neurons and increasing 
their threshold for activation. Second, by binding to 
receptors on presynaptic sensory terminals, opioids 
block voltage-gated Ca2+ channels, which reduces Ca+ 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 20 / Pain    491
B  Proteolytically processed opioid peptides
Methionine-enkephalin
Leucine-enkephalin
β-Endorphin
Dynorphin
α-Neoendorphin
Orphanin FQ
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Met OH
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Leu OH
Amino acid sequence
β-END
M
D
N
O
L
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Thr Gly Ala Arg Lys Ser Ala Arg Lys 
Leu Ala Asn Gln
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Leu Arg Lys Tyr Pro Lys
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Leu Arg Arg Ile Arg Pro Lys Leu Lys 
Trp Asp Asn Gln OH
Tyr Gly Gly Phe Met Thr Ser Glu Lys Ser Gln Thr Pro  
Leu Val Thr Leu Phe Lys Asn Ala Ile Val Lys Asn Ala 
His Lys Gly Gln OH
N
D
D
M M
M
M
M
M
L
Pre-proenkephalin
Pre-prodynorphin
γMSH
γ-LPH
β-END
αMSH
CLIP
O
Pre-proorphanin FQ
A  Precursor protein
Pre-proopiomelanocortin
Figure 20–18  Four families of endogenous opioid peptides 
arise from large precursor polyproteins.
A. Proteolytic enzymes cleave each of the precursor proteins 
to generate shorter, biologically active peptides, some of 
which are shown in this diagram. The proenkephalin precur-
sor protein contains multiple copies of methionine-enkephalin 
(M), leucine-enkephalin (L), and several extended enkephalins. 
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) contains β-endorphin (β-END, 
melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH), and corticotropin-like intermediate-lobe pep-
tide (CLIP). The prodynorphin precursor can produce dynorphin 
(D) and α-neoendorphin (N). The pro-orphanin precursor con-
tains the orphanin FQ peptide (O), also called nociceptin. The 
black domains indicate a signal peptide.
B. Amino acid sequences of proteolytically processed bioactive 
peptides. The amino acid residues shown in bold type mediate 
interaction with opioid receptors. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Fields 1987.)
entry into the sensory nerve terminal (Figure 20–19B). 
This effect in turn inhibits the release of neurotransmit-
ter and thereby decreases activation of postsynaptic 
dorsal horn neurons.
The wide distribution of opioid receptors within 
the brain and periphery accounts for the many side 
effects produced by opiates. Activation of opioid 
receptors expressed by muscles of the bowel and anal 
sphincter results in constipation. Similarly, opioid 
receptor–mediated inhibition of neuronal activity in 
the nucleus of the solitary tract underlies the respira-
tory depression and cardiovascular side effects. For 
this reason, direct spinal administration of opiates 
has significant advantages. Morphine injected into 
the cerebrospinal fluid of the spinal cord subarach-
noid space interacts with opioid receptors in the dor-
sal horn to elicit a profound and prolonged analgesia. 
Spinal administration of morphine is now commonly 
used in the treatment of postoperative pain, nota-
bly the pain associated with cesarean section during 
childbirth. In addition to producing prolonged anal-
gesia, intrathecal morphine has fewer side effects 
because the drug does not diffuse far from its site of 
injection. Continuous local infusion of morphine to 
the spinal cord has also been used for the treatment of 
certain cancer pains.


===== Page 9 =====
492    Part IV / Perception
Figure 20–19  Local interneurons in the spinal cord integrate 
descending and afferent nociceptive pathways.
A. Nociceptive afferent fibers, local interneurons, and descend-
ing fibers interconnect in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (see 
also Figure 20–3B). Nociceptive fibers terminate on second-
order projection neurons. Local GABAergic and enkephalin-
containing inhibitory interneurons exert both pre- and 
postsynaptic inhibitory actions at these synapses. Serotonergic 
and noradrenergic neurons in the brain stem activate the local 
interneurons and also suppress the activity of the projection 
neurons. Loss of these inhibitory controls contributes to  
ongoing pain and pain hypersensitivity.
B. Regulation of nociceptive signals at dorsal horn synapses.  
1. Activation of a nociceptor leads to the release of  
glutamate and neuropeptides from the primary sensory 
neuron, producing an excitatory postsynaptic potential in the 
projection neuron. 2. Opiates decrease the duration of the 
postsynaptic potential, probably by reducing Ca2+ influx, and 
thus decrease the release of transmitter from the primary 
sensory terminals. In addition, opiates hyperpolarize the 
dorsal horn neurons by activating a K+ conductance and thus 
decrease the amplitude of the postsynaptic potential in the 
dorsal horn neuron.
Norepinephrine
Serotonin
Nociceptor
sensory
neuron
Projection
neuron
Morphine
Morphine
Control
No sensory input
Sensory input
Neuropeptides
Ca2+
Glutamate
1  Sensory input alone
2  Sensory input + opiates/opioids
Control
Ca2+
Enkephalin
Enkephalin
No sensory input + opiates
Sensory input + opiates
Enkephalin
Enkephalin
Control
B  Effects of opiates and opioids on nociceptor signal transmission
Nociceptor
A  Nociceptor circuitry in the dorsal horn 
Opiate
Control
Projection
neuron
Enkephalin
interneuron
To higher 
centers
+
–
–
+


