===== Page 1 =====
37
The Cerebellum
The Cerebellum Is Necessary for Motor Learning in 
Several Different Movement Systems
Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum
Highlights
T
he cerebellum constitutes only 10%  of the 
total volume of the brain but contains more than 
one-half of its neurons. The cerebellar cortex 
comprises a series of highly regular, repeating units, 
each of which contains the same basic microcircuit. 
Different regions of the cerebellum receive projections 
from distinct brain and spinal structures and then pro-
ject back to the brain. The similarity of the architecture 
and physiology in all regions of the cerebellum implies 
that different regions of the cerebellum perform simi-
lar computational operations on different inputs.
The symptoms of cerebellar damage in humans 
and experimental animals provide compelling evi-
dence that the cerebellum participates in the control of 
movement. The symptoms, in addition to being diag-
nostic for clinicians, thus help define the possible roles 
of the cerebellum in controlling behavior.
Several fundamental principles define our under-
standing of the physiological function of the cerebel-
lum. First, the cerebellum acts in advance of sensory 
feedback arising from movement, thus providing feed-
forward control of muscular contractions. Second, to 
achieve such control, the cerebellum relies on internal 
models of the body to process and compare sensory 
inputs with copies of motor commands. Third, the cer-
ebellum plays a special role in motor and perceptual 
timing. Fourth, the cerebellum is critical for adapting 
Damage of the Cerebellum Causes Distinctive Symptoms  
and Signs
Damage Results in Characteristic Abnormalities of 
Movement and Posture
Damage Affects Specific Sensory and Cognitive Abilities
The Cerebellum Indirectly Controls Movement Through 
Other Brain Structures
The Cerebellum Is a Large Subcortical Brain Structure
The Cerebellum Connects With the Cerebral Cortex 
Through Recurrent Loops
Different Movements Are Controlled by Functional 
Longitudinal Zones
The Cerebellar Cortex Comprises Repeating Functional  
Units Having the Same Basic Microcircuit
The Cerebellar Cortex Is Organized Into Three 
Functionally Specialized Layers
The Climbing-Fiber and Mossy-Fiber Afferent Systems 
Encode and Process Information Differently
The Cerebellar Microcircuit Architecture Suggests a 
Canonical Computation
The Cerebellum Is Hypothesized to Perform Several  
General Computational Functions
The Cerebellum Contributes to Feedforward 
Sensorimotor Control
The Cerebellum  incorporates an Internal Model of the 
Motor Apparatus
The Cerebellum Integrates Sensory Inputs and  
Corollary Discharge
The Cerebellum Contributes to Timing Control
The Cerebellum Participates in Motor Skill Learning
Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic  
Efficacy of Parallel Fibers


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    909
and learning motor skills. Finally, the primate cerebel-
lum has extensive connectivity to nonmotor areas of 
the cerebral cortex, suggesting it performs similar 
functions in the performance and learning of motor 
and nonmotor behaviors.
Damage of the Cerebellum Causes Distinctive 
Symptoms and Signs
Damage Results in Characteristic Abnormalities of 
Movement and Posture
Disorders that involve the cerebellum typically disrupt 
normal movement patterns, demonstrating the cer-
ebellum’s critical role in movement. Patients describe 
a loss of the automatic, unconscious nature of most 
movements. In the early 20th century, Gordon Holmes 
recorded the self-report of a man with a lesion of his 
right cerebellar hemisphere: “movements of my left 
arm are done subconsciously, but I have to think out 
each movement of the right arm. I come to a dead stop 
in turning and have to think before I start again.”
This has been interpreted as an interruption in the 
automatic level of processing by cerebellar inputs and 
outputs. With a malfunctioning cerebellum, it seems that 
the cerebral cortex needs to play a more active role in 
programming the details of motor actions. Importantly, 
individuals with cerebellar damage do not experience 
the paralysis that can be associated with cerebral cortical 
damage. Instead, they show characteristic abnormalities 
in voluntary movement, walking, and posture that have 
provided important clues about cerebellar function.
The most prominent symptom of cerebellar dis-
orders is ataxia, or lack of coordination of movement. 
Ataxia is a generic term used to describe the collec-
tive motor features associated with cerebellar damage. 
People with cerebellar disorders make movements 
that qualitatively appear jerky, irregular, and highly 
variable. Limb ataxia during reaching is characterized 
by curved hand paths that are dysmetric in that they 
over- or undershoot the intended target and oscil-
late (Figure 37–1A). Patients often break a movement 
down into components, presumably in an effort to sim-
plify control of multi-joint movements (decomposition 
of movement). Yet this may not be effective. For exam-
ple, patients often have difficulty holding the shoul-
der steady while moving the elbow, a deficit thought 
to be due to poor predictions of how the movement 
at the elbow mechanically affects the shoulder (Figure 
37–1B). If prediction fails, then patients are forced to 
try to steady the shoulder using time-delayed feed-
back, which is less effective.
At the end of reaching movements, there can be 
marked oscillation as the hand approaches the target. 
This action (or intention) tremor is the result of a series 
of erroneous, overshooting attempts to correct the 
movement. It largely disappears when the eyes are 
shut, suggesting that it is driven by time-delayed vis-
ual feedback of the movement. Finally, patients show 
abnormalities in the rate and regularity of repeated 
movements, a sign referred to as dysdiadochokinesia 
(Greek, impaired alternating movement) that can be 
readily demonstrated when a patient attempts to per-
form rapid alternating movements (Figure 37–1C).
People with cerebellar damage also exhibit gait ataxia 
and poor balance. When walking, they take steps that are 
irregularly timed and placed. They have difficulty shift-
ing their weight from one foot to the other, which can 
lead to falling. The trunk oscillates when they are unsup-
ported in sitting, standing, and during walking, particu-
larly as they start, stop, or turn. A wide stepping pattern 
with feet spread apart is common and is thought to be a 
compensatory measure to improve stability.
Other signs that are commonly observed with 
cerebellar dysfunction can also occur with damage to 
other brain regions. People with cerebellar damage 
often have slurred speech with irregular timing (dys-
arthria); repetitive to-and-fro movements of the eyes 
with a slow and fast phase (nystagmus); and reduced 
resistance to passive limb displacements (hypotonia), 
which is thought to be related to so-called “pendu-
lar reflexes” often observed in cerebellar patients. In 
patients with cerebellar disease, the leg may oscillate 
like a pendulum many times after a knee jerk produced 
by a tap on the patellar tendon with a reflex hammer, 
instead of coming to rest immediately.
Damage Affects Specific Sensory and  
Cognitive Abilities
It is now known that cerebellar damage affects pro-
prioceptive abilities (the sense of limb position and 
movement), but only during active movement. Pro-
prioceptive acuity—the sense of the position and 
movement of the limbs—is normally more precise for 
active movements than for passive movements. Cer-
ebellar patients show normal proprioceptive acuity 
when they have to judge which of two passive move-
ments is larger. However, their proprioceptive acuity 
is worse than that of healthy individuals when they 
move a limb actively. One interpretation of these find-
ings is that the cerebellum normally helps to predict 
how active movements will unfold, which would be 
important for movement coordination and for perceiv-
ing where the limbs are during active movements.


===== Page 3 =====
910    Part V / Movement
Figure 37–1  (Left) Typical defects observed in cerebellar 
diseases.
A. A cerebellar patient moving his arm from a raised position to 
touch the tip of his nose exhibits inaccuracy in range and direc-
tion (dysmetria) and moves his shoulder and elbow separately 
(decomposition of movement). Tremor increases as the finger 
approaches the nose.
B. Failure of compensation for interaction torques can account 
for cerebellar ataxia. Subjects flex their elbows while keep-
ing their shoulder stable. In both the control subject and the 
cerebellar patient, the net elbow torque is large because the 
elbow is moved. In the control subject, there is relatively little 
net shoulder torque because the interaction torques are auto-
matically cancelled by muscle torques. In the cerebellar patient, 
this compensation fails; the muscle torques are present but are 
inappropriate to cancel the interaction torques. As a result, the 
patient cannot flex her elbow without causing a large perturba-
tion of her shoulder position. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Bastian, Zackowski, and Thach 2000.)
C. A subject was asked to alternately pronate and supinate the 
forearm while flexing and extending at the elbow as rapidly as 
possible. Position traces of the hand and forearm show the nor-
mal pattern of alternating movements and the irregular pattern 
(dysdiadochokinesia) typical of cerebellar disorder.
Control
Cerebellar damage
Normal
Abnormal
A
B
C
Normal
Abnormal
Start
Finish
Damage to the cerebellum also affects cogni-
tive processes, although these deficits are less obvi-
ous compared to the pronounced disturbances of 
sensory–motor function. Some of the earliest studies 
implicating the cerebellum in a range of cognitive tasks 
involved functional imaging to study the brain activ-
ity during behavior in healthy individuals. For exam-
ple, in a study using positron emission tomography to 
image the brain activity of subjects during silent read-
ing, reading aloud, and speech, areas of the cerebellum 
involved in the control of mouth movements were more 
active when subjects read aloud than when they read 
silently. Surprisingly, however, cerebellar activation 
was more pronounced in a task with greater cognitive 
load, when subjects were asked to name a verb associ-
ated with a noun; a subject might respond with “bark” 
if he or she saw the word “dog.” Compared with sim-
ply reading aloud, the word-association task produced 
a pronounced increase in activity within the right lat-
eral cerebellum. Consistent with this finding, a patient 
with damage in the right cerebellum could not learn a 
word-association task.
By now, many studies have revealed clear defi-
cits in executive function, visual spatial cognition, 
language, and emotional processing after cerebellar 
damage. There appears to be some regional specific-
ity within the cerebellum for different types of cogni-
tive function. Damage to the midline cerebellum or 
vermis seems to be related to emotional or affective 
dysregulation, likely due to its interconnectivity with 
limbic structures. Damage to the right cerebellar hemi-
sphere is related to language and verbal dysfunction, 
presumably because this hemisphere is interconnected 
with the left cerebral cortical hemisphere. Likewise, 
damage to the left cerebellar hemisphere is related to 
visuospatial dysfunction, probably because this hemi-
sphere is interconnected with the right cerebral cortical 
hemisphere. Additionally, studies that examine cogni-
tive dysfunction produce variable results; patients 
perform normally in one study but not another. Some 
studies show that cognitive deficits are most pro-
nounced when patients are tested shortly after dam-
age to the cerebellum and that compensations at the 
level of cerebral cortex might gradually make up for 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    911
cerebellar loss of function. However, cognitive deficits 
may be more robust and long lasting when cerebellar 
damage is acquired in childhood.
Thus, cognitive deficits arising from cerebellar 
damage sometimes can be difficult to characterize. 
What is clear is that the motor dysfunction after cer-
ebellar loss is more obvious than cognitive dysfunc-
tion. It may be that cortical regions of motor control are 
less able to compensate for losses of cerebellar motor 
control compared to cortical compensation for impair-
ment of cerebellar computations involved in cognitive 
processes.
The Cerebellum Indirectly Controls Movement 
Through Other Brain Structures
Understanding the anatomy of the cerebellum and 
how it interacts with different brain structures is vital 
to understanding its function. In this section, we con-
sider the general anatomy of the cerebellum as well as 
its inputs and outputs.
The Cerebellum Is a Large Subcortical  
Brain Structure
The cerebellum occupies most of the posterior cranial 
fossa. It is composed of an outer mantle of gray mat-
ter (the cerebellar cortex), internal white matter, and 
three pairs of deep nuclei: the fastigial nucleus, the 
interposed nucleus (itself composed of the emboliform 
and globose nuclei), and the dentate nucleus (Figure 
37–2A). The surface of the cerebellum is highly convo-
luted, with many parallel folds or folia (Latin, leaves).
Two deep transverse fissures divide the cerebel-
lum into three lobes. The primary fissure on the dor-
sal surface separates the anterior and posterior lobes, 
which together form the body of the cerebellum  
(Figure 37–2A). The posterolateral fissure on the ven-
tral surface separates the body of the cerebellum from 
the smaller flocculonodular lobe (Figure 37–2B). Each 
lobe extends across the cerebellum from the midline 
to the most lateral tip. In the orthogonal, anterior-
posterior direction, two longitudinal furrows separate 
three regions: the midline vermis (Latin, worm) and 
the two cerebellar hemispheres, each split into inter-
mediate and lateral regions (Figure 37–2D).
The cerebellum is connected to the dorsal aspect 
of the brain stem by three symmetrical pairs of pedun-
cles: the inferior cerebellar peduncle (also called the 
restiform body), the middle cerebellar peduncle (or 
brachium pontis), and the superior cerebellar peduncle 
(or brachium conjunctivum). Most of the output axons 
of the cerebellum arise from the deep nuclei and pro-
ject through the superior cerebellar peduncle to other 
brain areas. The main exception is a group of Purkinje 
cells in the flocculonodular lobe that project to vestibu-
lar nuclei in the brain stem.
The Cerebellum Connects With the Cerebral  
Cortex Through Recurrent Loops
Many parts of the cerebellum form recurrent loops 
with the cerebral cortex. The cerebral cortex projects 
to the lateral cerebellum through relays in the pon-
tine nuclei. In turn, the lateral cerebellum projects 
back to the cerebral cortex through relays in the thala-
mus. Peter Strick and his colleagues used viruses for 
transneuronal tracing in nonhuman primates to show 
that this recurrent circuit is organized as a series of par-
allel closed loops, where a given part of the cerebellum 
connects reciprocally with a specific part of the cer-
ebral cortex (Figure 37–3A). Through these reciprocal 
connections, the cerebellum interacts with vast regions 
of the neocortex, including substantial connections to 
motor, prefrontal, and posterior parietal regions. More 
recently, Strick’s group also demonstrated disynaptic 
connections between the cerebellum and basal ganglia 
in nonhuman primates.
The resting state connectivity between the cerebel-
lum and cerebral cortex in humans was studied using 
fMRI scans of 1,000 subjects. Correlations in activity in 
different regions of the brain were assessed at low fre-
quencies, measured by blood flow while subjects were 
at rest. They found that different regions of the cerebel-
lum are functionally connected with cerebral cortical 
regions across the entire cerebral cortex (Figure 37–3C). 
Taken together, these studies demonstrate the vast 
impact the cerebellum could have on many aspects of 
brain function.
Different Movements Are Controlled by  
Functional Longitudinal Zones
The cerebellum can be broadly divided into three areas 
that have distinctive roles in different kinds of move-
ments: the vestibulocerebellum, spinocerebellum, and 
cerebrocerebellum (Figure 37–4).
The vestibulocerebellum consists of the flocculonod-
ular lobe and is the most primitive part of the cerebel-
lum. It receives vestibular and visual inputs, projects to 
the vestibular nuclei in the brain stem, and participates 
in balance, other vestibular reflexes, and eye move-
ments. It receives information from the semicircular 
canals and the otolith organs, which sense the head’s 
motion and its position relative to gravity. Most of this 


===== Page 5 =====
912    Part V / Movement
Midbrain
Tonsil
Flocculus
Nodulus
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Cerebellar peduncles:
Flocculonodular lobe:
Primary
ﬁssure
A  Dorsal view
B  Ventral view
C  Midsagittal section
Pons
Posterolateral
ﬁssure
Medulla
Posterolateral 
ﬁssure
Centralis II, III
Lingula I
Culmen 
IV, V
Declive 
VI
Folium 
VIIa
Tuber 
VIIb
Pyramis 
VIII
Uvula IX
Nodulus X
Cerebellar 
peduncles:
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Primary ﬁssure
Vermis
Caudate 
nucleus
Putamen
Internal 
capsule
Thalamus
Hemisphere
Dentate
nucleus
Emboliform nucleus
Globose nucleus
Fastigial
nucleus
Tonsil
Interposed nuclei:
Cerebrocerebellum
(lateral hemispheres)
Spinocerebellum
(vermis and 
intermediate 
hemispheres)
Vestibulocerebellum
(ﬂocculonodular node)
D  Motor and cognitive functional regions
Figure 37–2  Gross features of the cerebellum. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Nieuwenhuys, Voogd, and van Huijzen 
1988.)
A. Part of the right hemisphere has been cut away to reveal the 
underlying cerebellar peduncles.
B. The cerebellum is shown detached from the brain stem.
C. A midsagittal section through the brain stem and cerebellum 
shows the branching structure of the cerebellum. The cerebellar 
lobules are labeled with their Latin names and Larsell’s Roman 
numeral designations. (Reproduced, with permission, from Lar-
sell and Jansen 1972.)
D. Functional regions of the cerebellum.
vestibular input arises from the vestibular nuclei in the 
brain stem. The vestibulocerebellum also receives vis-
ual input, from both the pretectal nuclei that lie deep 
in the midbrain beneath the superior colliculus and the 
primary and secondary visual cortex through the pon-
tine and pretectal nuclei.
The vestibulocerebellum is unique in that its 
output bypasses the deep cerebellar nuclei and pro-
ceeds directly to the vestibular nuclei in the brain 
stem. Purkinje cells in the midline parts of the ves-
tibulocerebellum project to the lateral vestibular 
nucleus to modulate the lateral and medial ves-
tibulospinal tracts, which predominantly control 
axial muscles and limb extensors to assure balance 
during stance and gait (Figure 37–5A). Disruption of 
these projections through lesions or disease impairs 
equilibrium.
The most striking deficits following lesions of the 
lateral vestibulocerebellum are in smooth-pursuit eye 
movement toward the side of the lesion. A patient 
with a lesion of the left lateral vestibulocerebellum 
can smoothly track a target that is moving to the right, 
but only poorly tracks motion to the left, using sac-
cades predominantly (Figure 37–6A). These patients 
can have normal vestibulo-ocular reflex responses 
to head rotations but cannot suppress the reflex by 
fixating an object that rotates with the head (Figure 
37–6B). These deficits occur commonly if the lateral 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    913
Figure 37–3  The cerebellum connects to many areas of 
cerebral cortex. (Parts A and B adapted, with permission, 
from Bostan, Dum, and Strick 2013. Copyright © 2013 Elsevier 
Ltd. part C adapted, with permission, from Buckner et al. 2011. 
Copyright © 2011 American Physiological Society.)
A. The cortical-cerebellar circuit in monkeys was traced with 
fluorescence-labeled transsynaptic viruses that can move in an 
anterograde or retrograde direction. Injection into the cerebral 
cortex of a retrograde virus, such as rabies virus, will label 
neurons that project to it and, by crossing synapses, can label 
second- and possibly higher-order neurons in a pathway. These 
are shown here in red as first-order (thalamus), second-order 
(deep nucleus), and third-order neurons (Purkinje cells). Injec-
tion into the cerebral cortex of an anterograde virus, such as 
the H129 strain of herpes simplex virus, will label neurons that 
are targets of the cerebral cortex. These are shown here in 
yellow as first-order (pons), second-order (granule cells), and 
third-order neurons (Purkinje cells). (Abbreviations: DN, dentate 
nuclei; GC, granule cell; H129, strain of herpes simplex virus; 
PC, Purkinje cell rabies virus.)
B. Areas of the cerebral cortex connected to the cerebellum. 
The numbers refer to cytoarchitectonic areas. (Abbreviations: 
AIP, anterior intraparietal area; M1, face, arm, and leg areas of 
the primary motor cortex; PMd arm, arm area of the dorsal pre-
motor area; PMv arm, arm area of the ventral premotor area; 
PrePMd, predorsal premotor area; PreSMA, presupplementary 
motor area; SMA arm, arm area of the supplementary motor 
area.)
C. Color-coded coronal section of the human cerebellum (top) 
and lateral and medial views of the human cerebral cortex  
(bottom) created from resting state functional connectivity 
maps (based on functional magnetic resonance imaging scans 
of 1,000 subjects). Colors correspond to cerebellar and cerebral 
areas that are connected. Note that the cerebellum is function-
ally connected with nearly all cerebral areas. (Abbreviations: 
HF, horizontal fissure; PF, primary fissure.)
A  Cortical-cerebellar circuit
B  Cortical-cerebellar connections in the monkey
C  Cortical-cerebellar connections in the human
HF
SMA
Cerebral
cortex
Retrograde
transport
Anterograde
transport
1st
order
3rd order
2nd
order
1st
order
2nd
order
Rabies virus
H129
PC
DN
GC
Thalamus
Pons
M1
PMd
Arm
Pre-PMd
PMv
Arm
Leg
Face
AIP
7b
Arm
Leg
Pre SMA
9m
9I
46d
PF


===== Page 7 =====
914    Part V / Movement
F
IP
D
Input
Vestibular 
nuclei
Spinocerebellar
and pontine 
nuclei
Pontine 
nuclei
Spinocerebellar 
nuclei
Association  
cortex
Somatosensory 
receptors (limbs), 
motor cortex
Somatosensory 
receptors (trunk),  auditory 
and visual information
Somatosensory 
receptors (neck), labyrinths, 
and visual information
Vestibular 
nuclei
Output
Motor, prefrontal, 
premotor, and 
parietal cortices
Interneurons (spinal 
cord), inferior olive, 
other brain stem nuclei
Motor and interneurons
(spinal cord and 
brain stem)
Ventrolateral 
thalamus
Red nucleus 
reticular nuclei
Vestibular 
nuclei
Cerebrocerebellum
Spinocerebellum
Vestibulocerebellum
Spinocerebellar paths (and
vestibulocerebellar and 
pontocerebellar paths)
Vestibulocerebellar paths 
(and spinocerebellar and 
pontocerebellar paths)
Figure 37–4  The three functional regions of the cerebel-
lum have different inputs and different output targets.  The 
cerebellum is shown unfolded, and arrows indicate the inputs 
and outputs of the different functional areas. The body maps in 
the deep nuclei are based on anatomical tracing and single-cell 
recordings in nonhuman primates. (Abbreviations: D, dentate 
nucleus; F, fastigial nucleus; IP, interposed nucleus.) (Adapted, 
with permission, from Brooks and Thach 1981).


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    915
Figure 37–5  Input and output pathways of the  
cerebellum.
A. Nuclei in the vestibulocerebellum and the vermis control 
proximal muscles and limb extensors. The vestibulocerebel-
lum (flocculonodular lobe) receives input from the vestibular 
labyrinth and projects directly to the vestibular nuclei. The 
vermis receives input from the neck and trunk, the vestibular 
labyrinth, and retinal and extraocular muscles. Its output is 
focused on the ventromedial descending systems of the brain 
stem, mainly the reticulospinal and vestibulospinal tracts and 
the corticospinal fibers acting on medial motor neurons. The 
oculomotor connections of the vestibular nuclei have been 
omitted for clarity.
B. Nuclei in the intermediate and lateral parts of the cerebellar 
hemispheres control limb and axial muscles. The intermedi-
ate part of each hemisphere (spinocerebellum) receives sen-
sory information from the limbs and controls the dorsolateral 
descending systems (rubrospinal and corticospinal tracts) acting 
on the ipsilateral limbs. The lateral area of each hemisphere (cer-
ebrocerebellum) receives cortical input via the pontine nuclei and 
influences the motor and premotor cortices via the ventrolateral 
nucleus of the thalamus, and directly influences the red nucleus.
A
B
Thalamus
(ventrolateral
nucleus)
Primary and 
premotor
cortex
To limb muscle
Pyramidal
decussation
Dentate
nucleus
Cerebrocerebellum
Spinocerebellum
Interposed
nuclei
Red nucleus
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
Corticospinal 
tract
Rubrospinal 
tract
+
Thalamus
(ventrolateral
nucleus)
Primary and 
premotor
cortex
Limb
extensors
(antigravity
muscles)
Axial and proximal
(antigravity muscles)
Medullary
reticular
formation
Lateral
vestibular
nucleus
Fastigial
nucleus
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
Vermis
+
Flocculonodular
lobe


===== Page 9 =====
916    Part V / Movement
Leftward 
head rotation
Eye
position
Eye
position
Rightward 
head rotation
A
B
L
R
Dark
Light
(tracking 
object)
1 Normal VOR
 eye movement
 during both 
 rotations
2 Normal ﬁxation only 
 during rightward 
 rotation when leftward 
 VOR is suppressed 
Smooth
movement
Saccade
Target
Gaze
Position
Time
Figure 37–6  Lesions in the vestibulocerebellum have large 
effects on smooth-pursuit eye movements.
A. Sinusoidal target motion is tracked with smooth-pursuit eye 
movements as the target moves from left (L) to right (R). With a 
lesion of the left vestibulocerebellum, smooth pursuit is punctu-
ated by saccades when the target moves from right to left.
B. In the same patient, responses to vestibular stimulation are 
normal, whereas object fixation is disrupted during leftward 
rotation. The traces on the left and right show the eye move-
ments evoked by rightward and leftward head rotation experi-
enced in separate sessions. In each session the patient sat in a 
chair that rotated continuously in one direction, first in the dark 
then in the light while fixating on a target that moves along 
with him. (1) In the dark, the eyes show a normal vestibulo-
ocular reflex (VOR) during rotation in both directions: The eyes 
move smoothly in the direction opposite to the head’s rotation, 
then reset with saccades in the direction of head rotation. (2) In 
the light, the eye position during rightward head rotation is nor-
mal: Fixation on the target is excellent and the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex is suppressed. During leftward head rotation, however, 
the subject is unable to fixate on the object and the vestibulo-
ocular reflex cannot be suppressed.
vestibulocerebellum is compressed by an acoustic 
neuroma, a benign tumor that grows on the eighth 
cranial nerve as it courses directly beneath the lateral 
vestibulocerebellum.
The spinocerebellum is composed of the vermis and 
intermediate parts of the cerebellar hemispheres 
(Figure 37–4). It is so named because it receives exten-
sive input from the spinal cord via the dorsal and ven-
tral spinocerebellar tracts. These pathways convey 
information about touch, pressure, and limb position 
as well as the spiking activity of spinal interneurons. 
Thus, these inputs provide the cerebellum with varied 
information about the changing state of the organism 
and its environment.
The vermis receives visual, auditory, and vestib-
ular input as well as somatic sensory input from the 
head and proximal parts of the body. It projects by 
way of the fastigial nucleus to cortical and brain stem 
regions that give rise to the medial descending systems 
controlling proximal muscles of the body and limbs 
(Figure 37–5A). The vermis governs posture and loco-
motion as well as eye movements. For example, lesions 
of the oculomotor region of the vermis cause saccadic 
eye movements that overshoot their target, much as 
patients with cerebellar damage make arm movements 
that overshoot their target.
The adjacent intermediate parts of the hemispheres 
also receive somatosensory input from the limbs. Neu-
rons here project to the interposed nucleus, which 
provides inputs to lateral corticospinal and rubrospi-
nal systems on the contralateral side of the brain and 
controls the more distal muscles of the limbs and dig-
its (Figure 37–5B). Because corticospinal and rubrospi-
nal systems cross the midline as they descend to the 
spinal cord, cerebellar lesions disrupt ipsilateral limb 
movements.


