===== Page 1 =====
924    Part V / Movement
Figure 37–11  Long-term depression of the synaptic input 
from parallel fibers to Purkinje cells is one plausible mecha-
nism for cerebellar learning.
A. Two different groups of parallel fibers and the presynaptic 
climbing fibers are electrically stimulated in vitro. Repeated 
stimulation of one set of parallel fibers (PF1) at the same 
time as the climbing fibers produces a long-term reduction 
in the responses of those parallel fibers to later stimulation. 
The responses of a second set of parallel fibers (PF2) are not 
depressed because they are not stimulated simultaneously 
with the presynaptic climbing fibers. (Abbreviations: CF,  
climbing fiber; EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential.) 
(Adapted from Ito et al. 1982.)
B. Top: An accurate wrist movement by a monkey is accom-
panied by a burst of simple spikes in a Purkinje cell, followed 
later by discharge of a single climbing fiber in one trial. Middle: 
When the monkey must make the same movement against 
a novel resistance (adaptation), climbing-fiber activity occurs 
during movement in every trial and the movement itself over-
shoots the target. Bottom: After adaptation, the frequency of 
simple spikes during movement is quite attenuated, and the 
climbing fiber is not active during movement or later. This is the 
sequence of events expected if long-term depression in the 
cerebellar cortex plays a role in learning. Climbing fiber activity 
is usually low (1/s) but increases during adaptation to a novel 
load. (Adapted, with permission, from Gilbert and Thach 1977.)
Climbing-Fiber Activity Changes the Synaptic 
Efficacy of Parallel Fibers
Climbing fibers can selectively induce long-term 
depression in the synapses between parallel fibers 
and Purkinje cells that are activated concurrently 
with the climbing fibers. Many studies in brain slices 
and cultured Purkinje cells have found that concur-
rent stimulation of climbing fibers and parallel fibers 
depresses the Purkinje cell responses to subsequent 
stimulation of the same parallel fibers. The depres-
sion is selective for the parallel fibers that were acti-
vated in conjunction with the climbing-fiber input 
A
B
Accurate movement prior to loading
Adaptation to novel load
After adaptation
Climbing
ﬁber ﬁres
PF1
PF2
PF2
PF2
PF1/CF
PF1
Test
Adapt
Test
Parallel ﬁber EPSPs recorded in Purkinje cell
Training
Paired (PF1)        
Unpaired (PF2)
Before 
training
After 
training
Purkinje
cell
Wrist
movement
Granule 
cell
Purkinje
cell
Mossy 
ﬁber
Climbing
ﬁber
PF1
PF2
Inferior Olive
and does not appear in synapses from parallel fibers 
that had not been stimulated along with climbing fib-
ers (Figure 37–11A). The resulting depression can last 
for minutes to hours.
Many studies in a variety of motor learning sys-
tems have recorded activity in Purkinje cells that is 
consistent with the predictions of the cerebellar learn-
ing theory. For example, if an unexpected resistance is 
applied to a well-practiced arm movement, extra mus-
cle tension will be required to move. Climbing fiber 
activity can signal error until the unexpected resist-
ance is learned. They presumably depress the synaptic 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    925
strength of parallel fibers involved in generating those 
errors, namely those that drove Purkinje simple-spike 
firing at the time of the climbing-fiber activity (Figure 
37–11B). With successive movements, the parallel-fiber 
inputs conveying the flawed central command are 
increasingly suppressed, a more appropriate pattern of 
simple-spike activity emerges, and eventually move-
ment errors disappear, along with the climbing-fiber 
error signal. Although this kind of result is consistent 
with the theory of cerebellar learning, it stops short of 
proving that the neural and behavioral learning was 
caused by long-term depression of the synapses from 
parallel fibers onto Purkinje cells.
The Cerebellum Is Necessary for Motor Learning in 
Several Different Movement Systems
The cerebellum is involved in learning a wide variety 
of movements, ranging from limb and eye movements 
to walking. In each movement system, motor learning 
operates to improve the feedforward control of move-
ment. Errors render motor control transiently depend-
ent on sensory feedback, and motor learning restores 
the ideal situation where performance is accurate 
without relying on sensory feedback.
Adaptation of limb movements that rely on eye–
hand coordination can be demonstrated by having 
people wear prisms that deflect the light path side-
ways. When a person plays darts while wearing prism 
goggles that displace the entire visual field to the left, 
the initial dart throw lands to the left side of the tar-
get by an amount proportional to the strength of the 
prisms. The subject gradually adapts to the distortion 
through practice; within 10 to 30 throws, the darts land 
on target (Figure 37–12). When the prisms are removed, 
the adaptation persists, and the darts hit to the right of 
the target by roughly the same distance as the initial 
prism-induced error. Patients with a damaged cerebel-
lar cortex or inferior olive are severely impaired or 
unable to adapt at all in this test.
Classical conditioning of the eye-blink response 
also depends on an intact cerebellum. In this form of 
associative learning, a puff of air is directed at the cor-
nea, causing the eye to blink at the end of a neutral 
stimulus such as a tone. If the tone and the puff are 
paired repeatedly with a fixed duration of the tone, 
then the brain learns the tone’s predictive power and 
the tone alone is sufficient to cause a blink. Michael 
Mauk and his colleagues have shown that the brain 
also can learn about the timing of the stimulus so that 
the eye blink occurs at the right time. It is even possible 
to learn to blink at different times in response to tones 
of different frequencies.
All forms of conjugate eye movement require the 
cerebellum for correct performance, and each form is 
subject to motor learning that involves the cerebel-
lum. For example, the vestibulo-ocular reflex normally 
keeps the eyes fixed on a target when the head is rotated 
(Chapter 27). Motion of the head in one direction is 
sensed by the vestibular labyrinth, which initiates eye 
movements in the opposite direction to prevent visual 
images from slipping across the retina. When humans 
and experimental animals wear glasses that change the 
size of a visual scene, the vestibulo-ocular reflex ini-
tially fails to keep images stable on the retina because 
the amplitude of the reflex is inappropriate to the new 
conditions. After the glasses have been worn continu-
ously for several days, however, the size of the reflex 
becomes progressively reduced (for miniaturizing 
glasses) or increased (for magnifying glasses) (Figure 
37–13A). These changes are required to prevent images 
from slipping across the retina because magnified (or 
miniaturized) images also move faster (or slower). The 
performance of the baseline vestibulo-ocular reflex 
does not depend heavily on the cerebellum, but its 
adaptation does and can be blocked in experimental 
animals by lesions of the lateral part of the vestibu-
locerebellum called the floccular complex.
Saccadic eye movements also depend on the integ-
rity of Purkinje cells in the oculomotor vermis in lobules 
V, VI, and VII of the vermis (Figure 37–2C). These cells 
discharge prior to and during saccades, and lesions 
of the vermis cause saccades to become hypermetric, 
much as we see in the arm movements of cerebellar 
patients. The outputs from neurons of the vermis con-
cerned with saccades are transmitted through a very 
small region of the caudal fastigial nucleus to the sac-
cade generator in the reticular formation.
The same Purkinje cells participate in a form of 
motor learning called saccadic adaptation. This adap-
tation is demonstrated by having a monkey fixate on a 
target straight ahead and then displaying a new target 
at an eccentric location. During the saccade to the new 
target, the experimenter moves the new target to a more 
eccentric location. Initially, the subject needs to make a 
second saccade to fixate on the target. Gradually, over 
several hundred trials, the first saccade grows in ampli-
tude so that it brings the eye directly to the final loca-
tion of the target (Figure 37–13B). Recordings during 
saccadic adaptation have revealed that climbing fiber 
inputs to the Purkinje cells in the oculomotor vermis 
signal saccadic errors during learning, and the simple-
spike firing rate of the same cells adapts gradually 
along with the monkey’s eye movements. Thus, the 
oculomotor vermis is a likely site for motor learning 
of the amplitude of saccadic eye movements. The story 


===== Page 3 =====
926    Part V / Movement
Figure 37–12  Adjustment of eye–hand coordination to a 
change in optical conditions.  The subject wears prism gog-
gles that bend the optic path to her right. She must look to her 
left along the bent light path to see the target directly ahead. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Martin et al. 1996).
A. Without prisms, the subject throws with good accuracy (I). 
The first hit after the prisms have been put in place is displaced 
left of center because the hand throws where the eyes are 
directed. Thereafter, hits trend rightward toward the target, 
away from where the eyes are looking (II). After removal of the 
prisms, the subject fixes her gaze in the center of the target; 
the first throw hits to the right of center, away from where the 
eyes are directed. Thereafter, hits trend toward the target (III). 
Immediately after removing the prisms, the subject directs her 
gaze toward the target; her adapted throw is to the right of the 
direction of gaze and to the right of the target (IV). After recov-
ery from adaptation, she again looks at and throws toward the 
target (V). Data during and after prism use have been fit with 
exponential curves. Gaze and throw directions are indicated 
by the blue and brown arrows, respectively, on the right. The 
inferred gaze direction assumes that the subject is fixating the 
target.
B. Adaptation fails in a patient with unilateral infarctions in the 
territory of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery that affect the 
inferior cerebellar peduncle and inferior lateral posterior cer-
ebellar cortex.
A
B
–50
0
50
Left
Right
Before
Throw direction
Gaze direction
I
II
III
IV
V
Prisms
After
Before
Prisms
After
–50
0
Left
Right
50
Horizontal displacement (cm)
Horizontal displacement (cm)
Time


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    927
Figure 37–13  Cerebellar learning in the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex and in saccadic eye movements.
A. Motor learning in the vestibulo-ocular reflex of a monkey 
wearing magnifying spectacles. The columns show normal 
conditions before learning, the situation when the monkey first 
dons the spectacles (day 0), and after complete adaptation (day 
3). Eye movements are normally equal and opposite to head 
turns, and the banana stays stable in the retina during head 
turns. With the spectacles on, the banana appears larger; when 
the head turns, the vestibulo-ocular reflex is too small and the 
banana’s image slips across the retina. After adaptation, the 
eye movements are large enough that the image of the banana 
again remains stable on the retina during head turns. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Lisberger 1988.)
B. Motor learning in saccadic eye movements. The columns 
show saccades under normal conditions, on the first adaptation 
trial, and after full adaptation. Normally, the saccade responds 
to a change in target position by bringing the eye almost per-
fectly to the new target position. During adaptation, the target 
moves to a new position during the initial saccade, requiring a 
second saccade to bring the eye to the new, final target posi-
tion. After adaptation, the original target position evokes a 
larger saccade that is appropriate to bring the eye to the new 
target position, even though the target does not move.
A
Normal
Wearing magnifying spectacles
B
Normal
Target
Eye
1
2
1
2
3
1
2
3
Adaptation to displaced target
Time
After adaptation
Day 0
Head
rotation
Head
movement
Slippage
Eye
movement
Eye
movement
Retinal
image
Day 3


===== Page 5 =====
928    Part V / Movement
Figure 37–14  Learning in the cerebellar microcircuit can 
occur in the cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar 
nuclei.  The diagram is based on classical conditioning of blink-
ing, which is driven by pairing a tone (so-called conditioned 
stimulus carried by mossy fibers) and an air puff (the uncon-
ditioned stimulus carried by climbing fibers). Learning occurs 
at the parallel fiber–Purkinje cell synapses when the climbing 
fiber and parallel fibers are active together. Learning also occurs 
at the mossy-fiber synapse onto the deep cerebellar nuclei. 
(Sites of learning are denoted by asterisks.) While this example 
diagrams a classical conditioning paradigm, plasticity occurs at 
the same sites during adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex 
when head turns are associated with image motion on the 
retina (Chapter 27). (Adapted, with permission, from Carey and 
Lisberger 2002.)
is very similar for smooth-pursuit eye movements, 
except that the relevant part of the cerebellum is the 
floccular complex, using the same Purkinje cells that 
participate in adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex.
Finally, learning of new walking patterns has 
been studied in cerebellar patients using a split-belt 
treadmill that requires one leg to move faster than the 
other. Cerebellar damage does not impair the ability 
to use feedback to immediately change the walking 
pattern when the two belt speeds differ: Patients can 
lengthen the time that they stand on the slower tread-
mill belt and shorten the time that they stand on the 
faster treadmill belt. However, cerebellar patients can-
not learn over hundreds of steps to make their walking 
pattern symmetric, whereas healthy individuals can 
(see Figure 30–14).
Learning Occurs at Several Sites in the Cerebellum
We know now that there are many sites of synaptic and 
cellular plasticity in the cerebellar microcircuit. Almost 
every synapse that has been studied undergoes either 
potentiation or depression, and the theory of cerebel-
lar learning has been broadened accordingly. Detailed 
analyses of the role of cerebellar circuits in motor learn-
ing have been conducted in several motor systems: 
adaptation of multiple kinds of eye movements, clas-
sical conditioning of the eye blink, and motor learning 
in arm movements.
In today’s broadened theory of cerebellar learn-
ing, learning occurs not only in the cerebellar cortex, 
as postulated by Marr, Albus, and Ito, but also in the 
deep cerebellar nuclei (Figure 37–14). Our under-
standing of learning in the cerebellar cortex is based 
partly on long-term depression of the synapses from 
parallel fibers to Purkinje cells, but many other syn-
apses are characterized by plasticity, and they also 
probably participate. Available evidence is still com-
patible with the long-standing idea that inputs from 
climbing fibers provide the primary instructive sig-
nals that lead to changes in synaptic strength within 
the cerebellar cortex, but now there is room for the 
possibility of other instructive signals as well. Learn-
ing probably results from coordinated synaptic plas-
ticity at multiple sites rather than from changes at a 
single site.
Studies of classical conditioning of the eye blink 
and adaptation of the vestibulo-ocular reflex provide 
strong evidence that learning occurs in both the cer-
ebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei. Further, 
considerable evidence suggests that learning may 
occur first in the cerebellar cortex and then be trans-
ferred to the deep cerebellar nuclei. At least for eye 
Inferior 
olive
Purkinje 
cell
Parallel ﬁber
Granule
cell
Mossy
ﬁber
–
–
–
–
Climbing 
ﬁber
Inhibitory 
interneuron
Deep 
cerebellar
nucleus
Learned 
response
Tone
Air puff
*
*
*
blink conditioning, the cerebellar cortex may play a 
special role in learning timing.
As discussed earlier, the cerebellum makes use of 
internal models to ensure smooth and accurate move-
ment in advance of any guidance by sensory feedback. 
Synaptic changes that lead to circuit learning could 
be the mechanisms that create and maintain accurate 
internal models. One important function of learning 
in the cerebellum may be the continuous tuning of 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    929
internal models. Cerebellar internal models may use 
sensory feedback to adjust synaptic and cellular func-
tion so that motor commands produce movements that 
are rapid, accurate, and smooth. Thus, the cerebellum 
appears to be the learning machine envisioned by the 
earliest investigators, but its learning capabilities may 
be greater and more widely dispersed than originally 
imagined and may affect all cerebellar contributions to 
behavior.
Highlights
1.	 The cerebellum plays a critical role in movement. 
Damage to the cerebellum leads to profound 
movement incoordination called ataxia, which 
affects all movements ranging from eye and limb 
movements to balance and walking. Cerebellar 
damage also leads to some sensory deficits but 
only during active movement.
2.	 The cerebellum also plays a role in cognitive and 
emotional behavior. Deficits in these domains are 
less immediately obvious after cerebellar damage 
but appear with formalized testing. There is prob-
ably a common mechanism for deficits across both 
motor and nonmotor domains, but the mechanism 
is not yet understood.
3.	 The cerebellum acts through its connections to 
other brain structures. Its inputs come indirectly 
from wide regions of the cerebral cortex, as well as 
from the brainstem and spinal cord. Cerebellar out-
puts project to the vestibular nuclei, the brainstem 
reticular formation, and the red nucleus and via the 
thalamus to wide regions of the cerebral cortex.
4.	 Reciprocal connections between the cerebellum 
and the cerebral cortex include sensory and motor 
cortices as well as wide regions of the parietal and 
prefrontal cortices. Cerebrocerebellar connections 
are organized as a series of parallel, closed, recur-
rent loops, where a given region of the cerebral 
cortex makes both efferent and afferent connec-
tions with a given part of the cerebellum.
5.	 The circuit of the cerebellar cortex is highly ste-
reotyped, suggesting a common computational 
mechanism for its interactions with other brain 
regions. It includes an input granular layer where 
mossy fibers synapse on granule cells and Golgi 
cells provide inhibitory feedback; an inhibitory 
Purkinje cell layer, with the sole output neurons of 
the cerebellar cortex; and a molecular layer where 
Purkinje cell dendrites and inhibitory interneu-
rons receive inputs from the parallel fibers that 
emerge from the axons of granule cells.
6.	 The climbing-fiber and mossy-fiber inputs to the 
cerebellum are very different anatomically. Each 
Purkinje cell receives many synaptic contacts from 
a single climbing fiber but can be influenced via 
granule cells by a huge number of mossy fibers. 
Climbing fibers fire at very low frequencies and 
cause unitary “complex spikes” in Purkinje cells. 
Mossy fibers cause “simple spikes” that can dis-
charge at very high rates. It is thought that the inter-
play between these inputs is essential for learning.
7.	 Theories of cerebellar motor control emphasize 
several general principles. The cerebellum is 
important for generating reliable feedforward 
action before there has been time for useful sen-
sory feedback to occur. It plays a key role in the 
internal control of timing. The cerebellum relies on 
computations that combine sensory inputs with 
corollary discharge reporting the movement that 
was commanded. Internal models of the motor 
effector organs and the world allow the cerebel-
lum to estimate the state of the motor system and 
guide accurate feedforward actions.
8.	 Learning and adaptation of movement are fun-
damental functions of the cerebellum. Cerebel-
lar learning requires feedback about movement 
errors and updates movement on a trial-by-trial 
basis. There are many sites of synaptic plasticity 
in the cerebellum, and current evidence for motor 
learning systems supports at least two sites of 
learning in the cerebellum. One site involves long-
term depression of the synapses from parallel fib-
ers to Purkinje cells, guided by errors signaled by 
climbing-fiber inputs. The other site is in the deep 
cerebellar nuclei. It is likely that the same learning 
mechanism is used for cognitive and emotional 
processing.
 Amy J. Bastian  
 Stephen G. Lisberger 
Selected Reading
Bodranghien F, Bastian A, Casali C, et al. 2016. Consensus 
paper: revisiting the symptoms and signs of cerebellar 
syndrome. Cerebellum 15:369–391.
Bostan AC, Dum RP, Strick PL. 2013. Cerebellar networks 
with the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia. Trends Cogn 
Sci 17:241–254.


===== Page 7 =====
930    Part V / Movement
Boyden ES, Katoh A, Raymond JL. 2004. Cerebellum-dependent 
learning: the role of multiple plasticity mechanisms. Annu 
Rev Neurosci 27:581–609.
Ito M. 1984. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. New York: 
Raven.
Raymond JL, Lisberger SG, Mauk MD. 1996. The cerebellum: 
a neuronal learning machine? Science 272:1126–1131.
Stoodley CJ, Schmahmann JD. 2010. Evidence for topographic 
organization in the cerebellum of motor control versus 
cognitive and affective processing. Cortex 46:831–844.
References
Adamaszek M, D’Agata F, Ferrucci R, et al. 2017. Consensus 
paper: cerebellum and emotion. Cerebellum 16:552–576.
Adrian ED. 1943. Afferent areas in the cerebellum connected 
with the limbs. Brain 66:289–315.
Albus JS. 1971. A theory of cerebellar function. Math Biosci 
10:25–61.
Arshavsky YI, Berkenblit MB, Fukson OI, Gelfand IM, 
Orlovsky GN. 1972. Recordings of neurones of the dor-
sal spinocerebellar tract during evoked locomotion. Brain 
Res 43:272–275.
Arshavsky YI, Berkenblit MB, Fukson OI, Gelfand IM, 
Orlovsky GN. 1972. Origin of modulation in neurones of 
the ventral spinocerebellar tract during locomotion. Brain 
Res 43:276–279.
Bastian AJ, Martin TA, Keating JG, Thach WT. 1996. Cerebel-
lar ataxia: abnormal control of interaction torques across 
multiple joints. J Neurophysiol 176:492–509.
Bastian AJ, Zackowski KM, Thach WT. 2000. Cerebellar ataxia: 
torque deficiency or torque mismatch between joints?  
J Neurophys 83:3019–3030.
Bhanpuri NH, Okamura AM, Bastian AJ. 2013. Predictive 
modeling by the cerebellum improves proprioception.  
J Neurosci 33:14301–14306.
Brooks VB, Thach WT. 1981. Cerebellar control of posture and 
movement. In Handbook of Physiology, The Nervous System, 
Sect. I, Vol. 2, ed. V. B. Brooks, pp. 877–46. Bethesda: Am 
Physiol Soc.
Brooks JX, Carriot J, Cullen KE. 2015. Learning to expect the 
unexpected: rapid updating in primate cerebellum during 
voluntary self-motion. Nat Neurosci 18:1310–1317.
Buckner RL, Krienen FM, Castellanos A, Diaz JC, Yeo BT. 
2011 The organization of the human cerebellum esti-
mated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 
106:2322–2345.
Courchesne E, Yeung-Courchesne R, Press GA, Hesselink JR, 
Jernigan TL. 1988. Hypoplasia of cerebellar vermal lob-
ules VI and VII in autism. N Engl J Med 318:1349–1354.
Carey MR, Lisberger SG. 2002. Embarrassed but not 
depressed: some eye opening lessons for cerebellar learn-
ing. Neuron 35: 223–226.
Eccles JC, Ito M, Szentagothai J. 1967. The Cerebellum as a 
Neuronal Machine. New York: Springer.
Fiez JA, Petersen SE, Cheney MK, Raichle ME. 1992. Impaired 
non-motor learning and error detection associated with 
cerebellar damage. Brain 115:155–178.
Flament D, Hore J. 1986. Movement and electromyographic 
disorders associated with cerebellar dysmetria. J Neuro-
physiol 55:1221–1233.
Gao Z, van Beugen BJ, De Zeeuw CI. 2012. Distributed syner-
gistic plasticity and cerebellar learning. Nat Rev Neurosci 
13:619–635.
Ghasia FF, Meng H, Angelaki DE. 2008. Neural correlates of for-
ward and inverse models for eye movements: evidence from 
three-dimensional kinematics. J Neurosci 28:5082–5087.
Gilbert PFC, Thach WT. 1977. Purkinje cell activity during 
motor learning. Brain Res 128:309–328.
Groenewegen HJ, Voogd J. 1977. The parasagittal zonation 
within the olivocerebellar projection. I. Climbing fiber 
distribution in the vermis of cat cerebellum. J Comp Neurol 
174:417–488.
Heck DH, Thach WT, Keating JG. 2007. On-beam synchrony 
in the cerebellum as the mechanism for the timing and 
coordination of movement. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
104:7658–7663.
Hore J, Flament D. 1986. Evidence that a disordered servo-
like mechanism contributes to tremor in movements dur-
ing cerebellar dysfunction. J Neurophysiol 56:123–136.
Ito M, Sakurai M, Tongroach P. 1982. Climbing fibre induced 
depression of both mossy fibre responsiveness and glu-
tamate sensitivity of cerebellar Purkinje cells. J Physiol 
Lond 324:113–134.
Ivry RB, Keele SW. 1989. Timing functions of the cerebellum. 
J Cogn Neurosci 1:136–152.
Jansen J, Brodal A (eds). 1954. Aspects of Cerebellar Anatomy. 
Oslo: Grundt Tanum.
Kelly RM, Strick PL. 2003. Cerebellar loops with motor cortex 
and prefrontal cortex of a nonhuman primate. J Neurosci 
23:8432–8444.
Kim SG, Ugurbil K, Strick PL. 1994. Activation of a cerebel-
lar output nucleus during cognitive processing. Science 
265:949–951.
Larsell O, Jansen J. 1972. The Comparative Anatomy and His-
tology of the Cerebellum: The Human Cerebellum, Cerebellar 
Connection and Cerebellar Cortex, pp. 111–119. Minneapolis, 
MN: Univ. of Minnesota Press.
Lisberger SG. 1988. The neural basis for motor learning in 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex in monkeys. Trends in Neurosci 
11:147–152.
Lisberger SG. 1994. Neural basis for motor learning in the 
vestibulo-ocular reflex of primates. III. Computational and 
behavioral analysis of the sites of learning. J Neurophysiol 
72:974–998.
Lisberger SG, Fuchs AF. 1978. Role of primate flocculus dur-
ing rapid behavioral modification of vestibulo-ocular 
reflex. I. Purkinje cell activity during visually guided hori-
zontal smooth-pursuit eye movements and passive head 
rotation. J Neurophysiol 41:733–763.
Marr D. 1969. A theory of cerebellar cortex. J Physiol 
202:437–470.
Martin TA, Keating JG, Goodkin HP, Bastian AJ, Thach 
WT. 1996. Throwing while looking through prisms. I. 
Focal olivocerebellar lesions impair adaptation. Brain 
119:1183–1198.


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 37 / The Cerebellum    931
Martinez FE, Crill WE, Kennedy TT. 1971. Electrogenesis of 
cerebellar Purkinje cell responses in cats. J Neurophysiol 
34:348–356.
McCormick DA, Thompson RF. 1984. Cerebellum: essen-
tial involvement in the classically conditioned eyelid 
response. Science 223:296–299.
Medina JF, Lisberger SG. 2008. Links from complex spikes 
to local plasticity and motor learning in the cerebellum 
of awake-behaving monkeys. Nat Neurosci 11:1185–1192.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. 1981. The human 
central nervous system: a synopsis and atlas. Springer.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen Chr. 1988. The Human 
Central Nervous System: A Synopsis and Atlas, 3rd rev. ed. 
Berlin: Springer.
Ohyama T, Nores WL, Medina JF, Riusech FA, Mauk MD. 
2006. Learning-induced plasticity in deep cerebellar 
nucleus. J Neurosci 26:12656–12663.
Pasalar S, Roitman AV, Durfee WK, Ebner TJ. 2006. Force 
field effects on cerebellar Purkinje cell discharge 
with implications for internal models. Nat Neurosci 
9:1404–1411.
Robinson DA. 1976. Adaptive gain control of vestibuloocular 
reflex by the cerebellum. J Neurophysiol 39:954–969.
Strata P, Montarolo PG. 1982. Functional aspects of the infe-
rior olive. Arch Ital Biol 120:321–329.
Strick PL, Dum RP, Fiez JA. 2009. Cerebellum and nonmotor 
function. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:413–434.
Thach WT. 1968. Discharge of Purkinje and cerebellar nuclear 
neurons during rapidly alternating arm movements in the 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 31:785–797.
Tseng YW, Diedrichsen J, Krakauer JW, Shadmehr R,  
Bastian AJ. 2007. Sensory prediction errors drive  
cerebellum-dependent adaptation of reaching. J Neuro-
physiol 98:54–62.
Yeo CH, Hardiman MJ, Glickstein M. 1984. Discrete lesions 
of the cerebellar cortex abolish the classically conditioned 
nictitating membrane response of the rabbit. Behav Brain 
Res 13:261–266.


===== Page 9 =====
38
The Basal Ganglia
Throughout Vertebrate Evolution, the Basal Ganglia Have 
Been Highly Conserved
Action Selection Is a Recurring Theme in  
Basal Ganglia Research
All Vertebrates Face the Challenge of Choosing One 
Behavior From Several Competing Options
Selection Is Required for Motivational, Affective, 
Cognitive, and Sensorimotor Processing
The Neural Architecture of the Basal Ganglia Is 
Configured to Make Selections
Intrinsic Mechanisms in the Basal Ganglia  
Promote Selection
Selection Function of The Basal Ganglia  
Questioned
Reinforcement Learning Is an Inherent Property of a 
Selection Architecture
Intrinsic Reinforcement Is Mediated by Phasic Dopamine 
Signaling Within the Basal Ganglia Nuclei
Extrinsic Reinforcement Could Bias Selection by 
Operating in Afferent Structures
Behavioral Selection in the Basal Ganglia Is Under  
Goal-Directed and Habitual Control
Diseases of the Basal Ganglia May Involve Disorders of 
Selection
A Selection Mechanism Is Likely to Be Vulnerable to 
Several Potential Malfunctions
Parkinson Disease Can Be Viewed in Part as a Failure to 
Select Sensorimotor Options
Huntington Disease May Reflect a Functional Imbalance 
Between the Direct and Indirect Pathways
Schizophrenia May Be Associated With a General Failure 
to Suppress Nonselected Options
The Basal Ganglia Network Consists of Three Principal Input 
Nuclei, Two Main Output Nuclei, and One Intrinsic Nucleus
The Striatum, Subthalamic Nucleus, and Substantia 
Nigra Pars Compacta/Ventral Tegmental Area Are the 
Three Principal Input Nuclei of the Basal Ganglia
The Substantia Nigra Pars Reticulata and the Internal 
Globus Pallidus Are the Two Principal Output Nuclei of 
the Basal Ganglia
The External Globus Pallidus Is Mostly an Intrinsic 
Structure of the Basal Ganglia
The Internal Circuitry of the Basal Ganglia Regulates How 
the Components Interact
The Traditional Model of the Basal Ganglia Emphasizes 
Direct and Indirect Pathways
Detailed Anatomical Analyses Reveal a More  
Complex Organization
Basal Ganglia Connections With External Structures Are 
Characterized by Reentrant Loops
Inputs Define Functional Territories in the  
Basal Ganglia
Output Neurons Project to the External Structures That 
Provide Input
Reentrant Loops Are a Cardinal Principle of Basal 
Ganglia Circuitry
Physiological Signals Provide Further Clues to Function in 
the Basal Ganglia
The Striatum and Subthalamic Nucleus Receive Signals 
Mainly from the Cerebral Cortex, Thalamus,  
and Ventral Midbrain
Ventral Midbrain Dopamine Neurons Receive Input 
From External Structures and Other Basal Ganglia Nuclei
Disinhibition Is the Final Expression of  
Basal Ganglia Output


