===== Page 1 =====
460    Part IV / Perception
several competing responses is transmitted, permit-
ting a winner-take-all strategy. These circuits prevent 
blurring of tactile details such as texture when large 
populations of touch neurons are stimulated. In addi-
tion, higher centers in the brain use inhibitory circuits 
to focus attention on relevant information from the 
hand when it is used in skilled tasks, by suppressing 
unwanted, distracting inputs.
The size and position of receptive fields on the skin 
are not fixed permanently but can be modified by expe-
rience or injury to sensory nerves (Chapter 53). Cortical 
receptive fields appear to be formed during develop-
ment and maintained by simultaneous activation of 
the input pathways. If a peripheral nerve is injured or 
transected, its cortical projection targets acquire new 
receptive fields from less effective sensory inputs that 
are normally suppressed by inhibitory networks, or 
from newly developed connections from neighboring 
skin areas that retain innervation. Likewise, extensive 
stimulation of afferent pathways through repeated 
practice may strengthen synaptic inputs, improving 
perception and thereby performance.
Touch Information Becomes Increasingly 
Abstract in Successive Central Synapses
Somatosensory information is conveyed in parallel 
from the four areas of S-I to higher centers in the 
cortex, such as the secondary somatosensory cortex 
(S-II), the posterior parietal cortex, and the primary 
motor cortex (Figure 19–17C). As information flows 
toward higher-order cortical areas, specific com-
binations of stimulus patterns are needed to excite 
individual neurons.
Signals from neighboring neurons are combined 
in higher cortical areas to discern global properties of 
objects such as their orientation on the hand, or the 
direction of motion (Figure 19–19). In general, corti-
cal neurons in higher cortical areas are concerned with 
sensory features that are independent of the stimu-
lus position in their receptive field, abstracting object 
properties common to a particular class of stimuli.
A cortical neuron is able to detect the orientation 
of an edge or the direction of motion because of the 
spatial arrangement of the presynaptic receptive fields. 
The receptive fields of the excitatory presynaptic neu-
rons are typically aligned along a common axis that 
generates the preferred orientation of the postsynaptic 
neuron. In addition, the receptive fields of inhibitory 
presynaptic neurons at one side of the excitatory fields 
reinforce the orientation and direction selectivity of 
postsynaptic neurons (Figure 19–18B).
Cognitive Touch Is Mediated by Neurons in the 
Secondary Somatosensory Cortex
An S-I neuron’s response to touch depends primarily 
on input from within the neuron’s receptive field. This 
feedforward pathway is often described as a bottom-up 
process because the receptors in the periphery are the 
principal source of excitation of S-I cortical neurons.
Higher-order somatosensory areas not only receive 
information from peripheral receptors but are also 
strongly influenced by top-down cognitive processes, 
such as goal-setting and attentional modulation. Data 
obtained from a variety of studies—single-neuron stud-
ies in monkeys, neuroimaging studies in humans, and 
clinical observations of patients with lesions in higher-
order somatosensory areas—suggest that the ventral and 
dorsal regions of the parietal lobe serve complementary 
functions in the touch system similar to the “what” and 
“where” pathways of the visual system (see Figure 17–13).
S-II is located on the upper bank and adjacent pari-
etal operculum of the lateral sulcus in both humans 
and monkeys (Figures 19–12B and 19–20B). Like S-I, 
the S-II cortex contains four distinct anatomical sub-
regions with separate maps of the body. The central 
zone—consisting of S-II proper and the adjacent pari-
etal ventral area—receives its major input from areas 
3b and 1, largely tactile information from the hand and 
face. A more rostral region, the parietal rostroventral 
area, receives information from area 3a about active 
hand movements as well as tactile information from 
areas 3b and 1 (Figure 19–20). The most caudal soma-
tosensory region of the lateral sulcus extends onto the 
parietal operculum (Figure 19–12A). This region abuts 
the posterior parietal cortex and plays a role in inte-
grating somatosensory and visual properties of objects.
Physiological studies indicate that S-II plays key 
roles in tactile recognition of objects placed in the hand 
(stereognosis), distinguishing spatial features, such as 
shape and texture, and temporal properties, such as 
vibratory frequency. The receptive fields of neurons in 
S-II are larger than those in S-I, covering the entire sur-
face of the hand, and are often bilateral, representing 
symmetric, mirror-image locations on the contralateral 
and ipsilateral hands. Such large receptive fields enable 
us to sense the shape of an entire large object grasped 
in one hand, allowing us to integrate the overall con-
tours of a tool as it contacts the palm and different fin-
gers. Bilateral receptive fields enable us to perceive still 
larger objects with two hands, such as a watermelon or 
basketball, sharing the load between them.
The large receptive fields of S-II neurons also 
influence their physiological responses to motion and 
vibration. S-II neurons do not represent vibration as 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    461
R
D
A  Motion-sensitive neurons
B  Direction-sensitive neurons
C  Orientation-sensitive neurons
P
D
D
P
D
P
R
U
R
U
R
U
Distal-proximal axis
Ulnar-radial axis
2
1 s
Figure 19–19  Neurons in area 2 encode complex tactile 
information. These neurons respond to motion of a probe 
across the receptive field but not to touch at a single point. The 
lower trace indicates the direction of motion by upward and 
downward deflections. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Warren, Hämäläinen, and Gardner 1986.)
A. A motion-sensitive neuron responds to stroking the skin in 
all directions.
B. A direction-sensitive neuron responds strongly to motion 
toward the ulnar side of the palm but fails to respond to motion 
in the opposite direction. Responses to distal or proximal move-
ments are weaker.
C. An orientation-sensitive neuron responds better to motion 
across a finger (ulnar-radial) than to motion along the finger 
(distal-proximal), but does not distinguish ulnar from radial or 
proximal from distal directions.
periodic spike trains linked to the oscillatory frequency, 
as do the sensory fibers from the skin or S-I neurons  
(Figure 19–9). Instead, S-II neurons abstract temporal 
or intensive properties of the vibratory stimulus, fir-
ing at different mean rates for different frequencies. A 
similar frequency-dependent transition from tempo-
ral- to rate-coding neurons underlies sound processing 
in primary auditory cortex (Chapter 28), a brain region 
juxtaposed to S-II cortex in the parietal operculum.
Importantly, the firing rates of S-II neurons 
depend on the behavioral context or motivational 
state of the subject. In elegant recent studies, Ran-
ulfo Romo and his colleagues compared responses to 
vibratory stimuli of neurons in S-I, S-II, and various 
regions of the frontal lobe of monkeys while the ani-
mals performed a two-alternative forced-choice task. 
The animals were rewarded if they correctly recog-
nized which of two vibratory stimuli was higher in 
frequency.
Neurons in S-I faithfully represent the vibratory 
cycles of each stimulus using a temporal code: they fire 
brief spike bursts in phase with each cycle (Figure 19–9B). 


===== Page 3 =====
462    Part IV / Perception
Figure 19–20  Responses in S-I and S-II 
to active touch are more complex than 
those evoked by passive touch. Cortical 
regions in the human brain stimulated by 
passive and active touch are localized using 
functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI). (Adapted, with permission, from 
Hinkley et al. 2007.)
A. Axial views of activity along the cen-
tral sulcus during passive stroking of the 
right hand with a sponge (right panel) and 
during active touching of the sponge (left 
panel). Areas 3b and 1 are activated in the 
left hemisphere in both conditions. Active 
touch also engages the primary motor cor-
tex (M1) in the left hemisphere, the anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC), and evokes weak 
activity in the ipsilateral S-I (right hemi-
sphere). These sites were confirmed inde-
pendently using magnetoencephalography 
in the same subjects.
B. Axial views of activity along the Sylvian 
fissure in the same experiment. Bilateral 
activity occurs in S-II and the parietal ven-
tral (PV) area during passive stroking and is 
stronger when the subject actively moves 
the hand. The parietal rostroventral area 
(PR) is active only during active touch. Mag-
netoencephalographic responses in S-II/
PV and PR occur later than in S-I, reflecting 
serial processing of touch from S-I to S-II/
PV and from S-II/PV to PR.
A  Activity along the central sulcus (S-I)
B  Activity along the lateral sulcus (S-II)
Passive touch
Active touch 
A
B
S-I
PR
S-II/PV
S-II/PV
S-II/PV
PR
PR
6
0
0
8
S-I/M1
ACC
ACC
In contrast, S-II neurons respond to the first stimulus with 
nonperiodic spike trains in which their mean firing rates 
are directly or inversely correlated with the vibratory fre-
quency (Figure 19–21A). Their responses to the second 
stimulus are even more abstract. S-II spike trains combine 
the frequencies of both stimuli (Figure 19–21B). In other 
words, S-II responses to vibration depend on the stimulus 
context: the same vibratory stimulus can evoke different 
firing rates depending on whether the preceding stimulus 
is higher or lower in frequency.
Even more interesting, Romo’s group found that 
neurons in S-II send copies of the spike trains evoked 
by the first stimulus to the prefrontal and premotor 
cortex in order to preserve a memory of that response. 
Neurons in these frontal cortical areas continue to fire 
during the delay period after the first stimulus ends. 
Romo and colleagues proposed that these regions in 
the frontal lobe send the memory signal back to S-II 
when the second stimulus occurs, thereby modifying 
the response of S-II neurons to the direct tactile signals 
from the hand. In this manner, sensorimotor memories 
of previous stimuli influence sensory processing in the 
brain, allowing subjects to make cognitive judgments 
about newly arriving tactile stimuli.
S-II is the gateway to the temporal lobe via the 
insular cortex. Regions of the medial temporal lobe, 
particularly the hippocampus, are vital to the storage of 
explicit memory (Chapter 53). We do not store in mem-
ory every scintilla of tactile information that enters the 
nervous system, only that which has some behavioral 
significance. In light of the demonstration that the fir-
ing patterns of S-II neurons are modified by selective 
attention, S-II could make the decision whether a par-
ticular bit of tactile information is remembered.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    463
Figure 19–21  The sensitivity of an S-II neuron to vibratory 
stimuli is modulated by attention and behavioral condi-
tions. A monkey was trained to compare two vibratory stimuli 
applied at a 3-second interval to the fingertips (f1 and f2) and 
to indicate which had the higher frequency. The plots show the 
mean firing rates of the neuron during each of the two stimuli. 
The animal’s decision about which frequency is higher can be 
predicted from the neural data during each type of trial. The 
mean firing rates of this neuron are significantly higher at each 
stimulation frequency when f2 is greater than f1 than when 
f2 is less than f1. (Adapted, with permission, from Romo et al. 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Springer Nature.)
A. Raster plots show the responses of an S-II neuron to various 
sample stimuli (f1). The vertical tick marks in each row denote 
action potentials, and individual rows are separate trials of the 
stimulus pairs. Trials are grouped according to the frequencies 
tested. The firing rate of the neuron encodes the vibratory fre-
quency of the sample stimulus; it is higher for low-frequency 
vibration regardless of the subsequent events. Note that the 
firing patterns recorded in S-II are not phase-locked to the vibra-
tory cycle as in S-I (see Figure 19–9B).
B. Each row in the raster plots illustrates responses to the 
comparison stimulus (f2) during the same trials shown in A. 
The neuron’s response to f2 reflects the frequency of both f2 
and f1. When f2 > f1, the neuron fires at high rates during f2 
and the animal reports that f2 is the higher frequency. When 
f2 < f1, the neuron fires at low rates during f2 and the animal 
reports that f1 is the higher frequency. In this manner, the 
responses of S-II neurons reflect the animal’s memory of an 
earlier event.
14 
30 
22 
Hz
B  Responses to comparison stimulus (f2)
22 
A  Responses to ﬁrst stimulus (f1)
100
20
Impulses/s
Impulses/s
10
20
30
100
20
10
20
30
Frequency (Hz)
Frequency (Hz)
200 ms
200 ms
S-II
14 
30 
22 
Hz
22 
f2 > f1
f2 < f1
Active Touch Engages Sensorimotor Circuits in the 
Posterior Parietal Cortex
Studies in the mid-1970s by Vernon Mountcastle, Juhani 
Hyvärinen, and others demonstrated that regions of 
the posterior parietal cortex surrounding the intra-
parietal sulcus play an important role in the sensory 
guidance of movement rather than in discriminative 
touch. These regions include areas 5 and 7 in monkeys 
and the superior parietal lobule (Brodmann’s areas 5 
and 7) and inferior parietal cortex (areas 39 and 40) in 
humans. These and subsequent studies demonstrated 
that neural activity in the posterior parietal cortex dur-
ing reaching and grasping coincides with activation 
of neurons in motor and premotor areas of the fron-
tal cortex and precedes activity in S-I. Areas 5 and 7 


===== Page 5 =====
464    Part IV / Perception
are postulated to be engaged in the planning of hand 
actions, because the posterior parietal cortex receives 
convergent central and peripheral signals that allow it 
to compare central motor commands with somatosen-
sory feedback during reaching and grasping behav-
iors. Sensory feedback from S-I to the posterior parietal 
cortex is used to confirm the goal of the planned action, 
thereby reinforcing previously learned skills or cor-
recting those plans when errors occur.
Predicting the sensory consequences of hand 
actions is an important component of active touch. For 
example, when we view an object and reach for it, we 
predict how heavy it should be and how it should feel in 
the hand; we use such predictions to initiate grasping. 
Daniel Wolpert and Randy Flanagan have proposed 
that during active touch the motor system controls 
the afferent flow of somatosensory information to the 
brain so that subjects can predict when tactile infor-
mation should arrive in S-I and reach consciousness. 
Convergence of central and peripheral signals allows 
neurons to compare planned and actual movements. 
Corollary discharge from motor areas to somatosen-
sory regions of the cortex may play a key role in active 
touch. It provides posterior parietal cortex neurons 
with information on intended actions, allowing them 
to learn new skills and perform them smoothly.
Lesions in Somatosensory Areas of the Brain 
Produce Specific Tactile Deficits
Patients with lesions in S-I cortex have difficulty respond-
ing to simple tactile tests: touch thresholds, vibration 
and joint position sense, and two-point discrimination 
(Figure 19–22A). These patients also perform poorly on 
more complex tasks, such as texture discrimination, ste-
reognosis, and visual–tactile matching tests.
Loss of tactile sensation in the hand produces sig-
nificant motor as well as sensory deficits. Motor deficits 
are less pronounced than sensory losses, particularly 
during tests of force and position control. Exploratory 
movements and skilled tasks such as catching a ball or 
pinching small objects between the fingertips are also 
abnormal.
Local anesthesia of sensory nerve fibers in the hand 
provides a direct way to appreciate the sensorimotor 
role of touch. Under local anesthesia of the median and 
ulnar nerves, hand movements are clumsy and poorly 
coordinated, and force generation during grasping is 
abnormally slow. With the loss of tactile sensibility, 
one is completely reliant on vision for directing the 
hand. Loss of touch does not cause paralysis or weak-
ness because much of skilled movement is predictive, 
relying on sensory feedback for adjustment if neces-
sary. The motor system in these subjects compensates 
for the absence of tactile information by generating 
more force than necessary.
These motor problems are exacerbated by long-
term, chronic loss of tactile function because of injury 
to peripheral nerves or dorsal column lesions. Deaf-
ferentation produces major changes in the afferent 
connections in the brain, as do certain diseases. Myeli-
nated afferent fibers in the dorsal columns degenerate 
in patients with demyelinating diseases, such as mul-
tiple sclerosis. In late-stage syphilis, the large-diameter 
neurons in the dorsal root ganglia are destroyed (tabes 
dorsalis). These patients have severe chronic deficits in 
touch and proprioception but often little loss of tem-
perature perception and nociception. The somatosen-
sory losses are accompanied by motor deficits: clumsy 
and poorly coordinated movements and dystonia. 
Similar impairments occur in patients with damage to 
S-I caused by stroke or head trauma, or following sur-
gical excision of the postcentral gyrus.
Patients with lesions in the posterior parietal 
cortex usually have only mild difficulty with simple 
tactile tests. However, they have profound difficulty 
with complex tactile recognition tasks and use few 
exploratory and skilled movements (Figure 19–22B). 
They display kinematic deficits when interacting with 
objects, failing to shape and orient the hand properly 
to grasp them and misdirecting the arm during reach-
ing. They typically use too much grip force when an 
object is placed in their hand and are unable to direct 
the fingers properly when asked to evaluate its size 
and shape. These deficits are described clinically as the 
“useless hand” syndrome (tactile apraxia).
Studies of sensory deficits in human patients are 
complicated by the fact that disease states or trauma 
rarely produce damage confined to one localized brain 
area. For this reason, analyses of experimentally con-
trolled lesions in animals have been useful for under-
standing the etiology of the sensory deficits observed 
in human patients. For example, macaque monkeys 
with a lesion of the cuneate fascicle show chronic 
losses in tactile discrimination, such as higher touch 
thresholds, impaired vibration sense, and poor two-
point discrimination. They also display major deficits 
in the control of fine finger movements during groom-
ing, scratching, and object manipulation. A similar 
deficit in skilled movements can be produced experi-
mentally in monkeys by inhibiting the neurons in the 
hand-representation region of area 2.
Experimental ablation of somatosensory areas of 
the cortex in monkeys has provided valuable informa-
tion about the function of these areas. Small lesions 


===== Page 6 =====
Figure 19–22  Lesions of anterior and posterior regions of 
the parietal lobe produce characteristic sensory and motor 
deficits of the hand. Bar graphs rank the performance of nine 
patients (a–i) with unilateral parietal cortex brain lesions on four 
sets of standardized tests of sensory and motor function of 
the contralateral hand. The behavioral scores are ranked from 
normal (10) to maximal deficit (0). The normal range shown is 
the performance score of these patients for the ipsilateral hand. 
Tests of simple somatosensory function include light touch 
from a 1-g force-calibrated probe, two-point discrimination on 
the finger and palm, vibration sense, and position sense of the 
index finger metacarpophalangeal joint. Tests of complex tactile 
recognition assess texture discrimination, form recognition, 
and size discrimination. Tests of hand position and force control 
measure grip force, tapping, and reaching to a target. Tests of 
exploratory and skilled movements evaluate insertion of pegs in 
slots, pincer grip of small objects, and exploratory movements 
when palpating objects. (Adapted, with permission, from Pause 
et al. 1989. Copyright © 1989, Oxford University Press.)
A. Two patients with lesions to the anterior parietal lobe show 
severe impairment in both sets of tactile tests but only moder-
ate impairment in the motor tasks.
B. Three patients with posterior parietal lesions show only 
minor deficits in simple somatosensory tests but severe impair-
ment in complex tests of stereognosis and form. Motor deficits 
are greater in skilled tasks.
C. Four patients with combined lesions to anterior and posterior 
parietal cortex show severe impairment in all tests. Interest-
ingly, the patient who showed the least impairment in this 
group (patient f) suffered brain damage at birth; the developing 
brain was able to compensate for the loss of major somatosen-
sory areas. Lesions in the other patients resulted from strokes 
later in life.
B  Posterior parietal lesions
C  Combined anterior and posterior parietal lesions
A  Anterior parietal lesions
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
A
B
C
a
c
d
e
b
f
g
h
i
Normal range
Score
Score
Score
Simple somatosensory
function
Complex tactile
recognition
Hand position and
force control
Exploratory and
skilled movements


===== Page 7 =====
466    Part IV / Perception
Figure 19–23  Finger coordination is disrupted when synap-
tic transmission in the somatic sensory cortex is inhibited 
in a monkey. Muscimol, a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonist 
that inhibits cortical cells, was injected into Brodmann’s area 2 
on the left side of a monkey’s brain. Within minutes after injec-
tion, the finger coordination of the right hand (contralateral) was 
severely disrupted; the monkey was unable to pick up a grape 
from a funnel. The injection effects are shown to be specific 
to the injected hemisphere because the left hand (ipsilateral) 
continues to perform normally. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Hikosaka et al. 1985. Copyright © 1985 Elsevier B.V.)
limited to area 3b produce major deficits in touch sen-
sation from a particular part of the body. Lesions in 
area 1 produce a defect in the assessment of the texture 
of objects, whereas lesions in area 2 alter the ability to 
differentiate the size and shape of objects. The dam-
age to tactile function is less severe when such lesions 
are made in infant animals, apparently because in the 
developing brain S-II cortex may take over functions 
normally assumed by S-I.
Removal of S-II cortex in monkeys causes severe 
impairment in the discrimination of both shape and 
texture and prevents the animals from learning new 
tactile discriminations. Ablation or inhibition of areas 
2 or 5 produces deficits in roughness discrimination 
but few other alterations in passive touch. However, 
motor performance is impaired as these animals misdi-
rect reaching toward objects, fail to preshape the hand 
Ipsilateral hand normal
Contralateral hand affected
Muscimol
2
to grasp objects skillfully, and have difficulty coordi-
nating finger movements because tactile feedback is 
absent (Figure 19–23).
The similarity between impairments observed in 
humans and monkeys is an important basis for under-
standing clinical losses of somatosensory function. 
We shall learn in later chapters that lesioning studies 
of other cortical areas in monkeys have also provided 
insight into higher-order sensory and motor functions 
of the brain.
Highlights
1.	 When we explore an object with our hands, a large 
part of the brain may become engaged by the sen-
sory experience, by the thoughts and emotions it 
evokes, and by motor responses to it. These sensa-
tions result from the parallel actions of multiple 
cortical areas engaged in feedforward and feed-
back networks.
2.	 At the first touch, the peripheral sensory appara-
tus deconstructs the object into tiny segments, dis-
tributed over a large population of approximately 
20,000 sensory nerve fibers. The SA1 system pro-
vides high-fidelity information about the object’s 
spatial structure that is the basis of form and tex-
ture perception. The SA2 system provides infor-
mation about the hand conformation and posture 
during grasping and other hand movements. The 
RA1 system conveys information about motion of 
the object in the hand, which enables us to manip-
ulate it skillfully. Together with RA2 receptors, 
they sense vibration of objects that allows us to 
use them as tools.
3.	 The information from touch receptors is conveyed 
to consciousness by the dorsal column fiber tracts 
of the spinal cord, relay nuclei in the brain stem 
and thalamus, and a hierarchy of intracortical 
pathways. By analyzing patterns of activity across 
the entire population, the brain constructs a neural 
representation of objects and actions of the hand.
4.	 Computations in central pathways are complex 
and accomplished serially, beginning in the dor-
sal column nuclei, progressing through the thala-
mus and several cortical stages, and terminating 
in regions of the medial temporal cortex con-
cerned with memory and perception and in motor 
areas of the frontal lobe that mediate voluntary 
movements.
5.	 The brain’s processing of touch is aided by the 
topographic, somatotopic organization of the neu-
rons involved at each relay. Adjacent skin areas that 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 19 / Touch    467
are stimulated together are linked anatomically 
and functionally in central relays. Body parts that 
are especially sensitive to touch—the hands, feet, 
and mouth—are represented in large areas of the 
brain, reflecting the importance of tactile informa-
tion conveyed from these regions.
6.	 Another function of the central pathways is the 
transformation of the disaggregated representa-
tion of object properties among thousands of neu-
rons to an integrated representation of complex 
object properties in a few neurons. Convergent 
excitatory connections between neurons repre-
senting neighboring skin areas and intracortical 
inhibitory circuits enable higher-order cortical 
cells to integrate global features of objects. In this 
manner, the somatosensory areas of the brain rep-
resent properties common to particular classes of 
objects.
7.	 A third function is regulating the afferent flow 
of somatosensory information. The peripheral  
fibers deliver much more information than can 
be handled at any one moment; the central neural 
pathways compensate by selecting information 
for delivery to the mechanisms of perception and 
memory. Recurrent pathways from higher brain 
areas modify the ascending information provided 
by touch receptors, thus fitting the stream of sen-
sory information to previous experience and task 
goals.
8.	 Finally, the touch system provides information nec-
essary for the control and guidance of movement. 
Interactions between sensory and motor areas of 
parietal and frontal cortex provide a neural mecha-
nism for planning desired actions, for predicting 
the sensory consequences of motor behaviors, and 
for skill learning from repeated experience.
 Esther P. Gardner 
Selected Reading
Freund HJ. 2003. Somatosensory and motor disturbances in 
patients with parietal lobe lesions. Adv Neurol 93:179–193.
Harris KD, Shepherd GMG. 2015. The neocortical circuit: 
themes and variations. Nat Neurosci 18:170–181.
Johnson KO. 2001. The roles and functions of cutaneous 
mechanoreceptors. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:455–461.
Jones EG. 2000. Cortical and subcortical contributions to 
activity-dependent plasticity in primate somatosensory 
cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci 23:1–37.
Jones EG, Peters A (eds). 1986. Cerebral Cortex. Vol 5, Sensory-
Motor Areas and Aspects of Cortical Connectivity. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Kaas JH, Gardner EP (eds). 2008. The Senses: A Comprehensive 
Reference. Vol 6, Somatosensation. Oxford: Elsevier.
Milner AD, Goodale MA. 1995. The Visual Brain in Action. 
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Mountcastle VB. 1995. The parietal system and some higher 
brain functions. Cerebral Cortex 5:377–390.
Mountcastle VB. 2005. The Sensory Hand: Neural Mechanisms of 
Somatic Sensation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
Romo R, Salinas E. 2003. Flutter discrimination: neural 
codes, perception, memory and decision making. Nat 
Rev Neurosci 4:203–218.
Wing AM, Haggard P, Flanagan JR (eds). 1996. Hand and 
Brain. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
References
Bennett-Clarke CA, Chiaia NL, Rhodes RW. 1997. Contribu-
tions of raphe-cortical and thalamocortical axons to the 
transient somatotopic pattern of serotonin immunoreac-
tivity in rat cortex. Somatosens Mot Res 14:27–33.
Birznieks I, Macefield VG, Westling G, Johansson RS. 2009. 
Slowly adapting mechanoreceptors in the borders of the 
human fingernail encode fingertip forces. J Neurosci 
29:9370–9379.
Bolanowski SJ, Pawson L. 2003. Organization of Meissner 
corpuscles in the glabrous skin of monkey and cat. 
Somatosens Mot Res 20:223–231.
Brisben AJ, Hsiao SS, Johnson KO. 1999. Detection of vibra-
tion transmitted through an object grasped in the hand.  
J Neurophysiol 81:1548–1558.
Brochier T, Boudreau M-J, Paré M, Smith AM. 1999. The effects of 
muscimol inactivation of small regions of motor and soma-
tosensory cortex on independent finger movements and 
force control in the precision grip. Exp Brain Res 128:31–40.
Carlson M. 1981. Characteristics of sensory deficits follow-
ing lesions of Brodmann’s areas 1 and 2 in the postcentral 
gyrus of Macaca mulatta. Brain Res 204:424–430.
Chapman CE, Meftah el-M. 2005. Independent controls of 
attentional influences in primary and secondary soma-
tosensory cortex. J Neurophysiol 94:4094–4107.
Connor C, Hsiao SS, Phillips J, Johnson KO. 1990. Tactile 
roughness: neural codes that account for psychophysical 
magnitude estimates. J Neurosci 10:3823–3836.
Costanzo RM, Gardner EP. 1980. A quantitative analysis of 
responses of direction-sensitive neurons in somatosensory 
cortex of alert monkeys. J Neurophysiol 43:1319–1341.
DiCarlo JJ, Johnson KO, Hsaio SS. 1998. Structure of recep-
tive fields in area 3b of primary somatosensory cortex in 
the alert monkey. J Neurosci 18:2626–2645.
Edin BB, Abbs JH. 1991. Finger movement responses of cuta-
neous mechanoreceptors in the dorsal skin of the human 
hand. J Neurophysiol 65:657–670.


===== Page 9 =====
468    Part IV / Perception
Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC. 1991. Distributed hierarchical 
processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 
1:1–47.
Fitzgerald PJ, Lane JW, Thakur PH, Hsiao SS. 2006. Receptive 
field properties of the macaque second somatosensory 
cortex: representation of orientation on different finger 
pads. J Neurosci 26:6473–6484.
Flanagan JR, Vetter P, Johansson RS, Wolpert DM. 2003. 
Prediction precedes control in motor learning. Curr Biol 
13:146–150.
Fogassi L, Luppino G. 2005. Motor functions of the parietal 
lobe. Curr Opin Neurobiol 15:626–631.
Gardner EP. 1988. Somatosensory cortical mechanisms of 
feature detection in tactile and kinesthetic discrimination. 
Can J Physiol Pharmacol 66:439–454.
Gardner EP. 2008. Dorsal and ventral streams in the sense of 
touch. In: JH Kaas, EP Gardner (eds). The Senses: A Com-
prehensive Reference. Vol. 6, Somatosensation, pp. 233–258. 
Oxford: Elsevier.
Gardner EP, Babu KS, Ghosh S, Sherwood A, Chen J. 2007. 
Neurophysiology of prehension: III. Representation of 
object features in posterior parietal cortex of the macaque 
monkey. J Neurophysiol 98:3708–3730.
Hikosaka O, Tanaka M, Sakamoto M, Iwamura Y. 1985. Defi-
cits in manipulative behaviors induced by local injections 
of muscimol in the first somatosensory cortex of the con-
scious monkey. Brain Res 325:375–380.
Hinkley LB, Krubitzer LA, Nagarajan SS, Disbrow EA. 2007. 
Sensorimotor integration in S2, PV, and parietal rostro-
ventral areas of the human Sylvian fissure. J Neurophysiol 
97:1288–1297.
Hyvärinen J, Poranen A. 1978. Movement-sensitive and 
direction and orientation-selective cutaneous receptive 
fields in the hand area of the post-central gyrus in mon-
keys. J Physiol (Lond) 283:523–537.
Iwamura Y, Iriki A, Tanaka M. 1994. Bilateral hand represen-
tation in the postcentral somatosensory cortex. Nature 
369:554–556.
Iwamura Y, Tanaka M, Sakamoto M, Hikosaka O. 1993. Ros-
trocaudal gradients in neuronal receptive field complex-
ity in the finger region of the alert monkey’s postcentral 
gyrus. Exp Brain Res 92:360–368.
Jenmalm P, Birznieks I, Goodwin AW, Johansson RS. 2003. 
Influence of object shape on responses of human tactile 
afferents under conditions characteristic of manipulation. 
Eur J Neurosci 18:164–176.
Johansson RS. 1996. Sensory control of dexterous manipula-
tion in humans. In: AM Wing, P Haggard, JR Flanagan 
(eds). Hand and Brain, pp. 381–414. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Johansson RS, Flanagan JR. 2009. Coding and use of tactile 
signals from the fingertips in object manipulation tasks. 
Nat Rev Neurosci 10:345–359.
Johansson RS, Landström U, Lundström R. 1982. Responses 
of mechanoreceptive afferent units in the glabrous skin of 
the human hand to sinusoidal skin displacements. Brain 
Res 244:17–25.
Johansson RS, Vallbo ÅB. 1983. Tactile sensory coding in 
the glabrous skin of the human hand. Trends Neurosci 
6:27–32.
Johnson KO, Phillips JR. 1981. Tactile spatial resolution: I. 
Two-point discrimination, gap detection, grating resolu-
tion and letter recognition. J Neurophysiol 46:1177–1191.
Jones EG, Powell TPS. 1969. Connexions of the somatic sen-
sory cortex of the rhesus monkey. I. Ipsilateral cortical 
connexions. Brain 92:477–502.
Klatzky RA, Lederman SJ, Metzger VA. 1985. Identifying 
objects by touch: an “expert system.” Percept Psychophys 
37:299–302.
Koch KW, Fuster JM. 1989. Unit activity in monkey parietal 
cortex related to haptic perception and temporary mem-
ory. Exp Brain Res 76:292–306.
LaMotte RH, Mountcastle VB. 1979. Disorders in somethe-
sis following lesions of parietal lobe. J Neurophysiol 
42:400–419.
Lederman SJ, Klatzky RL. 1987. Hand movements: a 
window into haptic object recognition. Cogn Psychol 19: 
342–368.
Lieber JD, Xia X, Weber AI, Bensmaia SJ. 2017. The neural 
code for tactile roughness in the somatosensory nerves.  
J Neurophysiol 118:3107–3117.
Manfredi LR, Saal, HP, Brown KJ, et al. 2014. Natural scenes 
in tactile texture. J Neurophysiol 111:1792–1802.
Mountcastle VB. 1997. The columnar organization of the neo-
cortex. Brain 120:701–722.
Mountcastle VB, LaMotte RH, Carli G. 1972. Detection 
thresholds for stimuli in humans and monkeys: com-
parison with threshold events in mechanoreceptive affer-
ent fibers innervating the monkey hand. J Neurophysiol 
35:122–136.
Mountcastle VB, Lynch JC, Georgopoulos AP, Sakata H, 
Acuna C. 1975. Posterior parietal association cortex of 
the monkey: command functions for operations within 
extrapersonal space. J Neurophysiol 38:871–908.
Muniak MA, Ray S, Hsiao SS, Dammann JF, Bensmaia SJ. 
2007. The neural coding of stimulus intensity: linking the 
population response of mechanoreceptive afferents with 
psychophysical behavior. J Neurosci 27:11687–11699.
Murray EA, Mishkin M. 1984. Relative contributions of SII 
and area 5 to tactile discrimination in monkeys. Behav 
Brain Res 11:67–83.
Nelson RJ, Sur M, Felleman DJ, Kaas JH. 1980. Representa-
tions of the body surface in postcentral parietal cortex of 
Macaca fascicularis. J Comp Neurol 192:611–643.
Nolano M, Provitera V, Crisci C, et al. 2003. Quantification 
of myelinated endings and mechanoreceptors in human 
digital skin. Ann Neurol 54:197–205.
Oberlaender M, de Kock CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2012. Cell type-
specific three-dimensional structure of thalamocortical 
circuits in a column of rat vibrissal cortex. Cereb Cortex 
22:2375–2391.
Pandya DN, Seltzer B. 1982. Intrinsic connections and archi-
tectonics of posterior parietal cortex in the rhesus monkey. 
J Comp Neurol 204:196–210.


