===== Page 1 =====
764    Part V / Movement
Muscle spindles are small encapsulated sensory recep-
tors that have a spindle-like or fusiform shape and are 
located within the fleshy part of a muscle. Their main 
function is to signal changes in the length of the muscle 
within which they reside. Changes in length of muscles 
are closely associated with changes in the angles of the 
joints that the muscles cross. Thus, muscle spindles are 
used by the central nervous system to sense relative 
positions of the body segments.
Each spindle has three main components: (1) a 
group of specialized intrafusal muscle fibers with non-
contractile central regions; (2) sensory fibers that termi-
nate on the central regions of the intrafusal fibers; and 
(3) motor axons that terminate on the contractile polar 
regions of the intrafusal fibers (Figure 32–2A,B).
When the intrafusal fibers are stretched, often 
referred to as “loading the spindle,” the sensory axon 
endings are also stretched and increase their firing rate. 
Because muscle spindles are arranged in parallel with 
the extrafusal muscle fibers that make up the main body 
of the muscle, the intrafusal fibers change in length 
as the whole muscle changes. Thus, when a muscle is 
stretched, activity in the sensory axons of muscle spin-
dles increases. When a muscle shortens, the spindle is 
unloaded and the activity decreases.
The intrafusal muscle fibers are innervated by 
gamma motor neurons, which have small-diameter mye-
linated axons, whereas the extrafusal muscle fibers are 
innervated by alpha motor neurons, with large-diameter 
myelinated axons. Activation of gamma motor neurons 
causes shortening of the polar regions of the intrafusal 
fibers. This in turn stretches the central region from 
both ends, leading to an increase in firing rate of the 
sensory axons or to a greater likelihood that the axons 
will fire in response to stretch of the muscle. Thus, the 
gamma motor neurons adjust the sensitivity of the mus-
cle spindles. Contraction of the intrafusal muscle fibers 
does not contribute significantly to the force of muscle 
contraction.
The structure and functional behavior of muscle 
spindles is considerably more complex than this simple 
description depicts. As a muscle is stretched, the change 
in length has two phases: a dynamic phase, the period 
during which length is changing, and a static or steady-
state phase, when the muscle has stabilized at a new 
length. Structural specializations within each compo-
nent of the muscle spindle enable the sensory axons to 
signal aspects of each phase separately.
The intrafusal muscle fibers include nuclear bag fib-
ers and nuclear chain fibers. The bag fibers can be clas-
sified as dynamic or static. A typical spindle has two or 
three bag fibers and a variable number of chain fibers, 
usually about five. Furthermore, the intrafusal fibers 
receive two types of sensory endings. A single Ia (large 
diameter) axon spirals around the central region of all 
intrafusal muscle fibers and serves as the primary sensory 
ending (Figure 32–2B). A variable number of type II 
(medium diameter) axons spiral around the static bag 
and chain fibers near their central regions and serve as 
secondary sensory endings.
The gamma motor neurons can also be divided into 
two classes: Dynamic gamma motor neurons innervate 
the dynamic bag fibers, whereas the static gamma motor 
neurons innervate the static bag fibers and the chain fibers.
This duality of structure is reflected in a duality of 
function. The tonic discharge of both primary and sec-
ondary sensory endings signals the steady-state length 
of the muscle. The primary sensory endings are, in addi-
tion, highly sensitive to the velocity of stretch, allow-
ing them to provide information about the speed of 
movements. Because they are highly sensitive to small 
changes, the primary endings rapidly provide informa-
tion about sudden unexpected changes in length, which 
can be used to generate quick corrective reactions.
Increases in the firing rate of dynamic gamma 
motor neurons increase the dynamic sensitivity of pri-
mary sensory endings but have no influence on sec-
ondary sensory endings. Increases in the firing rate of 
static gamma motor neurons increase the tonic level of 
activity in both primary and secondary sensory endings, 
decrease the dynamic sensitivity of primary endings 
(Figure 32–2C), and can prevent the silencing of primary 
endings when a muscle is released from stretch. Thus, 
the central nervous system can independently adjust the 
dynamic and static sensitivity of the different sensory 
endings in muscle spindles.
Box 32–1  Muscle Spindles
ventral roots to electrical stimulation of dorsal roots. 
When the Ia sensory axons innervating the muscle 
spindles were selectively activated, the reflex latency 
through the spinal cord was less than 1 ms. This dem-
onstrated that the Ia fibers make direct connections on 
the alpha motor neurons because the delay at a single 
synapse is typically 0.5 ms to 0.9 ms (Figure 32–3B). In 
humans, an analog of the monosynaptic stretch reflex, 
the Hoffmann reflex, may be elicited by electrical stim-
ulation of peripheral nerves (Box 32–3).


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    765
Figure 32–2  The muscle spindle detects changes in 
muscle length.
A. The main components of the muscle spindle are 
intrafusal muscle fibers, sensory axon endings, and motor 
axon endings. The intrafusal fibers are specialized mus-
cle fibers with central regions that are not contractile. 
Gamma motor neurons innervate the contractile polar 
regions of the intrafusal fibers. Contraction of the polar 
regions pulls on the central regions of the intrafusal fiber 
from both ends. The sensory endings spiral around the 
central regions of the intrafusal fibers and are responsive 
to stretch of these fibers. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Hulliger 1984. Copyright © Springer-Verlag 1984.)
B. The muscle spindle contains three types of intrafusal 
fibers: dynamic nuclear bag, static nuclear bag, and 
nuclear chain fibers. A single Ia sensory axon innervates all 
three types of fibers, forming a primary sensory ending. 
Type II sensory axons innervate the nuclear chain fibers 
and static bag fibers, forming a secondary sensory ending. 
Two types of motor neurons innervate different intrafusal 
fibers. Dynamic gamma motor neurons innervate only 
dynamic bag fibers; static gamma motor neurons inner-
vate various combinations of chain and static bag fibers. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Boyd 1980. Copyright © 
1980. Published by Elsevier Ltd.)
C. Selective stimulation of the two types of gamma motor 
neurons has different effects on the firing of the Ia sen-
sory fibers from the spindle. Without gamma stimulation, 
the Ia fiber shows a small dynamic response to muscle 
stretch and a modest increase in steady-state firing. When 
a static gamma motor neuron is stimulated, the steady-
state response of the Ia fiber increases but the dynamic 
response decreases. When a dynamic gamma motor neu-
ron is stimulated, the dynamic response of the Ia fiber is 
markedly enhanced, but the steady-state response gradu-
ally returns to its original level. (Adapted, with permission, 
from Brown and Matthews 1966.)
Afferent
axons
Efferent
axons
Gamma motor
neuron endings
Sensory
endings
Capsule
Intrafusal
muscle
ﬁbers
II sensory
ﬁber
Ia sensory
ﬁber
Static gamma
motor neuron
Dynamic gamma
motor neuron
A  Muscle spindle
Dynamic nuclear
bag ﬁber
Static nuclear
bag ﬁber
Nuclear
chain ﬁbers
B  Intrafusal ﬁbers of the muscle spindle
C  Response of Ia sensory ﬁber to selective
 
activation of gamma motor neurons
Stretch alone
Dynamic response
Steady-state response
0
Stimulate static gamma motor neurons
200
0
Stimulate dynamic gamma motor neurons
Stretch
pps
200
0
6
0.2 s
pps
0
200
pps
The pattern of connections of Ia fibers to motor 
neurons can be shown directly by intracellular record-
ing. Ia fibers from a given muscle excite not only the 
motor neurons innervating that same (homonymous) 
muscle but also the motor neurons innervating other 
(heteronymous) muscles with a similar mechanical 
action.
Lorne Mendell and Elwood Henneman used a 
computer enhancement technique called spike-triggered 
averaging to determine the extent to which the action 


===== Page 3 =====
766    Part V / Movement
Table 32–1  Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle
Type
Axon
Receptor
Sensitivity to
Ia
12–20 μm myelinated
Primary spindle ending
Muscle length and rate of change of length
Ib
12–20 μm myelinated
Golgi tendon organ
Muscle tension
II
6–12 μm myelinated
Secondary spindle ending
Muscle length (little rate sensitivity)
II
6–12 μm myelinated
Nonspindle endings
Deep pressure
III
2–6 μm myelinated
Free nerve endings
Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature (impor-
tant for physiological responses to exercise)
IV
0.5–2 μm nonmyelinated
Free nerve endings
Pain, chemical stimuli, and temperature
Sensory fibers are classified according to their diam-
eter. Axons with larger diameters conduct action poten-
tials more rapidly than those with smaller diameters 
(Chapters 9 and 18). Because each class of sensory 
receptors is innervated by fibers with diameters within 
a restricted range, this method of classification distin-
guishes to some extent the fibers that arise from differ-
ent types of receptor organs. The main groups of sensory 
fibers from muscle are listed in Table 32–1.
The organization of reflex pathways in the spi-
nal cord has been established primarily by electrically 
stimulating the sensory fibers and recording evoked 
responses in different classes of neurons in the spinal 
cord. This method of activation has three advantages 
over natural stimulation. The timing of afferent input 
can be precisely established; the responses evoked in 
motor neurons and other neurons by different classes of 
sensory fibers can be assessed by grading the strength of 
the electrical stimulus; and certain classes of receptors 
can be selectively activated.
The strength of the electrical stimulus required to acti-
vate a sensory fiber is measured relative to the strength 
required to activate the fibers with the largest diameter 
because these fibers have the lowest threshold for electri-
cal activation. The thresholds of most type I fibers usually 
range from one to two times that of the largest fibers (with 
Ia fibers having, on average, a slightly lower threshold 
than Ib fibers). For most type II fibers, the threshold is 2 to 
5 times higher, whereas types III and IV have thresholds in 
the range of 10 to 50 times that of the largest sensory fibers.
Box 32–2  Classification of Sensory Fibers From Muscle
potentials in single Ia fibers are transmitted to a popu-
lation of spinal motor neurons. They found that indi-
vidual Ia axons make excitatory synapses with all 
homonymous motor neurons innervating the medial 
gastrocnemius of the cat. This widespread divergence 
effectively amplifies the signals of individual Ia fibers, 
leading to a strong excitatory drive to the muscle from 
which they originate (autogenic excitation).
The Ia axons in reflex pathways also provide excit-
atory inputs to many of the motor neurons innervating 
synergist muscles (up to 60% of the motor neurons 
of some synergists) (Figure 32–1A). Although wide-
spread, these connections are not as strong as the con-
nections to homonymous motor neurons.
The Ia fibers also send inhibitory signals via the 
Ia inhibitory interneurons to the alpha motor neurons 
innervating antagonistic muscles. This disynaptic 
inhibitory pathway is the basis for reciprocal innerva-
tion: When a muscle is stretched, its antagonists relax.
Gamma Motor Neurons Adjust the Sensitivity of 
Muscle Spindles
Activity of muscle spindles may be modulated by 
changing the level of activity in the gamma motor neu-
rons, which innervate the intrafusal muscle fibers of 
muscle spindles (Box 32–1). This function of gamma 
motor neurons, often referred to as the fusimotor 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    767
Figure 32–3  The number of synapses in a reflex pathway 
can be inferred from intracellular recordings.
A. An intracellular recording electrode is inserted into the cell 
body of a spinal motor neuron that innervates an extensor mus-
cle. Stimulation of Ia sensory fibers from flexor or extensor mus-
cles produces a volley of action potentials at the dorsal root.
B. Left: When Ia fibers from an extensor muscle are stimulated, 
the latency between the recording of the afferent volley and the 
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) in the motor neuron is 
only 0.7 ms, approximately equal to the duration of signal trans-
mission across a single synapse. Thus, it can be inferred that the 
excitatory action of the stretch reflex pathway is monosynaptic. 
Right: When Ia fibers from an antagonist flexor muscle are stim-
ulated, the latency between the recording of the afferent volley 
and the inhibitory postsynaptic potential in the motor neuron is 
1.6 ms, approximately twice the duration of signal transmission 
across a single synapse. Thus, it can be inferred that the inhibi-
tory action of the stretch reflex pathway is disynaptic.
Stimulate Ia
afferents in
ﬂexor nerve
Record afferent volley
A  Experimental setup
B  Inferring the number of synapses in a pathway
Monosynaptic
To extensor
muscle
0.7 ms
Stimulate Ia
afferents in
extensor
nerve
Intracellular
recording in 
motor neuron
Disynaptic
1.6 ms
EPSP in 
motor neuron
Afferent volley
5 ms
1 mV
system, can be demonstrated by selectively stimulat-
ing the alpha and gamma motor neurons under experi-
mental conditions.
When only alpha motor neurons are stimulated, 
the firing of the Ia fiber from the muscle spindle pauses 
during contraction of the muscle because the muscle 
is shortening and therefore unloading (slackening) the 
spindle. However, if gamma motor neurons are acti-
vated at the same time as alpha motor neurons, the 
pause is eliminated. The contraction of the intrafusal 
fibers by the gamma motor neurons keeps the spindle 
under tension, thus maintaining the firing rate of 
the Ia fibers within an optimal range for signaling 
changes in length, whatever the actual length of the 
muscle (Figure 32–5). This alpha-gamma co-activation is 
recruited for many voluntary movements because it 
stabilizes the sensitivity of the muscle spindles.
In addition to the axons of gamma motor neurons, 
collaterals of alpha motor neuron axons sometimes 
innervate the intrafusal fibers. Axons that inner-
vate both intrafusal and extrafusal muscle fibers are 
referred to as beta axons. Beta axon collaterals provide 
the equivalent of alpha-gamma coactivation. Beta 
innervation in spindles exists in both cats and humans, 
although it is unquantified for most muscles.
The forced linkage of extrafusal and intrafusal con-
traction by the beta fusimotor system highlights the 
importance of the independent fusimotor system (the 
gamma motor neurons). Indeed, in lower vertebrates, 
such as amphibians, beta efferents are the only source of 
intrafusal innervation. Mammals have evolved a mecha-
nism that frees muscle spindles from complete depend-
ence on the behavior of their parent muscles. In principle, 
this uncoupling allows greater flexibility in controlling 
spindle sensitivity for different types of motor tasks.
This conclusion is supported by recordings in spin-
dle sensory axons during a variety of natural movements 
in cats. The amount and type of activity in gamma motor 
neurons are set at steady levels, which vary according to 
the specific task or context. In general, activity levels in 
both static and dynamic gamma motor neurons (Figure 
32–2B) are set at progressively higher levels as the speed 
and difficulty of the movement increase. Unpredictable 
conditions, such as when the cat is picked up or han-
dled, lead to marked increases in activity in dynamic 
gamma motor neurons and thus increased spindle 
responsiveness when muscles are stretched. When an 
animal is performing a difficult task, such as walking 
across a narrow beam, both static and dynamic gamma 
activation are at high levels (Figure 32–6).
Thus, the nervous system uses the fusimotor system 
to fine-tune muscle spindles so that the ensemble output 
of the spindles provides information most appropriate 
for a task. The task conditions under which independ-
ent control of alpha and gamma motor neurons occurs 
in humans have not yet been clearly established.
The Stretch Reflex Also Involves  
Polysynaptic Pathways
The monosynaptic Ia pathway is not the only spinal 
reflex pathway activated when a muscle is stretched. 
Type II sensory fibers from muscle spindles are also 
activated. These discharge tonically depending on 


===== Page 5 =====
768    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–4  The Hoffmann reflex.
A. The Hoffmann reflex (H-reflex) is evoked by electrically 
stimulating Ia sensory fibers from muscle spindles. The 
sensory fibers excite alpha motor neurons, which in turn 
activate the muscle. When a mixed nerve is used, the 
motor neurons axons may also be activated directly.
B. At intermediate stimulus strengths, an M-wave pre-
cedes the H-wave (H-reflex) in the electromyogram (EMG).
C. As the stimulus strength increases, the orthodromic 
motor neuron spikes generated reflexively by the spindle 
sensory fibers are obliterated by antidromic spikes initi-
ated by the electrical stimulus in the same motor axons. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Schieppati 1987.  
Copyright © 1987. Published by Elsevier Ltd.)
The characteristics of the monosynaptic connections from 
Ia sensory fibers to spinal motor neurons in humans can 
be studied using an important technique introduced in the 
1950s and based on early work by Paul Hoffmann. This 
technique involves electrically stimulating the Ia sensory 
fibers in a peripheral nerve and recording the reflex elec-
tromyogram (EMG) response in the homonymous muscle. 
The response is known as the Hoffmann reflex, or H-reflex.
The H-reflex is readily measured in the soleus mus-
cle, an ankle extensor. The Ia fibers from the soleus and 
its synergists are excited by an electrode placed above the 
tibial nerve behind the knee (Figure 32–4A). The response 
recorded from the soleus muscle depends on stimulus 
strength. At low stimulus strengths, a pure H-reflex is 
evoked, for the threshold for activation of the Ia fibers is 
lower than the threshold for motor axons. Increasing the 
stimulus strength excites the motor axons innervating the 
soleus, producing two successive responses.
The first results from direct activation of the motor 
axons, and the second is the H-reflex evoked by stimula-
tion of the Ia fibers (Figure 32–4B). These two compo-
nents of the evoked EMG are called the M-wave and 
H-wave. The H-wave occurs later because it results from 
signals that travel to the spinal cord, across a synapse, 
and back again to the muscle. The M-wave, in contrast, 
results from direct stimulation of the motor axon inner-
vating the muscle.
As the stimulus strength is increased still fur-
ther, the M-wave continues to become larger and the 
H-wave progressively declines (Figure 32–4C). The 
decline in the H-wave amplitude occurs because 
action potentials in the motor axons propagate toward 
the cell body (antidromic conduction) and cancel 
reflexively evoked action potentials in the same motor 
axons. At very high stimulus strengths, only the 
M-wave persists.
Box 32–3  The Hoffmann Reflex
Orthodromic
motor signal (reﬂex)
Antidromic
motor signal
Stimulus
A
B
C
Sensory
Motor
EMG
10 ms
Stimulus
M-wave
H-reﬂex
Response amplitude (mV)
040
80
Stimulus strength (V)
120
8
H
M
6
4
2


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    769
Figure 32–5  Activation of gamma motor neurons during 
active muscle contraction maintains muscle spindle sensi-
tivity to muscle length. (Adapted, with permission, from Hunt 
and Kuffler 1951.)
A. Sustained tension elicits steady firing in the Ia sensory fiber 
from the muscle spindle (the two muscle fibers are shown 
separately for illustration only).
B. A characteristic pause occurs in the discharge of the Ia fiber 
when the alpha motor neuron is stimulated, causing a brief 
contraction of the muscle. The Ia fiber stops firing because  
the spindle is unloaded by the contraction.
C. Gamma motor neurons innervate the contractile polar 
regions of the intrafusal fibers of muscle spindles (see  
Figure 32–2A). If a gamma motor neuron is stimulated at 
the same time as the alpha motor neuron, the spindle is not 
unloaded during the contraction. As a result, the pause in dis-
charge of the Ia sensory fiber that occurs when only the alpha 
motor neuron is stimulated is “filled in” by the response of the 
fiber to stimulation of the gamma motor neuron.
A  Sustained stretch of muscle
Ia ﬁber 
discharge
Weight
Tension
Pull
B  Stimulation of alpha motor neurons only
Contraction
Ia ﬁber response is “ﬁlled in”
Muscle
spindle
C  Stimulation of alpha and gamma motor neurons
Contraction
muscle length and gamma motor neuron activity 
(Box 32–1) and connect to different populations of excita-
tory and inhibitory interneurons in the spinal cord.
Some of the interneurons project directly to the spi-
nal motor neurons, whereas others have more indirect 
connections. Because of the slower conduction velocity 
of type II sensory fibers and the signal relay through 
interneurons, the muscular responses elicited by 
group II fibers are smaller, more variable, and delayed 
compared to the monosynaptic stretch reflex. Some 
of the interneurons activated by group II fibers send 
axons across the midline of the spinal cord and give 
rise to crossed reflexes. Such connections that cross 
the midline are important for coordination of bilateral 
muscle activity in functional motor tasks.
Golgi Tendon Organs Provide Force-Sensitive 
Feedback to the Spinal Cord
Stimulation of Golgi tendon organs or their Ib sen-
sory fibers in passive animals produces disynaptic 
inhibition of homonymous motor neurons (autogenic 


===== Page 7 =====
770    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–6  The level of activity in the fusimotor system 
varies with the type of behavior. Only static gamma motor 
neurons are active during activities in which muscle length 
changes slowly and predictably. Dynamic gamma motor 
neurons are activated during behaviors in which muscle length 
may change rapidly and unpredictably. (Adapted, with permis-
sion, from Prochazka et al. 1988.)
Rest
0
0
0
0
+
+ + +
+
+ + +
+ + +
Dynamic
0
+
+
+ +
+ + +
+
+
+ + +
Static
Level of fusimotor activity
Sitting
Standing
Slow
walk
Fast
walk
Imposed
movements
Paw
shakes
Beam
walking
inhibition) and excitation of antagonist motor neurons 
(reciprocal excitation). Thus, these effects are the exact 
opposite of the responses evoked by muscle stretch or 
stimulation of Ia sensory axons.
This autogenic inhibition is mediated by Ib inhibi-
tory interneurons. These inhibiting interneurons receive 
their principal input from Golgi tendon organs, sen-
sory receptors that signal the tension in a muscle (Box 
32–4), and they make inhibitory connections with 
homonymous motor neurons. However, stimulation 
of the Ib sensory fibers from tendon organs in active 
animals does not always inhibit homonymous motor 
neurons. Indeed, as we shall see later, stimulation of 
tendon organs may in certain conditions excite homon-
ymous motor neurons.
One reason that the reflex actions of the sensory 
axons from tendon organs are complex in natural situ-
ations is that the Ib inhibitory interneurons also receive 
input from the muscle spindles, cutaneous receptors, 
and joint receptors (Figure 32–8A). In addition, they 
receive both excitatory and inhibitory input from vari-
ous descending pathways.
Golgi tendon organs were first thought to have a 
protective function, preventing damage to muscle. It 
was assumed that they always inhibited homonymous 
motor neurons and that they fired only when tension 
in the muscle was high. We now know that these recep-
tors signal minute changes in muscle tension, thus pro-
viding the nervous system with precise information 
about the state of a muscle’s contraction.
The convergent sensory input from tendon organs, 
cutaneous receptors, and joint receptors to the Ib inhib-
itory interneurons (Figure 32–8A) may allow for pre-
cise spinal control of muscle force in activities such as 
grasping a delicate object. Additional input from cuta-
neous receptors may facilitate activity in the Ib inhibi-
tory interneurons when the hand reaches an object, 
thus reducing the level of muscle contraction and per-
mitting a soft grasp.
As is the case with the Ia fibers from muscle spin-
dles, the Ib fibers from tendon organs form widespread 
connections with motor neurons that innervate mus-
cles acting at different joints. Therefore, the connec-
tions of the sensory fibers from tendon organs with the 
Ib inhibitory interneurons are part of spinal networks 
that regulate movements of whole limbs.
Cutaneous Reflexes Produce Complex Movements 
That Serve Protective and Postural Functions
Most reflex pathways involve interneurons. One such 
reflex pathway is that of the flexion-withdrawal reflex, 
in which a limb is quickly withdrawn from a painful 
stimulus. Flexion-withdrawal is a protective reflex in 
which a discrete stimulus causes all the flexor muscles 
in that limb to contract coordinately. We know that this 
is a spinal reflex because it persists after complete tran-
section of the spinal cord.
The sensory signal of the flexion-withdrawal reflex 
activates divergent polysynaptic reflex pathways. One 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 32 / Sensory-Motor Integration in the Spinal Cord    771
Golgi tendon organs are slender encapsulated struc-
tures approximately 1 mm long and 0.1 mm in diameter 
located at the junction between skeletal muscle fibers 
and tendon. Each capsule encloses several braided col-
lagen fibers connected in series to a group of muscle 
fibers.
Each tendon organ is innervated by a single Ib axon 
that branches into many fine endings inside the capsule; 
these endings become intertwined with the collagen fas-
cicles (Figure 32–7A).
Stretching of the tendon organ straightens the col-
lagen fibers, thus compressing the Ib nerve endings and 
causing them to fire. Because the nerve endings are so 
closely associated with the collagen fibers, even very small 
stretches of the tendons can compress the nerve endings.
Whereas muscle spindles are most sensitive to 
changes in length of a muscle, tendon organs are most 
sensitive to changes in muscle tension. Contraction of 
the muscle fibers connected to the collagen fiber bundle 
containing the receptor is a particularly potent stimulus 
to a tendon organ. The tendon organs are thus readily 
activated during normal movements. This has been 
demonstrated by recordings from single Ib axons in 
humans making voluntary finger movements and in 
cats walking normally.
Studies in anesthetized animal preparations have 
shown that the average level of activity in the popula-
tion of tendon organs in a muscle is a good index of the 
total force in a contracting muscle (Figure 32–7B). This 
close agreement between firing frequency, and force is 
consistent with the view that the tendon organs continu-
ously measure the force in a contracting muscle.
Box 32–4  Golgi Tendon Organs
Figure 32–7A  When the Golgi tendon organ is stretched 
(usually because of contraction of the muscle), the Ib 
afferent axon is compressed by collagen fibers (see 
enlargement) and its rate of firing increases.  (Adapted, 
with permission, from Schmidt 1983; inset adapted, with per-
mission, from Swett and Schoultz 1975.)
Figure 32–7B  The discharge rate of a population of 
Golgi tendon organs signals the force in a muscle.  
Linear regression lines show the relationship between 
discharge rate and force for Golgi tendon organs of the 
soleus muscle of the cat. (Adapted, with permission, from 
Crago, Houk, and Rymer 1982.)
Muscle
ﬁbers
Ib afferent
axon
Ib axon
Collagen ﬁber
A
Capsule
Tendon
250 µm
0
5
10
Force (N)
15
25
Discharge rate (ips)
150
100
50
20
B
excites motor neurons that innervate flexor muscles of 
the stimulated limb, whereas another inhibits motor 
neurons that innervate the limb’s extensor muscles 
(Figure 32–1B). This reflex can produce an opposite 
effect in the contralateral limb, that is, excitation of 
extensor motor neurons and inhibition of flexor motor 
neurons. This crossed-extension reflex serves to enhance 
postural support during withdrawal of a foot from a 
painful stimulus. Activation of the extensor muscles in 
the opposite leg counteracts the increased load caused 
by lifting the stimulated limb. Thus, flexion-withdrawal 
is a complete, albeit simple, motor act.
Although flexion reflexes are relatively stereo-
typed, both the spatial extent and the force of muscle 
contraction depend on stimulus intensity. Touching 
a stove that is slightly hot may produce moderately 


===== Page 9 =====
772    Part V / Movement
Figure 32–8  The reflex actions of Ib sensory fibers from 
Golgi tendon organs are modulated during locomotion.
A. The Ib inhibitory interneuron receives input from tendon 
organs, muscle spindles (not shown), joint and cutaneous 
receptors, and descending pathways.
B. The action of Ib sensory fibers on extensor motor neurons 
is reversed from inhibition to excitation when walking is 
initiated. When the animal is resting, stimulation of Ib fibers 
from the ankle extensor muscle inhibits ankle extensor 
motor neurons through Ib inhibitory interneurons, as shown 
by the hyperpolarization in the record. During walking, the 
Ib inhibitory interneurons are inhibited while excitatory 
interneurons that receive input from Ib sensory fibers are 
facilitated by the command system for walking, thus open-
ing a Ib excitatory pathway from the Golgi tendon organs to 
motor neurons.
Extensor
muscle
Joint
receptor
Flexor
muscle
Golgi
tendon
organ
Ib afferent
Joint afferent
Cutaneous
afferent
Motor
neuron
Descending
pathways
4 mV
100 ms
Stimulate Ib afferents
at 200 Hz
Intracellular recording from
ankle extensor motor neuron
A  Convergence onto Ib interneurons
B  Reversal of action of Ib afferents
Resting
Locomotion
Cutaneous
receptor
Ib afferent
Ib afferent
Excitatory
interneuron
To extensor
muscle
To extensor
muscle
Ib inhibitory
interneuron
Ib inhibitory
interneuron
fast withdrawal only at the wrist and elbow, whereas 
touching a very hot stove invariably leads to a force-
ful contraction at all joints, leading to rapid with-
drawal of the entire limb. The duration of the reflex 
usually increases with stimulus intensity, and the con-
tractions produced in a flexion reflex always outlast  
the stimulus.
Because of the similarity of the flexion-withdrawal 
reflex to stepping, it was once thought that the flexion 
reflex is important in producing contractions of flexor 
muscles during walking. We now know, however, 
that a major component of the neural control system 
for walking is a set of intrinsic spinal circuits that do 
not require sensory stimuli (Chapter 33). Nevertheless, 
in mammals, the intrinsic spinal circuits that control 
walking share many of the interneurons involved in 
flexion reflexes.
Convergence of Sensory Inputs on Interneurons 
Increases the Flexibility of Reflex Contributions  
to Movement
The Ib inhibitory interneuron is not the only interneu-
ron that receives convergent input from many different 
sensory modalities. An enormous diversity of sensory 
information converges on interneurons in the spinal 
cord, enabling them to integrate information from 
muscle, joints, and skin.
Interneurons activated by groups I and II sensory 
fibers have received special attention. It was thought 


