===== Page 1 =====
348    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Synaptotagmin
Snap-25
Synaptobrevin
Synaptobrevin
Synaptotagmin
Syntaxin
Syntaxin
Complexin
N
C
C2A
C2B
C2A
C2B
Synaptic 
vesicle
membrane
A
B1  Calcium-bound synaptotagmin
B2  Synaptotagmin/SNARE complex
C
Ca2+
Extracellular 
side
Cytoplasmic
side
1
2
Wild-type
Locked
Unlocking and triggering
Fusion pore formation
Mutant lacking
synaptotagmin
50 ms
160 pA
50 ms
40 pA
Complexin
VM
PM
VM
PM
Ca2+
C2A
C2B
C2A
Ca2+
SNAP-25


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    349
Figure 15–13   (Opposite) Synaptotagmin mediates Ca2+-
dependent transmitter release by forming a protein com-
plex that favors vesicle fusion.
A. Fast Ca2+-triggered transmitter release is absent in mutant 
mice lacking synaptotagmin-1. Recordings show excitatory 
postsynaptic currents evoked in vitro by stimulation of cul-
tured hippocampal neurons from wild-type mice and from 
mutant mice in which synaptotagmin-1 has been deleted by 
homologous recombination (1). Neurons from wild-type mice 
show large, fast excitatory postsynaptic currents evoked by 
presynaptic action potentials, reflecting the fact that synaptic 
transmission is dominated by the rapid synchronous release 
of transmitter from a large number of synaptic vesicles. In 
the bottom trace (2), where the synaptic current is shown at 
a highly expanded scale, one can see that a small, prolonged 
phase of asynchronous release of transmitter follows the fast 
phase of synchronous release. During this slow phase, there 
is a prolonged increase in frequency of individual quantal 
responses. In neurons from a mutant mouse, a presynaptic 
action potential triggers only the slow asynchronous phase 
of release; the rapid synchronous phase has been abolished. 
(Reproduced, with permission, from Geppert et al., 1994).
B. The X-ray crystal structure synaptotagmin. B1. A ribbon dia-
gram shows that the C2A domain binds three Ca2+ ions and the 
C2B domain two Ca2+ ions. The blue arrows show β-strands. 
There are two short α-helixes (orange) at the C-terminus of the 
C2B domain. The structures of the other regions of synaptotag-
min have not yet been determined and are drawn here for illustra-
tive purposes. The membrane and structures are drawn to scale. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Fernandez et al., 2001). B2. The 
X-ray crystal structure of synaptotagmin (light blue) bound to 
the SNARE complex (synaptobrevin, syntaxin and SNAP-25) and 
complexin. The transmembrane domain of synaptotagmin is not 
shown. (Adapted, with permission, from Zhou et al, 2017.)
C. Zippering of the synaptotagmin-complexin-SNARE complex 
mediates vesicle fusion. Top, in the absence of Ca2+, the α-helixes 
of the SNARE complex and complexin, with the bound synap-
totagmin, are only partially zippered. Middle, binding of Ca2+ to the 
C2A and C2B domains of synaptotagmin allows them to interact 
with the plasma membrane, applying force to bring the vesicle 
and plasma membranes closer together. Bottom, synaptotagmin-
mediated proximity and the final zippering of the complexin-
SNARE-synaptotagmin complex triggers membrane fusion. 
(Adapted, with permission, from Zhou et al., 2017.)
exocytosis at the active zone. Other types of exocytosis, 
such as that which occurs in the adrenal medulla, do not 
require a specialized domain of the plasma membrane. 
The active zone is thought to coordinate and regulate the 
docking and priming of synaptic vesicles to enable 
the speed and tight regulation of release. This is accom-
plished through a conserved set of proteins that form 
one large macromolecular structure at active zones.
An exquisitely detailed view of the active zone at 
the frog neuromuscular junction was obtained by Jack 
MacMahan using a powerful ultrastructural technique 
called electron microscopic tomography. This tech-
nique has shown how synaptic vesicles are tethered to 
the membrane by a series of distinctive structural enti-
ties, termed ribs and beams, that attach to defined sites 
on the vesicles and to particles (pegs) in the presynaptic 
membrane that may correspond to voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels (Figure 15–14).
A key goal in understanding how the various 
synaptic vesicle and active zone proteins are coordi-
nated during exocytosis is to match up the various 
proteins that have been identified with elements of 
this electron microscopic structure. Several cytoplas-
mic proteins have been identified that are thought 
to be components of a structural matrix at the active 
zone. These include three large cytoplasmic multid-
omain proteins, Munc13 (not related to the Munc18 
protein discussed earlier), RIM, and RIM-binding 
proteins (RIM-BPs), which form a tight complex with 
each other and may comprise part of the ribs and 
beams. The binding of synaptic vesicles to RIM and 
Munc13 is essential for priming the vesicles for exo-
cytosis. Phosphorylation of RIM by cAMP-dependent 
protein kinase is implicated in the enhancement of 
transmitter release associated with certain forms of 
long-term synaptic plasticity that may contribute to 
learning and memory. As we will see later, regula-
tion of Munc13 by second messengers is involved in 
shorter-term forms of synaptic plasticity.
RIM binds the synaptic vesicle proteins Rab3 and 
Rab27, members of the family of low-molecular-weight 
guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases). Rab3 and Rab27 
proteins transiently associate with synaptic vesicles as 
a GTP-bound Rab3 complex (Figure 15–11B). The bind-
ing of RIM to Rab3 or Rab27 is thought to tether synap-
tic vesicles to the active zone during the vesicle cycle 
prior to SNARE-complex assembly. Moreover, RIM 
and RIM-BP together mediate the recruitment of Ca2+ 
channels to the active zone, allowing tight coupling of 
Ca2+ influx to vesicle release. This general machinery is 
conserved through evolution and is present in inverte-
brates, although with modifications.
At the Drosophila neuromuscular junction, Sigrist 
and colleagues identified another protein, Bruchpilot, 
as a major component of the electron-dense active zone 
“T-bar” structure; Bruchpilot is associated with the fly 
homolog of RIM-binding protein, which also serves 
to recruit Ca2+ channels to active zones in Drosophila. 
As coordinators of both presynaptic Ca2+ channels and 
synaptic vesicles, these proteins act as essential regula-
tors of presynaptic release in the fly. In Caenorhabditis 
elegans, RIM plays a central role for the same processes.


===== Page 3 =====
350    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
Modulation of Transmitter Release Underlies 
Synaptic Plasticity
The effectiveness of chemical synapses can be modu-
lated dramatically and rapidly—by several-fold in a 
matter of seconds—and this change can be maintained 
for seconds, to hours, or even days or longer, a prop-
erty called synaptic plasticity.
Synaptic strength can be modified presynaptically, 
by altering the release of neurotransmitter, postsynap-
tically, by modulating the response to transmitter (as 
discussed in Chapter 13), or both. Long-term changes 
in presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms are cru-
cial for the refinement of synaptic connections during 
development (Chapter 49) and for storing informa-
tion during learning and memory (Chapters 53 and 
54). Here, we focus on how synaptic strength can be 
changed through modulation of the amount of trans-
mitter released. In principle, changes in transmitter 
release can be mediated by two different mechanisms: 
changes in Ca2+ influx or changes in the amount of 
transmitter released in response to a given Ca2+ con-
centration. As we will see later, both types of mecha-
nisms contribute to different forms of plasticity.
Synaptic strength is often altered by the pattern 
of activity of the presynaptic neuron. Trains of action 
potentials produce successively larger postsynaptic 
currents at some synapses and successively smaller 
currents in others (Figure 15–15A). A decrease in the 
size of the postsynaptic response to repeated stimula-
tion is referred to as synaptic depression (Figure 15–15A, 
upper); the opposite, enhancement of transmission 
with repeated stimulation, is called synaptic facilitation 
or potentiation (Figure 15–15A, lower, 15–15E). Various 
synapses exhibit these disparate forms of short-term 
synaptic plasticity—sometimes overlapping and some-
times with one predominating—resulting in charac-
teristic patterns of short-term dynamics in individual 
synapse types (Figure 15–15A).
Whether a synapse facilitates or depresses often is 
determined by the probability of release in response 
to the first action potential of a train. Synapses with 
an initial high probability of release normally undergo 
depression because the high rate of release transiently 
depletes docked vesicles at the active zone. Synapses 
with an initial low probability of release undergo syn-
aptic facilitation, in part because the buildup in intra-
cellular Ca2+ during the train increases the probability 
of release (see later). The importance of release prob-
ability in controlling the sign of plasticity can be seen 
by the effect of genetic mutations. Synapses formed by 
hippocampal neurons in cell culture have an initially 
high release probability and so normally depress in 
Figure 15–14  Synaptic vesicles at the active zone. The 
images are obtained from electron microscopic tomogra-
phy. (Reproduced, with permission, from Harlow et al. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
A. Vesicles are tethered to filamentous proteins of the active 
zone. Three distinct filamentous structures are resolved: pegs, 
ribs, and beams. Ribs protruding from the vesicles are attached 
to long horizontal beams, which are anchored to the membrane 
by vertical pegs.
B. Ribs and beams superimposed on a freeze fracture view of 
intramembranous particles at the active zone show how the 
ribs are aligned with the particles, some of which are presumed 
to be voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Scale bar = 100 nm.
C. A model for the structure of the active zone shows the rela-
tion between synaptic vesicles, pegs, ribs, and beams.
Beams Ribs
Pegs
A
B
C


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    351
response to 20-Hz stimulation. However, a mutation 
that reduces by approximately two-fold the Ca2+-
binding affinity of synaptotagmin-1, thus reducing the 
initial probability of release, converts the depressing 
synapse into a facilitating one (Figure 15–15B).
Mechanisms that affect the concentration of free 
Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal also affect the amount 
of transmitter released. For example, the buildup of 
inactivation of certain voltage-gated K+ channels during 
high-frequency firing leads to a gradual increase in the 
duration of the action potential. Prolongation of the action 
potential increases the time that voltage-gated Ca2+ chan-
nels stay open, which leads to enhanced entry of Ca2+ and 
a subsequent increase in transmitter release, resulting in a 
larger postsynaptic potential (Figure 15–15C). 
Most studies of the functional implications of short-
term synaptic dynamics have been performed in vitro 
or are based on computational results. However, recent 
in vivo experiments are beginning to shed light on 
the behavioral importance of short-term plasticity. For 
example, in vivo recordings in rodents from thalamocor-
tical synapses have suggested that synaptic depression 
may contribute to sensory adaptation during repeated 
whisker stimulation. The time course of this sensory 
adaptation parallels the attenuation of cortical spiking 
to whisker stimulation and the synaptic depression of 
EPSPs at thalamocortical synapses (Figure 15–15D).
High-frequency stimulation of the presynaptic 
neuron, which in some cells can generate up to 500 
to 1,000 action potentials per second, is called tetanic 
stimulation. Such intense stimulation can cause dra-
matic changes in synaptic strength. The increase in 
size of the EPSP during tetanic stimulation is called 
potentiation; the increase that persists after tetanic 
stimulation is called posttetanic potentiation (Figure 
15–15E). In contrast to synaptic facilitation, which 
lasts milliseconds to seconds, posttetanic potentiation 
usually lasts several minutes, but it can persist for an 
hour or more at some synapses.
Synapses utilize a complex containing Munc13 and 
RIM, two of the active zone proteins discussed earlier, 
to counteract vesicle depletion during high-frequency 
stimulation. The rise in presynaptic Ca2+ during tetanic 
stimulation activates phospholipase C, which pro-
duces inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylg-
lycerol. Diacylglycerol directly interacts with a protein 
domain on Munc13 called the C1 domain (homologous 
to the diacylglycerol-binding domain in protein kinase 
C but distinct from the C2 domain of synaptotagmin), 
thereby accelerating the rate of synaptic vesicle recy-
cling. At the same time, IP3 causes additional release of 
Ca2+ from intracellular stores, and the increase in Ca2+ 
further activates Munc13 by binding to its C2 domain, 
which resembles the C2 domain of synaptotagmin but 
acts as an agent of short-term synaptic plasticity.
Activity-Dependent Changes in Intracellular  
Free Calcium Can Produce Long-Lasting  
Changes in Release
Several Ca2+-dependent mechanisms contribute to 
longer-lasting changes in transmitter release that per-
sist after a high-frequency tetanus is terminated. Nor-
mally the rise in Ca2+ in the presynaptic terminal in 
response to an action potential is rapidly buffered by 
cytoplasmic Ca2+-binding proteins and mitochondria. 
Calcium ions are also actively transported out of the 
neuron by pumps and transporters. However, during 
tetanic stimulation, so much Ca2+ flows into the axon 
terminals that the Ca2+ buffering and clearance systems 
can become saturated.
This leads to a temporary excess of Ca2+ called 
residual Ca2+. The residual free Ca2+ enhances synaptic 
transmission for many minutes or longer by activating 
certain enzymes that are sensitive to enhanced levels 
of resting Ca2+, including the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent 
protein kinases. Activation of such Ca2+-dependent 
enzymatic pathways is thought to increase the prim-
ing of synaptic vesicles in the terminals. Here, then, is 
the simplest kind of cellular memory! The presynaptic 
cell can store information about the history of its activ-
ity in the form of residual free Ca2+ in its terminals (or 
residual Ca2+ bound to sensor proteins).
This Ca2+ acts by multiple pathways that have dif-
ferent half-times of decay. In Chapter 13, we saw how 
posttetanic potentiation at certain synapses is followed 
by an even longer-lasting process (also initiated by 
Ca2+ influx), called long-term potentiation, which can 
last for many hours or even days. The importance of 
long-term potentiation for learning and memory will 
be considered in Chapters 53 and 54.
Axo-axonic Synapses on Presynaptic Terminals 
Regulate Transmitter Release
Synapses are formed on axon terminals as well as the cell 
body and dendrites of neurons (see Chapter 13). Although 
axosomatic synaptic actions affect all branches of the 
postsynaptic neuron’s axon (because they affect the prob-
ability that the neuron will fire an action potential), axo-
axonic actions selectively control individual terminals of 
the axon. One important action of axo-axonic synapses 
is to increase or decrease Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic 
terminals of the postsynaptic cell, thereby enhancing or 
depressing transmitter release, respectively.
As we saw in Chapter 13, when one neuron releases 
transmitter that hyperpolarizes the cell body (or 


===== Page 5 =====
352    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
+40
Tetanic stimulation
Poten-
tiation
Posttetanic
potentiation
Presynaptic
action
potentials 
(mV)
Postsynaptic
membrane
potential 
(mV)
0
–65
2.5
1.0
0
E
D
B
A
C
1s
50 ms
Whisker
Barrel cortex
Thalamus
20 mV
50 ms
2 pA
400 pA
40 ms
1 nA
200 pA
100 mV
100th
100th
100th
1st
1st
1st
Vcomm
CF
WT
Syt1
mutant
Normalized EPSCs
PF
EPSCs
ICa
1s
1 2 3
4
1
2
3
4
1ms
Thalamus
Barrel
cortex
Barrel
cortex
Whisker


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    353
Figure 15–15  (Opposite) Diversity of short-term plasticity in 
the central nervous system.
A. Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) were recorded 
from a cerebellar Purkinje neuron under voltage clamp in 
response to repetitive stimulation of either the climbing fiber 
(CF) or parallel fiber (PF) inputs to the Purkinje cells. In both 
cases EPSCs were recorded while afferents were stimulated 10 
times at 50 Hz. Note that the CF EPSC depresses whereas the 
PF EPSC facilitates during repetitive stimulation. (Reproduced, 
with permission, from Dittman et al. 2000. Copyright © 2000 
Society for Neuroscience.)
B. EPSCs were recorded from hippocampal neurons in culture 
during stimulation at 20 Hz. EPSC size was normalized by 
dividing each response by peak amplitude of first EPSC in each 
individual train. The EPSC depresses in neurons cultured from 
wild-type mice (WT) whereas the EPSC facilitates in neurons 
from mice harboring a mutated form of synaptotagmin-1 that 
reduces its Ca2+ binding affinity (Syt1 mutant, R233Q). (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Fernandez-Chacon et al. 2001. 
Copyright © 2001 Springer Nature.)
C. The action potential recorded at the presynaptic terminals of 
dentate gyrus granule neurons broadens progressively during a 
2-s long train of 50 Hz stimulation. This results in enhanced syn-
aptic transmission from the granule neurons onto their CA3 post-
synaptic target. The 1st, 25th, 50th, and 100th action potentials 
are shown. These action potential waveforms were then used as 
the command waveforms (Vcomm, top) to voltage clamp the 
presynaptic nerve terminal (“action potential clamp”), eliciting the 
voltage-gated Ca2+ current (ICa) recorded in the terminal (middle) 
and the EPSCs in a postsynaptic CA3 neuron (bottom). As the 
action potential, waveform increases in duration, the duration of 
ICa increases, increasing the amplitude of the EPSCs. (Adapted, 
with permission, from Geiger and Jonas, 2000. Copyright © 2000 
Cell Press.)
D. Simultaneous extracellular multiunit recordings of action 
potentials from thalamus and barrel cortex (second and third 
traces from top) during a train of 4-Hz mechanical stimulation of 
the primary whisker (top trace). Cortical and thalamic responses 
both depress during stimulation, although cortical responses 
depress faster. Intracellular voltage responses of a cortical 
neuron in a whisker barrel to 4-Hz stimulation of the primary 
whisker (bottom two traces). The first of the two traces shows 
responses to successive whisker stimuli in one train. Time scale 
same as top traces. The bottom trace shows an expanded view 
of the first four responses to whisker stimulation in three sepa-
rate trains. Note there is variability from trial to trial in the spiking 
responses to the second and third stimuli in the train, likely due 
to the probabilistic nature of transmitter release. (Reproduced 
from Chung et al. 2002. Copyright © 2002 Cell Press.)
E. A brief burst of high-frequency stimulation leads to sustained 
enhancement in transmitter release. The time scale of the experi-
mental records here has been compressed (each presynaptic and 
postsynaptic potential appears as a single line indicating its ampli-
tude). A stable excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) of around 
1 mV is produced when the presynaptic neuron is stimulated at a 
relatively low rate of one action potential per second. The presyn-
aptic neuron is then stimulated for a few seconds at a higher rate 
of 50 action potentials per second. During this tetanic stimula-
tion, the EPSP increases in size because of enhanced transmit-
ter release, a phenomenon known as potentiation. After several 
seconds of stimulation, the presynaptic neuron is returned to the 
initial rate of stimulation (one per second). However, the EPSPs 
remain enhanced for minutes and, in some cells, for several hours. 
This persistent increase is called posttetanic potentiation.
dendrites) of another, it decreases the likelihood that the 
postsynaptic cell will fire; this action is called postsynaptic 
inhibition. In contrast, when a neuron forms synapses on 
the axon terminal of another cell, it can reduce the amount 
of transmitter that will be released by the postsynaptic 
cell onto a third cell; this action is called presynaptic inhibi-
tion (Figure 15–16A). Other axo-axonic synaptic actions 
can increase the amount of transmitter released by the 
postsynaptic cell; this action is called presynaptic facilita-
tion (Figure 15–16B). Both presynaptic inhibition and 
facilitation can occur in response to activation of iono-
tropic or metabotropic receptors in the membrane of the 
presynaptic terminals.
The best-analyzed mechanisms of presynaptic inhi-
bition and facilitation are found in invertebrate neurons 
and vertebrate mechanoreceptor neurons (whose axons 
project to neurons in the spinal cord). Three mecha-
nisms for presynaptic inhibition have been identified 
in these cells. One depends on the activation of inhibi-
tory interneurons that form axo-axonic synapses on 
the sensory neuron presynaptic terminals, where they 
activate ionotropic GABAA receptor-channels. Because 
the Cl− reversal potential in the presynaptic terminals is 
relatively positive, the increased Cl− conductance result-
ing from activation of GABAA channels depolarizes the 
presynaptic terminal. This voltage change, termed the 
primary afferent depolarization, is thought to inactivate 
voltage-gated Na+ channels, reducing the amplitude of 
the presynaptic action potential, which decreases the 
activation of voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and thereby 
decreases the amount of transmitter release.
The other two mechanisms for presynaptic inhibi-
tion both result from the activation of presynaptic G 
protein–coupled metabotropic receptors. One type of 
action results from the modulation of ion channels. 
As we saw in Chapter 14, the βγ-subunit complex of G 
proteins can simultaneously close voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels and open K+ channels. This decreases the influx 
of Ca2+ and enhances repolarization of the presynaptic 
terminal following an action potential, thus diminish-
ing transmitter release. A second type of G protein–
dependent action depends on a direct action by the 
βγ-subunit complex on the release machinery itself, inde-
pendent of any changes in ion channel activity or Ca2+ 
influx. This second action is thought to involve a decrease 
in the Ca2+ sensitivity of the release machinery.
In contrast, presynaptic facilitation can be caused 
by enhanced influx of Ca2+. In certain molluscan neu-
rons, serotonin acts through cAMP-dependent protein 
phosphorylation to close K+ channels in the presynaptic 


===== Page 7 =====
354    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
terminal (including the Aplysia S-type K+ channel 
discussed in Chapter 14). This action increases the 
duration of the presynaptic action potential, thereby 
increasing Ca2+ influx by enabling the voltage-dependent 
Ca2+ channels to remain open for a longer period. In 
other cells, activation of presynaptic ionotropic recep-
tors increases transmitter release. Activation of pre-
synaptic Ca2+-permeable ionotropic receptor-channels, 
including presynaptic NMDA-type glutamate recep-
tors, can increase release by directly enhancing Ca2+ 
influx. Activation of presynaptic ionotropic receptor-
channels that are not permeable to Ca2+ can indirectly 
increase presynaptic Ca2+ levels by depolarizing the 
terminal and activating voltage-gated Ca2+ channels.
Thus, presynaptic terminals are endowed with a 
variety of mechanisms that allow for the fine-tuning 
of the strength of synaptic transmission. Although we 
know a fair amount about the mechanisms of short-
term changes in synaptic strength—changes that last 
seconds, minutes, and hours—we are only beginning 
to learn about their functional roles. The mechanisms 
that support changes that persist for days, weeks, 
and longer also remain mysterious. These long-term 
changes often require alterations in gene expression 
and growth of presynaptic and postsynaptic structures 
in addition to alterations in Ca2+ influx and enhance-
ment of transmitter release from existing terminals. 
We will discuss how such changes may contribute to 
different forms of long-term learning and memory in 
Chapters 53 and 54.
Highlights
  1.  Chemical neurotransmission is the primary 
mechanism by which neurons communicate, and 
process information; it occurs throughout the 
nervous system. Release of neurotransmitter is 
Figure 15–16  Axo-axonic synapses can inhibit or facilitate 
transmitter release by the presynaptic cell.
A. An inhibitory neuron (c1) forms a synapse on an axon terminal 
of neuron a. Release of transmitter by cell c1 activates metabo-
tropic receptors on the terminal, thus inhibiting the Ca2+ current in 
the terminal and reducing the amount of transmitter released by 
cell a onto cell b. The reduction of transmitter release from cell a in 
turn reduces the amplitude of the excitatory postsynaptic potential 
in cell b, a process termed presynaptic inhibition.
B. A facilitating neuron (c2) forms a synapse on an axon ter-
minal of neuron a. Release of transmitter by cell c2 activates 
metabotropic receptors on the terminal, thus decreasing a 
K+ current in the terminals and thereby prolonging the action 
potential and increasing Ca2+ influx into cell a. This increases 
transmitter release from cell a onto cell b, thereby increasing 
the size of the EPSP in cell b, a process termed presynaptic 
facilitation.
A  Presynaptic inhibition
B  Presynaptic facilitation
Presynaptic
Postsynaptic
Presynaptic
Postsynaptic
a
a
b
b
c2
c1
Presynaptic
action
potential
Presynaptic
action
potential
Postsynaptic
potential
Control
Control
Control
Inhibited
Inhibited
Ca2+ current
in presynaptic 
neuron
Postsynaptic
potential
Facilitated
Facilitated
Ca2+ current
in presynaptic 
neuron
Prolongation of
Ca2+ current
Prolongation of
action potential


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 15 / Transmitter Release    355
stimulated by a series of electrical and biochemi-
cal processes in the presynaptic nerve terminal.
  2.  Neurotransmitter release is steeply dependent on 
depolarization of the presynaptic terminal. While 
the action potential is controlled by sodium and 
potassium conductances, it is the depolarization 
itself, rather than opening of either voltage-gated 
sodium or potassium channels, that triggers release.
  3.  Depolarization of the presynaptic terminal opens 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (VGCCs), resulting 
in Ca2+ influx. These channels are concentrated at 
presynaptic “active zones,” very close to the sites 
at which release occurs. The relationship between 
Ca2+ influx and neurotransmitter release is tightly 
coupled and steeply nonlinear. The peak Ca2+ 
entry lags slightly behind the peak of the action 
potential and quickly produces a marked rise in 
the rate of transmitter release.
  4.  VGCCs are heterogeneous—five classes have been 
described with distinct biophysical, biochemical, 
and pharmacological properties. Multiple classes 
of VGCCs can contribute to neurotransmitter 
release at individual nerve terminals and are 
targets of disease-causing mutations. P/Q- and 
N-type Ca2+ channels are particularly prominent 
at active zones in the central nervous system.
  5.  Chemical transmission generally involves the 
release of quantal packets of neurotransmitter, 
with a quantum corresponding to the contents of 
a single synaptic vesicle. Under conditions that 
decrease transmitter release, such as lowered 
extracellular Ca2+, a presynaptic action potential 
triggers the probabilistic release of a few quanta, 
which produce postsynaptic responses of vari-
able amplitude that are integral multiples of 
the unitary response to a single quantum, inter-
spersed by complete failures of transmission.
  6.  The unitary events are driven by the fusion of 
individual synaptic vesicles of relatively homo-
geneous size and transmitter content. Visualized 
as small, clear, spherical membrane organelles, 
single vesicles contain thousands of small-
molecule neurotransmitters. Other neurotrans-
mitters, including the biogenic amines and 
neuropeptides, are packaged into a distinct class 
of larger, dense-core vesicles that mediate slower 
forms of synaptic transmission. A typical presyn-
aptic terminal in the mammalian central nervous 
system involved in fast synaptic transmission 
contains 100 to 200 vesicles. A small number of 
vesicles dock along the presynaptic membrane of 
the active zone and are the most ready to fuse.
  7.  At many synaptic connections, the amplitude 
of a postsynaptic potential can be described as 
a product of multiple factors: (1) the number of 
presynaptic sites occupied by a readily releasable 
vesicle (n), (2) the release probability of individ-
ual sites (p), and (3) the size of the postsynaptic 
response to the release of a single vesicle (a). On 
individual trials, the number of vesicles released 
can be described by a binomial distribution reflect-
ing the likelihood of release of zero, one, two, or 
more vesicles, as if we were to count the number 
of heads when n coins were being flipped.
  8.  Exocytosis, the process by which vesicles fuse 
with the presynaptic membrane, and endocytosis, 
the process that retrieves vesicles, occur in rapid 
succession in nerve terminals and other secretory 
structures. These events are evident in morphologi-
cal studies and are studied in real time by electrical 
measurements of membrane surface area.
  9.  Exocytosis is mediated by evolutionarily conserved 
SNARE proteins. Together, the presynaptic plasma 
membrane proteins syntaxin and SNAP-25 and 
the synaptic vesicle membrane protein synapto-
brevin contribute to the SNARE complex, a set of 
four helical domains. Formation of this complex is 
critical for vesicle fusion as shown by the ability 
of various neurotoxins to block transmitter release 
through the cleavage of SNARE proteins. SNARE 
complex assembly is modulated by a family of SM 
proteins, exemplified by Munc18.
10.  Synaptotagmins, such as synaptotagmin-1 (syt1), 
are abundant vesicular proteins that act as Ca2+ 
sensors for regulation of vesicle release. Syt1 binds 
multiple Ca2+ ions and thus forms a close asso-
ciation with the plasma membrane following Ca2+ 
influx. By binding to the SNARE complex even 
before the rise in presynaptic Ca2+, it may enable 
that complex to cause fusion quickly.
11.  Synaptic vesicle exocytosis is exquisitely precise 
and rapid because its molecular machinery is 
embedded in an active zone protein scaffold con-
sisting of RIM, RIM-BP, and Munc-13. The complex: 
1. Tethers vesicles to the plasma membrane through 
binding of RIM to Rab3 and Rab27 vesicle proteins; 
2. Recruits calcium channels to the vicinity of teth-
ered vesicles via binding to RIM and RIM-BP; and 
3. Facilitates SNARE complex assembly via inter-
action with Munc13. The active zone complex also 
mediates many forms of short- and long-term syn-
aptic plasticity.
12.  Rapid endocytosis of vesicle membranes after 
release enables fast recycling of vesicles for a con-
tinuous supply during prolonged stimulation.
13.  Synaptic terminals are diverse and vary in their 
release properties. Active zone scaffolding pro-
teins differ across synapses and species, as does 


===== Page 9 =====
356    Part III / Synaptic Transmission
expression of presynaptic Ca2+ channels and 
synaptotagmins. At some synapses, vesicles and 
Ca2+ channels appear aligned by an intricate 
structural network.
14.  Transmitter release can be modulated intrinsically 
or extrinsically as an aspect of synaptic plastic-
ity. Synaptic strength can be strongly influenced 
intrinsically by the pattern of firing in phenom-
ena known as “depression” and “facilitation.” In 
addition, extrinsic neuromodulators can alter the 
dynamics of release by regulation of Ca2+ channels 
or events downstream of Ca2+ entry.
 Steven A. Siegelbaum 
  Thomas C. Südhof 
  Richard W. Tsien 
Selected Reading
Katz B. 1969. The Release of Neural Transmitter Substances. 
Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Lonart G. 2002. RIM1: an edge for presynaptic plasticity. 
Trends Neurosci 25:329–332.
Meinrenken CJ, Borst JG, Sakmann B. 2003. Local routes 
revisited: the space and time dependence of the Ca2+ sig-
nal for phasic transmitter release at the rat calyx of Held. 
J Physiol 547:665–689.
Reid CA, Bekkers JM, Clements JD. 2003. Presynaptic Ca2+ 
channels: a functional patchwork. Trends Neurosci 
26:683–687.
Stevens CF. 2003. Neurotransmitter release at central syn-
apses. Neuron 40:381–388.
Südhof TC. 2014. The molecular machinery of neurotrans-
mitter release (Nobel lecture). Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 
53:12696–12717.
References
Acuna C, Liu X, Südhof TC. 2016. How to make an active 
zone: unexpected universal functional redundance 
between RIMs and RIM-BPs. Neuron 91:792–807.
Akert K, Moor H, Pfenninger K. 1971. Synaptic fine structure. 
Adv Cytopharmacol 1:273–290.
Bacaj T, Wu D, Yang X, et al. 2013. Synaptotagmin-1 and -7 
trigger synchronous and asynchronous phases of neuro-
transmitter release. Neuron 80:947–959.
Baker PF, Hodgkin AL, Ridgway EB. 1971. Depolarization and 
calcium entry in squid giant axons. J Physiol 218:709–755.
Bollmann JH, Sakmann B, Gerard J, Borst G. 2000. Calcium 
sensitivity of glutamate release in a calyx-type terminal. 
Science 289:953–957.
Borst JG, Sakmann B. 1996. Calcium influx and transmitter 
release in a fast CNS synapse. Nature 383:431–434.
Boyd IA, Martin AR. 1956. The end-plate potential in mam-
malian muscle. J Physiol 132:74–91.
Chung S, Li X, Nelson SB. 2002. Short-term depression at 
thalamocortical synapses contributes to rapid adaptation 
of cortical sensory responses in vivo. Neuron 34:437–446.
Couteaux R, Pecot-Dechavassine M. 1970. Vésicules synap-
tiques et poches au niveau des “zones actives” de la jonc-
tion neuromusculaire. C R Acad Sci Hebd Seances Acad 
Sci D 271:2346–2349.
Del Castillo J, Katz B. 1954. The effect of magnesium on the 
activity of motor nerve endings. J Physiol 124:553–559.
Dittman JS, Kreitzer AC, Regehr WG. 2000. Interplay 
between facilitation, depression and residual calcium at 
three presynaptic terminals. J Neurosci 20:1374–1385.
Enoki R, Hu YL, Hamilton D, Fine A. 2009. Expression of 
long-term plasticity at individual synapses in hippocam-
pus is graded, bidirectional, and mainly presynaptic: opti-
cal quantal analysis. Neuron 62:242–253.
Fatt P, Katz B. 1952. Spontaneous subthreshold activity at 
motor nerve endings. J Physiol 117:109–128.
Fawcett DW. 1981. The Cell, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Fernandez I, Araç D, Ubach J, et al. 2001. Three-dimensional 
structure of the synaptotagmin 1 C2B-domain: synap-
totagmin 1 as a phospholipid binding machine. Neuron 
32:1057–1069.
Fernandez JM, Neher E, Gomperts BD. 1984. Capacitance 
measurements reveal stepwise fusion events in degranu-
lating mast cells. Nature 312:453–455.
Fernandez-Chacon R, Konigstorfer A, Gerber SH, et al. 2001. 
Synaptotagmin I functions as a calcium regulator of 
release probability. Nature 410:41–49.
Geiger JR, Jonas P. 2000. Dynamic control of presynaptic 
Ca(2+) inflow by fast-inactivating K(+) channels in hip-
pocampal mossy fiber boutons. Neuron 28:927–939.
Geppert M, Goda Y, Hammer RE, et al. 1994. Synaptotagmin 
I: a major Ca2+ sensor for transmitter release at a central 
synapse. Cell 79:717–727.
Harlow LH, Ress D, Stoschek A, Marshall RM, McMahan UJ. 
2001. The architecture of active zone material at the frog’s 
neuromuscular junction. Nature 409:479–484.
Heuser JE, Reese TS. 1981. Structural changes in transmit-
ter release at the frog neuromuscular junction. J Cell Biol 
88:564–580.
Hille B. 2001. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd ed. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer.
Kaeser PS, Deng L, Wang Y, et al. 2011. RIM proteins tether 
Ca2+ channels to presynaptic active zones via a direct 
PDZ-domain interaction. Cell 144:282–295.
Kandel ER. 1981. Calcium and the control of synaptic strength 
by learning. Nature 293:697–700.
Katz B, Miledi R. 1967a. The study of synaptic transmission 
in the absence of nerve impulses. J Physiol 192:407–436.
Katz B, Miledi R. 1967b. The timing of calcium action during 
neuromuscular transmission. J Physiol 189:535–544.
Klein M, Shapiro E, Kandel ER. 1980. Synaptic plasticity and 
the modulation of the Ca2+ current. J Exp Biol 89:117–157.


