===== Page 1 =====
148    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Cytoplasmic
protein
Proteins
Ribosome
mRNA emerging
Forms
polysome
Mitochondrion
Peroxisome
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Ribosomes
Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum
Secretory granules
Golgi apparatus
Lysosome
Nuclear
pore
Endoplasmic
membrane
Secretory
protein
Integral 
membrane
protein
Figure 7–13  Protein synthesis in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum. Free and membrane-bound polysomes translate mRNA 
that encodes proteins with a variety of destinations. Mes-
senger RNA, transcribed from genomic DNA in the neuron’s 
nucleus, emerges into the cytoplasm through nuclear pores to 
form polyribosomes (see enlargement). The polypeptides that 
become secretory and membrane proteins are translocated 
across the membrane of the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
in the reducing environment of the cytosol. Disulfide 
linkages are crucial to the tertiary structure of these 
proteins.
Proteins may be modified by cytosolic enzymes 
either during synthesis (cotranslational modification) 
or afterward (posttranslational modification). One 
example is N-acylation, the transfer of an acyl group 
to the N-terminus of the growing polypeptide chain. 
Acylation by a 14-carbon fatty acid myristoyl group 
permits the protein to anchor in membranes through 
the lipid chain.
C O
N
(CH2)12
CH3
Other fatty acids can be conjugated to the sulfhy-
dryl group of cysteine, producing a thioacylation:
C O
S
Cys
(CH2)14
CH3
Isoprenylation is another posttranslational modifi-
cation important for anchoring proteins to the cytosolic 
side of membranes. It occurs shortly after synthesis of the 
protein is completed and involves a series of enzymatic 
steps that result in thioacylation by one of two long-chain 
hydrophobic polyisoprenyl moieties (farnesyl, with 
15 carbons, or geranyl-geranyl, with 20) of the sulfhydryl 
group of a cysteine at the C-terminus of proteins.


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    149
Some posttranslational modifications are readily 
reversible and thus used to regulate the function of a 
protein transiently. The most common of these modifi-
cations is the phosphorylation at the hydroxyl group in 
serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues by protein kinases. 
Dephosphorylation is catalyzed by protein phosphatases. 
(These reactions are discussed in Chapter 14.) As with all 
posttranslational modifications, the sites to be phos-
phorylated are determined by particular sequences 
of amino acids around the residue to be modified. 
Phosphorylation can alter physiological processes in a 
reversible fashion. For example, protein phosphoryla-
tion–dephosphorylation reactions regulate the kinetics 
of ion channels, the activity of transcription factors, 
and the assembly of the cytoskeleton.
Still another important posttranslational modifi-
cation is the addition of ubiquitin, a highly conserved 
protein with 76 amino acids, to the ∈-amino group of 
specific lysine residues in the protein molecule. Ubiqui-
tination, which regulates protein degradation, is medi-
ated by three enzymes. E1 is an activating enzyme that 
uses the energy of ATP. The activated ubiquitin is next 
transferred to a conjugase, E2, which then transfers 
the activated moiety to a ligase, E3. The E3, alone or 
together with E2, transfers the ubiquitinyl group to the 
lysine residue in a protein. Specificity arises because a 
given protein molecule can only be ubiquinated by a 
specific E3 or combination of E3 and E2. Some E3s also 
require special cofactors—ubiquitination occurs only 
in the presence of E3 and a cofactor protein.
Monoubiquitination tags a protein for degradation 
in the endosomal–lysosomal system. This is especially 
important in endocytosis and recycling of surface 
receptors. Ubiquitinyl monomers are successively 
linked to the ∈-amino group of a lysine residue in the 
previously added ubiquitin moiety. Addition of more 
than five ubiquitins to the multiubiquitin chain tags 
the protein for degradation by the proteasome, a large 
complex containing multifunctional protease subunits 
that cleave proteins into short peptides.
UbC
O
N
+ Ub
Lys
Lys
UbC
O
N
UbC
O
N
Lys
The ATP–ubiquitin–proteasome pathway is a 
mechanism for the selective and regulated proteolysis 
of proteins that operates in the cytosol of all regions of 
the neuron—dendrites, cell body, axon, and terminals. 
Until recently, this process was thought to be primarily 
directed to poorly folded, denatured, or aged and dam-
aged proteins. We now know that ubiquitin-mediated 
proteolysis can be regulated by neuronal activity and 
plays specific roles in many neuronal processes, includ-
ing synaptogenesis and long-term memory storage.
Another important protein modification is glyco-
sylation, which occurs on amino groups of asparagine 
residues (N-linked glycosylation) and results in the 
addition en bloc of complex polysaccharide chains. 
These chains are then trimmed within the endoplasmic 
reticulum by a series of reactions controlled by chaper-
ones, including heat shock proteins, calnexin, and cal-
reticulin. Because of the great chemical specificities of 
oligosaccharide moieties, these modifications can have 
important implications for cell function. For example, 
cell-to-cell interactions that occur during develop-
ment rely on molecular recognition between glycopro-
teins on the surfaces of the two interacting cells. Also, 
because a given protein can have somewhat different 
oligosaccharide chains, glycosylation can diversify the 
function of a protein. It can increase the hydrophilicity 
of the protein (useful for secretory proteins), fine-tune 
its ability to bind macromolecular partners, and delay 
its degradation.
An interesting posttranslational modification 
of mRNA is RNA interference (RNAi), the targeted 
destruction of double-stranded RNAs. This mecha-
nism, which is believed to have arisen to protect cells 
against viruses and other rogue fragments of nucleic 
acids, shuts down the synthesis of any targeted protein. 
Double-stranded RNAs are taken up by an enzyme 
complex that cleaves the molecule into oligomers. 
The RNA sequences are retained by the complex. As 
a result, any homologous hybridizing RNA strands, 
either double- or single-stranded, will be destroyed. 
The process is regenerative: The complex retains a 
hybridizing fragment and goes on to destroy another 
RNA molecule until none remain in the cell. Although 
the physiological role of RNAi in normal cells is 
unclear, transfection or injection of RNAi into cells is 
of great research and clinical importance (Chapter 2).
Secretory Proteins Are Modified in the  
Golgi Complex
Proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum are carried 
in transport vesicles to the Golgi complex where they 
are modified and then moved to synaptic terminals 
and other parts of the plasma membrane. The Golgi 
complex appears as a grouping of membranous sacks 
aligned with one another in long ribbons.
The mechanism by which vesicles are trans-
ported between stations of the secretory and endocytic 


===== Page 3 =====
150    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
pathways has been remarkably conserved from simple 
unicellular prokaryotes (yeast) to neurons and glia of 
multicellular organisms. Transport vesicles develop 
from membrane, beginning with the assembly of 
proteins that form coats, or coat proteins, at selected 
patches of the cytosolic surface of the membrane. A 
coat has two functions. It forms rigid cage-like struc-
tures that produce evagination of the membrane into a 
bud shape, and it selects the protein cargo to be incor-
porated into the vesicles.
There are several types of coats. Clathrin coats 
assist in evaginating Golgi complex membrane and 
plasmalemma during endocytosis. Two other coats, 
COPI and COPII, cover transport vesicles that shut-
tle between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi 
complex. Coats usually are rapidly dissolved once free 
vesicles have formed. The fusion of vesicles with the 
target membrane is mediated by a cascade of molec-
ular interactions, the most important of which is the 
reciprocal recognition of small proteins on the cytosolic 
surfaces of the two interacting membranes: vesicular 
soluble N-ethylmaleimide–sensitive factor attachment 
protein receptors (v-SNAREs) and t-SNAREs (target-
membrane SNAREs). The role of SNARE proteins 
in neurotransmitter release through synaptic vesi-
cle fusion with the plasma membrane is discussed in 
Chapter 15.
Vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum arrive at 
the cis side of the Golgi complex (the aspect facing the 
nucleus) and fuse with its membranes to deliver their 
contents into the Golgi complex. These proteins travel 
from one Golgi compartment (cisterna) to the next, 
from the cis to the trans side, undergoing a series of 
enzymatic reactions. Each Golgi cisterna or set of cis-
ternae is specialized for a particular type of reaction. 
Several types of protein modifications, some of which 
begin in the endoplasmic reticulum, occur within the 
Golgi complex proper or within the transport station 
adjacent to its trans side, the trans-Golgi network (the 
aspect of the complex typically facing away from the 
nucleus toward the axon hillock). These modifications 
include the addition of N-linked oligosaccharides, 
O-linked (on the hydroxyl groups of serine and threo-
nine) glycosylation, phosphorylation, and sulfation.
Both soluble and membrane-bound proteins that 
travel through the Golgi complex emerge from the 
trans-Golgi network in a variety of vesicles that have 
different molecular compositions and destinations. 
Proteins transported from the trans-Golgi network 
include secretory products as well as newly synthe-
sized components for the plasmalemma, endosomes, 
and other membranous organelles (see Figure 7–2). 
One class of vesicles carries newly synthesized 
plasmalemmal proteins and proteins that are continu-
ously secreted (constitutive secretion). These vesicles 
fuse with the plasma membrane in an unregulated 
fashion. An important type of these vesicles delivers 
lysosomal enzymes to late endosomes.
Still other classes of vesicles carry secretory pro-
teins that are released by an extracellular stimulus 
(regulated secretion). One type stores secretory prod-
ucts, primarily neuroactive peptides, in high concen-
trations. Called large dense-core vesicles because of their 
electron-dense (osmophilic) appearance in the electron 
microscope, these vesicles are similar in function and 
biogenesis to peptide-containing granules of endocrine 
cells. Large dense-core vesicles are targeted primarily 
to axons but can be seen in all regions of the neuron. 
They accumulate in the cytoplasm just beneath the 
plasma membrane and are highly concentrated at axon 
terminals, where their contents are released through 
Ca2+-regulated exocytosis.
Recent work has demonstrated that small syn-
aptic vesicles—the electron-lucent vesicles responsi-
ble for the rapid release of neurotransmitter at axon  
terminals—are actively transported toward the synap-
tic terminals as individual cargoes. It is thought that 
protein components of small synaptic vesicles origi-
nate from large precursor vesicles from the trans-Golgi 
network. These synaptic vesicles already incorporate 
most of the proteins that enable their fusion at the pre-
synaptic active zone. The neurotransmitter molecules 
stored in these synaptic vesicles are released by exocy-
tosis regulated by Ca2+ influx through channels close 
to the release site. The vesicles can then undergo cycles 
of recycling/exocytosis as described in Chapter 15.  
Importantly, these vesicles are refilled through spe-
cialized transporters called vesicular transporters that 
are specific for each neurotransmitter (eg, glutamate, 
γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA], acetylcholine).
Surface Membrane and Extracellular 
Substances Are Recycled in the Cell
Vesicular traffic toward the cell surface is continuously 
balanced by endocytic traffic from the plasma membrane 
to internal organelles. This traffic is essential for main-
taining the area of the membrane in a steady state. It 
can alter the activity of many important regulatory 
molecules on the cell surface (eg, by removing recep-
tors and adhesion molecules). It also removes nutrients 
and molecules, such as expendable receptor ligands and 
damaged membrane proteins, to the degradative com-
partments of the cells. Finally, it serves to recycle synap-
tic vesicles at nerve terminals (Chapter 15).


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    151
A significant fraction of endocytic traffic is carried 
in clathrin-coated vesicles. The clathrin coat interacts 
selectively through transmembrane receptors with 
extracellular molecules that are to be taken up into the 
cell. For this reason, clathrin-mediated uptake is often 
referred to as receptor-mediated endocytosis. The vesicles 
eventually shed their clathrin coats and fuse with the 
early endosomes, in which proteins to be recycled to 
the cell surface are separated from those destined for 
other intracellular organelles. Patches of the plasma-
lemma can also be recycled through larger, uncoated 
vacuoles that also fuse with early endosomes (bulk 
endocytosis).
Glial Cells Play Diverse Roles in  
Neural Function
Ramón y Cajal recognized the close association of glia 
with neurons and synapses in the brain (Figure 7–14). 
Although their function was at that time a mystery, he 
predicted that glia must do more than hold neurons 
together. Indeed, it is now clear that glial cells are 
critical players in brain development, function, and 
disease.
Glia Form the Insulating Sheaths for Axons
A major function of oligodendrocytes and Schwann 
cells is to provide the insulating material that allows 
rapid conduction of electrical signals along the axon. 
These cells produce thin sheets of myelin that wrap 
concentrically, many times, around the axon. CNS 
myelin, produced by oligodendrocytes, is similar, but 
not identical, to peripheral nervous system myelin, 
produced by Schwann cells.
Both types of glia produce myelin only for seg-
ments of axons. This is because the axon is not con-
tinuously wrapped in myelin, a feature that facilitates 
propagation of action potentials (Chapter 9). One 
Schwann cell produces a single myelin sheath for one 
segment of one axon, whereas one oligodendrocyte 
produces myelin sheaths for segments of as many as 
30 axons (Figures 7–1 and 7–15).
The number of layers of myelin on an axon is pro-
portional to the diameter of the axon—larger axons 
have thicker sheaths. Axons with very small diameters 
are not myelinated; nonmyelinated axons conduct 
action potentials much more slowly than do myeli-
nated axons because of their smaller diameter and lack 
of myelin insulation (Chapter 9).
The regular lamellar structure and biochemical 
composition of the sheath are consequences of how 
Figure 7–14  Astrocytes interact with neurons and synapses 
in the brain. This drawing by Ramón y Cajal (based on tissue 
stained with the sublimated gold chloride method) shows astro-
cytes of the pyramidal layer and stratum radiatum of Ammon’s 
horn in the human brain. (A) A large astrocyte ensheathes a 
pyramidal neuron. (B) Twin astrocytes form a nest around a 
nerve cell body (C). One of the astrocytes sends two branches 
to form another nest (D). (E) A cell shows signs of autolysis. (F) 
Capillary vessel. (Reproduced, with permission, from the  
Instituto Cajal, Madrid, Spain.)
myelin is formed from the glial plasma membrane. 
In the development of the peripheral nervous system, 
before myelination takes place, the axon lies within a 
trough formed by Schwann cells. Schwann cells line 
up along the axon at regular intervals that become the 
myelinated segments of axon. The external membrane 
of each Schwann cell surrounds the axon to form a 
double membrane structure called the mesaxon, which 
elongates and spirals around the axon in concentric 
layers (Figure 7–15C). As the axon is ensheathed, the 
cytoplasm of the Schwann cell is squeezed out to form 
a compact lamellar structure.
The regularly spaced segments of myelin sheath 
are separated by unmyelinated gaps, called nodes of 
Ranvier, where the plasma membrane of the axon is 
exposed to the extracellular space for approximately  
1 μm (Figure 7–16). This arrangement greatly increases 
the speed at which nerve impulses are conducted 


===== Page 5 =====
152    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Oligodendrocyte
A  Myelination in the central nervous system
C  Development of myelin sheath in the peripheral nervous system
4
B  Myelination in the peripheral nervous system
1
2
3
Outer
mesaxon
Axon
Inner
mesaxon
Sc Cyt
Ax
IM
Ml
OM
1 µm
SM
Figure 7–15  Glial cells produce the myelin that insulates 
the axons of central and peripheral neurons.
A. Axons in the central nervous system are wrapped in several 
layers of myelin produced by oligodendrocytes. Each oligoden-
drocyte can myelinate many axons. (Adapted from Raine 1984.)
B. This electron micrograph of a transverse section through an 
axon (Ax) in the sciatic nerve of a mouse shows the origin of 
a sheet of myelin (MI) at a structure called the inner mesaxon 
(IM). The myelin arises from the surface membrane (SM) of 
a Schwann cell, which is continuous with the outer mesaxon 
(OM). In this image, the Schwann cell cytoplasm (Sc Cyt) 
still surrounds the axon; eventually it is squeezed out and the 
myelin layers become compact, as shown in part C. (Repro-
duced, with permission, from Dyck et al. 1984.)
C. A peripheral nerve fiber is myelinated by a Schwann cell 
in several stages. In stage 1, the Schwann cell surrounds the 
axon. In stage 2, the outer aspects of the plasma membrane 
have become tightly apposed in one area. This membrane 
fusion reflects early myelin membrane formation. In stage 3, 
several layers of myelin have formed because of continued 
rotation of the Schwann cell cytoplasm around the axon. In 
stage 4, a mature myelin sheath has formed; much of the 
Schwann cell cytoplasm has been squeezed out of the inner-
most loop. (Adapted, with permission, from Williams et al. 1989.)
(up to 100 m/s in humans) because the signal jumps 
from one node to the next, a mechanism called salta-
tory conduction (Chapter 9). Nodes are easily excited 
because the density of Na+ channels, which gener-
ate the action potential, is approximately 50 times 
greater in the axon membrane at the nodes than in 
myelin-sheathed regions of membrane. Cell adhesion 
molecules around nodes keep the myelin boundaries 
stable.
In the human femoral nerve, the primary sensory 
axon is approximately 0.5 m long and the internodal 
distance is 1 to 1.5 mm; thus, approximately 300 to 
500 nodes of Ranvier occur along a primary afferent 
fiber between the thigh muscle and the cell body in the 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    153
Peripheral nervous system
Central nervous system
Al
Al
M
M
Ax
Ax
Nd
Juxtaparanode
Internode
Paranode
Caspr 2
K+ channels 
Caspr 2
Contactin
Node
Na+ channels
ankG
NrCAM
PNP
PNL
PNL
PNL
Basal 
lamina
Schwann cell
Oligodendrocyte
A
B
Nd
Figure 7–16  The myelin sheath of axons has regular gaps 
called the nodes of Ranvier.
A. Electron micrographs show the region of nodes in axons 
from the peripheral nervous system and spinal cord. The axon 
(Ax) runs vertically in both micrographs. The layers of myelin 
(M) are absent at the nodes (Nd), where the axon’s membrane 
(axolemma, Al) is exposed. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Peters et al. 1991.)
B. Regions on both sides of a node of Ranvier are rich in 
stable contacts between myelinating cells and the axon, to 
ensure that the nodes do not move or change in size and to 
restrict the localization of K+ and Na+ channels in the axon. 
Potassium-permeable channels and the adhesion protein 
Caspr2 are concentrated in the juxtaparanode. Paranodal loops 
(PNL) of Schwann cell or oligodendrocyte cytoplasm form a 
series of stable junctions with the axon. The paranode region is 
rich with adhesion proteins such as Caspr2, contactin, and neu-
rofascin (NF155). At the nodes in central axons, perinodal astro-
glial processes (PNP) contact the axonal membrane, which is 
enormously enriched with Na+ channels. This localization of Na+ 
permeability is a major basis for the saltatory conduction in 
myelinated axons. The membrane-cytoskeletal linker ankyrin G 
(ankG) and the cell adhesion molecules NrCAM and NF186 are 
also concentrated at the nodes. (Reproduced, with permission, 
from Peles and Salzer 2000. Copyright © 2000 Elsevier.)


===== Page 7 =====
154    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
dorsal root ganglion. Because each internodal segment 
is formed by a single Schwann cell, as many as 500 
Schwann cells participate in the myelination of each 
peripheral sensory axon.
Myelin has bimolecular layers of lipid interspersed 
between protein layers. Its composition is similar to 
that of the plasmalemma, consisting of 70% lipid and 
30% protein with high concentrations of cholesterol 
and phospholipid. In the CNS, myelin has two major 
proteins: myelin basic protein, a small, positively 
charged protein that is situated on the cytoplasmic 
surface of compact myelin, and proteolipid protein, a 
hydrophobic integral membrane protein. Presumably, 
both provide structural stability for the sheath.
Both have also been implicated as important 
autoantigens against which the immune system can 
react to produce the demyelinating disease multiple 
sclerosis. In the peripheral nervous system, myelin 
contains a major protein, P0, as well as the hydrophobic 
protein PMP22. Autoimmune reactions to these pro-
teins produce a demyelinating peripheral neuropathy, 
the Guillain-Barré syndrome. Mutations in myelin pro-
tein genes also cause a variety of demyelinating dis-
eases in both peripheral and central axons (Box 7–3). 
Demyelination slows down, or even stops, conduction 
of the action potential in an affected axon, because it 
allows electrical current to leak out of the axonal mem-
brane. Demyelinating diseases thus have devastating 
effects on neuronal circuits in the central and periph-
eral nervous systems (Chapter 57).
Astrocytes Support Synaptic Signaling
Astrocytes are found in all areas of the brain; indeed, 
they constitute nearly half the number of brain cells. 
They play important roles in nourishing neurons and 
in regulating the concentrations of ions and neurotrans-
mitters in the extracellular space. But astrocytes and 
neurons also communicate with each other to modu-
late synaptic signaling in ways that are still poorly 
understood. Astrocytes are generally divided into two 
main classes, which are distinguished by morphology, 
location, and function. Protoplasmic astrocytes are found 
in gray matter, and their processes are closely associ-
ated with synapses as well as blood vessels. Fibrillary 
(or fibrous) astrocytes in white matter contact axons and 
nodes of Ranvier. In addition, specialized astrocytes 
include Bergmann glia in the cerebellum and Müller 
glia in the retina.
Astrocytes have large numbers of thin processes 
that enfold all the blood vessels of the brain and 
ensheathe synapses or groups of synapses. By their 
intimate physical association with synapses, often 
closer than 1 μm, astrocytes are positioned to regulate 
extracellular concentrations of ions, neurotransmitters, 
and other molecules (Figure 7–19). In fact, astrocytes 
express many of the same voltage-gated ion channels 
and neurotransmitter receptors that neurons do and 
are thus well equipped to receive and transmit signals 
that could affect neuronal excitability and synaptic 
function.
How do astrocytes regulate axonal conduction and 
synaptic activity? The first recognized physiological 
role was that of K+ buffering. When neurons fire action 
potentials, they release K+ ions into the extracellular 
space. Because astrocytes have high concentrations 
of K+ channels in their membranes, they can act as  
spatial buffers: They take up K+ at sites of neuronal 
activity, mainly synapses, and release it at distant con-
tacts with blood vessels. Astrocytes can also accumu-
late K+ locally within their cytoplasmic processes along 
with Cl− ions and water. Unfortunately, accumulation 
of ions and water in astrocytes can contribute to severe 
brain swelling after head injury.
Astrocytes also regulate neurotransmitter concen-
trations in the brain. For example, high-affinity trans-
porters located in the astrocyte’s plasma membrane 
rapidly clear the neurotransmitter glutamate from the 
synaptic cleft (Figure 7–19C). Once within the glial cell, 
glutamate is converted to glutamine by the enzyme 
glutamine synthetase. Glutamine is then transferred 
to neurons, where it serves as an immediate precur-
sor of glutamate (Chapter 16). Interference with these 
uptake mechanisms results in high concentrations of 
extracellular glutamate that can lead to the death of 
neurons, a process termed excitotoxicity. Astrocytes 
also degrade dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, 
and serotonin.
Astrocytes sense when neurons are active because 
they are depolarized by the K+ released by neurons 
and have neurotransmitter receptors similar to those 
of neurons. For example, Bergmann glia in the cerebel-
lum express glutamate receptors. Thus, the glutamate 
released at cerebellar synapses affects not only post-
synaptic neurons but also astrocytes near the synapse. 
The binding of these ligands to glial receptors increases 
the intracellular free Ca2+ concentration, which has 
several important consequences. The processes of one 
astrocyte connect to those of neighboring astrocytes 
through intercellular aqueous channels called gap 
junctions (Chapter 11), allowing transfer of ions and 
small molecules between many cells. An increase in 
free Ca2+ within one astrocyte increases Ca2+ concen-
trations in adjacent astrocytes. This spread of Ca2+ 
through the astrocyte network occurs over hundreds of 
micrometers. It is likely that this Ca2+ wave modulates 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 7 / The Cells of the Nervous System    155
Because in myelinated axons normal conduction of the 
nerve impulse depends on the insulating properties of 
the myelin sheath, defective myelin can result in severe 
disturbances of motor and sensory function.
Many diseases that affect myelin, including some ani-
mal models of demyelinating disease, have a genetic basis. 
The shiverer (or shi) mutant mice have tremors and frequent 
convulsions and tend to die young. In these mice, the mye-
lination of axons in the central nervous system is greatly 
deficient and the myelination that does occur is abnormal.
The mutation that causes this disease is a deletion of 
five of the six exons of the gene for myelin basic protein, 
which in the mouse is located on chromosome 18. The 
mutation is recessive; a mouse develops the disease only 
if it has inherited the defective gene from both parents. 
Shiverer mice that inherit both defective genes have only 
approximately 10% of the myelin basic protein (MBP) 
found in normal mice (Figure 7–17A).
When the wild-type gene is injected into fertilized 
eggs of the shiverer mutant with the aim of rescuing the 
mutant, the resulting transgenic mice express the wild-
type gene but produce only 20% of the normal amounts 
of MBP. Nevertheless, myelination of central neurons 
in the transgenic mice is much improved. Although 
they still have occasional tremors, the transgenic mice 
do not have convulsions and have a normal life span 
(Figure 7–17B).
In both the central and peripheral nervous systems, 
myelin contains a protein termed myelin-associated 
glycoprotein (MAG). MAG belongs to the immunoglob-
ulin superfamily that includes several important cell 
surface proteins thought to be involved in cell-to-cell 
recognition, eg, the major histocompatibility complex 
of antigens, T-cell surface antigens, and the neural cell 
adhesion molecule (NCAM).
Box 7–3  Defects in Myelin Proteins Disrupt Conduction of Nerve Signals
Normal mouse has abundant myelination
A
Transfected normal gene improves myelination
Normal
Shiverer
Transgenic
B
Shiverer mutant has scant myelination
Figure 7–17  A genetic disorder of myelination in mice 
can be partially cured by transfection of the normal 
gene that encodes myelin basic protein.
A. Electron micrographs show the state of myelination in 
the optic nerve of a normal mouse, a shiverer mutant, and 
a shiverer mutant with the transfected gene for myelin 
basic protein.
B. The shiverer mutant exhibits poor posture and weak-
ness. Injection of the wild-type gene into the fertilized egg 
of the mutant improves myelination; the treated mutant 
looks as perky as a normal mouse. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Readhead et al. 1987.)
(continued)


===== Page 9 =====
156    Part II / Cell and Molecular Biology of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 7–18  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (type 1A) 
results from increased production of peripheral myelin 
protein 22.
A. A patient with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease shows 
impaired gait and deformities. (Reproduced, with permis-
sion, from Charcot’s original description of the disease, 
Charcot and Marie 1886.)
In the peripheral nervous system, MAG is expressed 
by Schwann cells early during production of myelin and 
eventually becomes a component of mature (compact) 
myelin. Its early expression, subcellular location, and 
structural similarity to other surface recognition pro-
teins suggest that it is an adhesion molecule important 
for the initiation of the myelination process. Two iso-
forms of MAG are produced from a single gene through 
alternative RNA splicing.
The major protein in mature peripheral myelin, 
myelin protein zero (MPZ or P0), spans the plasmalemma 
of the Schwann cell. It has a basic intracellular domain 
and, like MAG, is a member of the immunoglobulin 
superfamily. The glycosylated extracellular part of the 
protein, which contains the immunoglobulin domain, 
functions as a homophilic adhesion protein dur-
ing myelin-ensheathing by interacting with identi-
cal domains on the surface of the apposed membrane. 
Genetically engineered mice in which the function of 
P0 has been eliminated have poor motor coordination, 
tremors, and occasional convulsions.
Observation of trembler mouse mutants led to the 
identification of peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22). 
This Schwann cell protein spans the membrane four 
times and is normally present in compact myelin. 
PMP22 is altered by a single amino acid in the mutants. 
A similar protein is found in humans, encoded by a gene 
on chromosome 17.
Mutations of the PMP22 gene on chromosome 17 
produce several hereditary peripheral neuropathies, 
while a duplication of this gene causes one form of 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (Figure 7–18). This disease 
is the most common inherited peripheral neuropathy 
and is characterized by progressive muscle weakness, 
greatly decreased conduction in peripheral nerves, and 
cycles of demyelination and remyelination. Because 
both duplicated genes are active, the disease results 
from increased production of PMP22 (a two- to three-
fold increase in gene dosage). Mutations in a number of 
genes expressed by Schwann cells can produce inherited 
peripheral neuropathies.
In the central nervous system, more than half of 
the protein in myelin is the proteolipid protein (PLP), 
which has five membrane-spanning domains. Proteolip-
ids differ from lipoproteins in that they are insoluble in 
water. Proteolipids are soluble only in organic solvents 
because they contain long chains of fatty acids that are 
covalently linked to amino acid residues throughout the 
proteolipid molecule. In contrast, lipoproteins are non-
covalent complexes of proteins with lipids and often 
serve as soluble carriers of the lipid moiety in the blood.
Many mutations of PLP are known in humans as 
well as in other mammals, eg, the jimpy mouse. One 
example is Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease, a heterogene-
ous X-linked disease in humans. Almost all PLP muta-
tions occur in a membrane-spanning domain of the 
molecule. Mutant animals have reduced amounts of 
(mutated) PLP, hypomyelination, and degeneration and 
death of oligodendrocytes. These observations suggest 
that PLP is involved in the compaction of myelin.
A
Box 7–3  Defects in Myelin Proteins Disrupt Conduction of Nerve Signals (continued)


