===== Page 1 =====
1284    Part VII / Development and the Emergence of Behavior
Sapolsky RM. 2004. Mothering style and methylation. Nat 
Neurosci 7:791–792.
Savic I, Berglund H, Gulyas B, Roland P. 2001. Smelling of odor-
ous sex hormone-like compounds causes sex-differentiated 
hypothalamic activations in humans. Neuron 31:661–668.
Savic I, Berglund H, Lindstrom P. 2005. Brain response to 
putative pheromones in homosexual men. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 102:7356–7361.
Savic I, Lindstrom P. 2008. PET and MRI show differences in 
cerebral asymmetry and functional connectivity between 
homo- and heterosexual subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
105:9403–9408.
Sekido R, Lovell-Badge R. 2009. Sex determination and SRY: 
down to a wink and a nudge? Trends Genet 25:19–29.
Shah NM, Pisapia DJ, Maniatis S, Mendelsohn MM, Nemes 
A, Axel R. 2004. Visualizing sexual dimorphism in the 
brain. Neuron 43:313–319.
Stockinger P, Kvitsiani D, Rotkopf S, Tirian L, Dickson BJ. 
2005. Neural circuitry that governs Drosophila male court-
ship behavior. Cell 121:795–807.
Stowers L, Holy TE, Meister M, Dulac C, Koentges G. 2002. 
Loss of sex discrimination and male-male aggression in 
mice deficient for TRP2. Science 295:1493–1500.
Unger EK, Burke KJ Jr, Yang CF, Bender KJ, Fuller PM, Shah 
NM. 2015. Medial amygdalar aromatase neurons regulate 
aggression in both sexes. Cell Rep 10:453–462.
Weaver IC, Cervoni N, Champagne FA, et al. 2004. Epige-
netic programming by maternal behavior. Nat Neurosci 
7:847–854.
Wei YC, Wang SR, Jiao ZL, et al. 2018. Medial preoptic area in 
mice is capable of mediating sexually dimorphic behav-
iors regardless of gender. Nat Commun 9:279.
Wierman ME. 2007. Sex steroid effects at target tissues: mech-
anisms of action. Adv Physiol Educ 31:26–33.
Wu MV, Manoli DS, Fraser EJ, et al. 2009. Estrogen mascu-
linizes neural pathways and sex-specific behaviors. Cell 
139:61–72.
Wu Z, Autry AE, Bergan JF, Watabe-Uchida M, Dulac CG. 
2014. Galanin neurons in the medial preoptic area govern 
parental behaviour. Nature 509:325–330.
Xu X, Coats JK, Yang CF, et al. 2012. Modular genetic control 
of sexually dimorphic behaviors. Cell 148:596–607.
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, et al. 2013. Sexually dimor-
phic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus gov-
ern mating in both sexes and aggression in males. Cell 
153:896–909.
Yang T, Yang CF, Chizari MD, et al. 2017. Social control 
of hypothalamus-mediated male aggression. Neuron 
95:955–970.
Zhang J, Webb DM. 2003. Evolutionary deterioration of the 
vomeronasal pheromone transduction pathway in catar-
rhine primates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:8337–8341.
Zhang TY, Meaney MJ. 2010. Epigenetics and the environ-
mental regulation of the genome and its function. Annu 
Rev Psychol 61:439–466.


===== Page 2 =====
Part VIII


===== Page 3 =====
Preceding Page
Tingarri Men and Initiates at Marabindinya. In this painting by the Aboriginal Australian  
artist, Anatjari Tjampitjinpa, Tingarri instructors are depicted as concentric circles and 
their young initiates are shown as horseshoe shapes along the boundaries. The back-
ground of the painting depicts the sandhill country of the central Australian desert. 
Such symbolic representations recall the neural representations of episodic memories, 
consisting of events taking place in space and time, encoded in the firing of grid cells 
and place cells in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, respectively. (© Estate of the 
artist licensed by Aboriginal Artists Agency Ltd.)


===== Page 4 =====
VIII
Learning, Memory, Language and 
Cognition
M
otor and sensory functions take up less than one-half 
of the cerebral cortex in humans. The rest of the cortex is 
occupied by the association areas, which coordinate events 
arising in the motor and sensory centers. Three association areas—
the prefrontal, parietal-temporal-occipital, and limbic—are involved 
in cognitive behavior: speaking, thinking, feeling, perceiving, plan-
ning skilled movements, learning, memory, decision-making, and 
consciousness.
Most of the early evidence relating cognitive functions to the asso-
ciation areas came from clinical studies of brain-damaged patients. 
Thus, the study of language in patients with aphasia yielded impor-
tant information about how human mental processes are distributed 
in the two hemispheres of the brain and how they develop. More 
refined analyses have come from human imaging studies using 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and other methods. 
Deeper insights into the neural circuitry and cellular mechanisms 
giving rise to cognitive processes have come from electrophysiologi-
cal recordings and genetic-based manipulations, including cell type–
specific gene deletions and cell type–specific optogenetic excitation 
or inhibition in experimental animals, particularly in rodents. Such 
studies can evaluate the relative contribution of specific genes, neu-
rons, and synaptic connections to specific types of behavior. 
So far in this book, we have considered neural mechanisms asso-
ciated with basic functions of the brain, including primary sensory 
perception, movement, and homeostatic control. In this part and the 
next, we begin to consider the more complex, higher-order brain 
functions mentioned earlier, the realm of cognitive neural science. 
The aim of this merger of neurophysiology, anatomy, developmental 
biology, cell and molecular biology, theory, and cognitive psychol-
ogy is to ultimately provide an understanding of the neural mecha-
nisms of the mind. 
Until the latter part of the 20th century, the study of higher 
mental function was approached through behavioral observations 
gleaned from brain-damaged patients and animals with experimen-
tal lesions. In the first part of the 20th century, to avoid untestable 


===== Page 5 =====
concepts and hypotheses, psychology became rigidly concerned 
with behaviors defined strictly in terms of observable stimuli and 
responses. Orthodox behaviorists thought it unproductive to deal 
with consciousness, feeling, attention, or even motivation. By con-
centrating only on observable actions, behaviorists asked: What can 
an organism do, and how does it do it? Indeed, careful quantita-
tive analysis of stimuli and responses has contributed greatly to our 
understanding of the acquisition and use of “implicit” knowledge 
of perceptual and motor skills. However, humans and other higher 
animals also have “explicit” knowledge of facts and events. They 
have knowledge of space, rules, and relations—what Edward Tol-
man termed cognitive maps. Animals can choose a newly available 
route to a goal without ever learning the sensory-response associa-
tion, and humans can reason deliberatively from what they know 
to imagine something unknown. Indeed, that is what makes neural 
science possible—in fact, all of science and the humanities. 
Thus, we also need to ask: What does the animal know about the 
world, and how does it come to know it? How is that knowledge rep-
resented in the brain? Does explicit knowledge differ from implicit 
knowledge? And how can such knowledge be communicated to oth-
ers and enable us to make rational decisions based on past experi-
ence? Much, perhaps most, knowledge is unconscious a great deal of 
the time. We need to know the nature of the unconscious processes, 
the systems that mediate them, and their influence on the nature of 
conscious mental activity. Finally, we need to know about the high-
est realms of conscious knowledge, the knowledge of oneself as an 
individual, a thinking and feeling human being.
The modern effort to understand the neural mechanisms of 
higher mental functions began at the end of the 19th century when 
Pierre Broca and Carl Wernicke discovered regions of the cerebral 
cortex responsible for the production and comprehension of lan-
guage. Throughout the 20th century, studies of patients with brain 
damage resulting from accidents, war, and disease led to an expan-
sion of knowledge of the roles of specific brain areas responsible for 
cognitive functions, including attention, intention (planning), rea-
soning, and learning and memory. However, it was only in the past 
20 to 30 years, based in part on new technological approaches, that 
our understanding of cognitive processes advanced from anatomical 
localization to an understanding of how neural activity in specific 
brain regions underlies such processes.  
In Part VIII, we explore such questions of cognitive brain sci-
ence. Chapter 52 introduces basic mechanisms of human learning 
and memory, focusing on the use of fMRI and behavioral studies to 
elucidate the role of different brain regions in implicit and explicit 
memory. In Chapter 53, we discuss the cellular and molecular mech-
anisms responsible for implicit memory storage, focusing on stud-
ies in invertebrates and vertebrates that have elucidated the role of 
synaptic plasticity in implicit memory storage. In Chapter 54, we 


===== Page 6 =====
expand on the theme of synaptic plasticity, this time for the storage of 
explicit memory by the hippocampus and related brain regions. We 
further consider how the synaptic connectivity between the entorhi-
nal cortex and hippocampus enables us to perceive and remember 
our spatial location in a given environment. Next, in Chapter 55, we 
focus on the neural mechanisms underlying language, a uniquely 
human function that enables us to communicate our store of knowl-
edge to others, including brain circuits necessary for speaking and 
perceiving the spoken word. Finally, in Chapter 56, we examine how 
the brain enables us to use our knowledge to make rational deci-
sions. Viewed through the lens of decision-making, the distinction 
between the apparently separate processes of knowledge and know-
how can be seen as a unified function, one that provides a basis for 
understanding how consciousness may emerge from brain activ-
ity. Achieving a full understanding of the neural mechanisms that 
enable us to maintain a rich set of memories of our past experiences 
over a lifetime, to communicate those memories to others, and to use 
them to make informed, conscious decisions is perhaps one of the 
most daunting challenges in all of science.
Part Editors: Eric R. Kandel and Steven A. Siegelbaum
Part VIII
Chapter 52	
Learning and Memory
Chapter 53	
Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage 
and the Biological Basis of Individuality
Chapter 54	
The Hippocampus and the Neural Basis of 
Explicit Memory Storage
Chapter 55	
Language
Chapter 56	
Decision-Making and Consciousness


===== Page 7 =====
This page intentionally left blank 


===== Page 8 =====
52
Learning and Memory
I
n his masterful novel  One Hundred Years of  
Solitude, Gabriel Garcia Márquez describes a strange 
plague that invades a tiny village and robs people 
of their memories. The villagers first lose personal rec-
ollections, then the names and functions of common 
objects. To combat the plague, one man places written 
labels on every object in his home. But he soon realizes 
the futility of this strategy, because the plague eventu-
ally destroys even his knowledge of words and letters.
This fictional incident reminds us of how impor-
tant learning and memory are in everyday life. Learn-
ing refers to a change in behavior that results from 
acquiring knowledge about the world, and memory 
refers to the processes by which that knowledge is 
encoded, stored, and later retrieved. Marquez’s story 
challenges us to imagine life without the ability to learn 
and remember. We would forget people and places we 
once knew, and no longer be able to use and under-
stand language or execute motor skills we had once 
learned; we would not recall the happiest or saddest 
moments of our lives and would even lose our sense 
of personal identity. Learning and memory are essen-
tial to the full functioning and independent survival of 
people and animals.
In 1861, Pierre Paul Broca discovered that damage 
to the posterior portion of the left frontal lobe (Broca’s 
area) produces a specific deficit in language. Soon 
thereafter, it became clear that other mental functions, 
such as perception and voluntary movement, are also 
mediated by discrete parts of the brain (Chapter 1). 
This naturally led to the question: Are there discrete 
neural systems concerned with memory? If so, is there 
a “memory center,” or is memory processing widely 
distributed throughout the brain?
Short-Term and Long-Term Memory Involve  
Different Neural Systems
Short-Term Memory Maintains Transient Representations 
of Information Relevant to Immediate Goals
Information Stored in Short-Term Memory Is Selectively 
Transferred to Long-Term Memory
The Medial Temporal Lobe Is Critical for Episodic   
Long-Term Memory
Episodic Memory Processing Involves Encoding, Storage, 
Retrieval, and Consolidation
Episodic Memory Involves Interactions Between the 
Medial Temporal Lobe and Association Cortices
Episodic Memory Contributes to Imagination and  
Goal-Directed Behavior
The Hippocampus Supports Episodic Memory by 
Building Relational Associations
Implicit Memory Supports a Range of Behaviors  
in Humans and Animals
Different Forms of Implicit Memory Involve Different 
Neural Circuits
Implicit Memory Can Be Associative  
or Nonassociative
Operant Conditioning Involves Associating a Specific 
Behavior With a Reinforcing Event
Associative Learning Is Constrained by the Biology of 
the Organism
Errors and Imperfections in Memory Shed Light on Normal 
Memory Processes
Highlights


===== Page 9 =====
1292    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Contrary to the prevalent view that cognitive func-
tions are localized in the brain, many students of learn-
ing doubted that memory is localized. In fact, until 
the middle of the 20th century, many psychologists 
doubted that memory is a discrete function, independ-
ent of perception, language, or movement. One reason 
for the persistent doubt is that memory storage involves 
many different parts of the brain. We now appreciate, 
however, that these regions are not all equally impor-
tant. There are several fundamentally different types 
of memory, and certain regions of the brain are much 
more important for encoding some types of memory 
than for others.
During the past several decades, researchers have 
made significant progress in the analysis and under-
standing of learning and memory. In this chapter, we 
focus on studies of normal human memory behavior, 
its perturbations following brain lesions due to injury 
or surgery, and measurements of brain activity during 
learning and memory recall using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI) and extracellular electro-
physiological recordings. These studies have yielded 
three major insights.
First, there are several forms of learning and mem-
ory. Each form of learning and memory has distinctive 
cognitive and computational properties and is sup-
ported by different brain systems. Second, memory 
involves encoding, storage, retrieval, and consolida-
tion. Finally, imperfections and errors in remember-
ing can provide clues about the nature and function of 
learning and memory and the fundamental role that 
memory plays in guiding behavior and planning for 
the future.
Memory can be classified along two dimensions: 
(1) the time course of storage and (2) the nature of the 
information stored. In this chapter, we consider the time 
course of storage. In the next two chapters, we focus on 
the cellular, molecular, and circuit-based mechanisms 
of different forms of learning and memory, based 
largely on studies of animal models.
Short-Term and Long-Term Memory Involve 
Different Neural Systems
Short-Term Memory Maintains Transient 
Representations of Information Relevant to 
Immediate Goals
When we reflect on the nature of memory, we usually 
think of the long-term memory that William James 
referred to as “memory proper” or “secondary memory.” 
That is, we think of memory as “the knowledge of a 
former state of mind after it has already once dropped 
from consciousness.” This knowledge depends on the 
formation of a memory trace that is durable, in which 
the representation persists even when its content has 
been out of conscious awareness for a long period.
Not all forms of memory, however, constitute “for-
mer states of mind.” In fact, the ability to store informa-
tion depends on a form of short-term memory, called 
working memory, which maintains current, albeit 
transient, representations of goal-relevant knowledge. 
In humans, working memory consists of at least two 
subsystems––one for verbal information and another 
for visuospatial information. The functioning of these 
two subsystems is coordinated by a third system called 
the executive control processes. Executive control pro-
cesses are thought to allocate attentional resources to 
the verbal and visuospatial subsystems and to moni-
tor, manipulate, and update stored representations.
We use the verbal subsystem when we attempt 
to keep speech-based (phonological) information in 
conscious awareness, as when we mentally rehearse 
a password before entering it. The verbal subsystem 
consists of two interactive components: a store that 
represents phonological knowledge and a rehearsal 
mechanism that keeps these representations active 
while we need them. Phonological storage depends 
on posterior parietal cortices, and rehearsal partially 
depends on articulatory processes in Broca’s area.
The visuospatial subsystem of working memory 
retains mental images of visual objects and of the loca-
tion of objects in space. The rehearsal of spatial and 
object information is thought to involve modulation of 
this information in the parietal, inferior temporal, and 
occipital cortices by the frontal and premotor cortices.
Single-cell recordings in nonhuman primates 
indicate that, over a period of seconds, some prefron-
tal neurons maintain spatial representations, others 
maintain object representations, and still others repre-
sent the integration of spatial and object knowledge. 
Although neurons concerned with working memory 
of objects tend to lie in the ventrolateral prefrontal cor-
tex and those concerned with spatial knowledge tend 
to lie in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, all three 
classes of neurons are found in both prefrontal subre-
gions (Figure 52–1).
Thus, working memory involves activation of 
representations of information stored in specialized 
cortical regions that vary based on the content of the 
information, as well as activation of general control 
mechanisms in prefrontal cortex. Prefrontal control 
signals in working memory are further dependent on 
interaction with the striatum and ascending dopamin-
ergic inputs from the midbrain.


