===== Page 1 =====
1052    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 42–5  Neural circuits engaged during fear condition-
ing.  The conditioned stimulus (CS) and unconditioned stimulus 
(US) are relayed to the lateral nucleus of the amygdala from 
the auditory and somatosensory regions of the thalamus and 
cerebral cortex. Convergence of the CS and US pathways in 
the lateral nucleus is believed to underlie the synaptic changes 
that mediate learning. The lateral nucleus communicates with 
the central nucleus both directly and through intra-amygdala 
pathways (not shown) involving the basal and intercalated 
nuclei. The central nucleus relays these signals to regions 
that control various motor responses, including the central 
gray region (CG), which controls freezing behavior; the lateral 
hypothalamus (LH), which controls autonomic responses; and 
the paraventricular hypothalamus (PVH), which controls stress 
hormone secretion by the pituitary–adrenal axis. (Adapted from 
Medina et al. 2002.)
Amygdala
Lateral 
nucleus
Central 
nucleus
Auditory
thalamus
Somatosensory
thalamus
Auditory  
cortex
Somatosensory  
cortex
CS (sound)
US (shock)
Freezing
Autonomic 
nervous
system
Hormones
LH
CG
PVH
predicted by the Cannon-Bard hypothesis, sensory sig-
nals from thalamic relay nuclei are conveyed to sen-
sory areas of cerebral cortex. As a result, the amygdala 
and cortex are activated simultaneously. However, 
the amygdala is able to respond to an auditory dan-
ger cue before the cortex can fully process the stimulus 
information. This scheme is well worked out only for 
auditory fear conditioning in rodents, and it remains 
unclear how it applies to other cases, such as visually 
evoked fear in humans.
The lateral nucleus is thought to be a site of syn-
aptic change during fear conditioning. The CS and 
US signals converge on neurons in the lateral nucleus; 
when the CS and US are paired, the effectiveness of 
the CS in eliciting action potentials is enhanced. This 
basic mechanism for a form of associative learning is 
similar to cellular mechanisms that underlie declara-
tive memory in the hippocampus as well (Chapter 54). 
In particular, the synaptic plasticity found in the hip-
pocampus has also been demonstrated in specific cen-
tral amygdala circuits. The central amygdala thus does 
not simply drive motor outputs but is also part of the 
circuitry through which fear associations are formed 
and stored, very likely by transmitting information 
about the CS and US from the lateral nucleus. Neural 
plasticity likely also occurs in the basal and accessory 
basal nuclei during fear learning. As with the hypo-
thalamus, recent work in rodents using tools such as 
optogenetics to manipulate specific subpopulations of 
amygdala neurons has begun to dissect this circuitry 
in further detail.
The emotional charge of a stimulus is evaluated 
by the amygdala together with other brain structures, 
such as the prefrontal cortex. If this system detects 
danger, it orchestrates the expression of behavioral and 
physiological responses by way of connections from 
the central amygdala and parts of prefrontal cortex to 
the hypothalamus and brain stem. For example, freez-
ing behavior is mediated by connections from the cen-
tral nucleus to the ventral periaqueductal gray region. 
In addition, the basal and accessory basal nuclei of 
the amygdala send projections to many parts of the 
cerebral cortex, including the prefrontal, rhinal, and 
sensory cortices; these pathways provide a means for 
neural representations in the amygdala to influence 
cognitive functions. For example, through its wide-
spread projections to cortical areas, the amygdala can 
modulate attention, perception, memory, and decision 
making. Its connections with the modulatory dopa-
minergic, noradrenergic, serotonergic, and choliner-
gic nuclei that project to cortical areas also influence 
cognitive processing (Chapter 40). Given these very 
widespread connections and functional effects, the 
amygdala is well situated to implement one of the key 
features of an emotion: its coordinated and multicom-
ponent responses.
The Amygdala Has Been Implicated in Innate Fear 
in Animals
Although the majority of stimuli acquire their emo-
tional significance through learning, especially in 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1053
humans, many animals also rely on innate (uncondi-
tioned) signals in the detection of threats, mates, food, 
and so forth. For example, rodents exhibit freezing and 
other defensive behaviors when fox urine is detected. 
Recent studies have made considerable progress in 
uncovering the circuits underlying this innate fear.
In mammals, sensory signals of unconditioned 
threats involving predator or conspecific odors are trans-
mitted from the vomeronasal component of the olfac-
tory system (Chapter 29) to the medial amygdala. This 
stands in contrast to auditory and visual threats, which 
as noted above are processed via the lateral amygdala. 
Outputs of the medial amygdala reach the ventrome-
dial hypothalamus, which connects with the premam-
millary hypothalamic nucleus. In contrast to learned 
fear, which depends on the ventral periaqueductal gray 
region, unconditioned fear responses depend on inputs 
from the hypothalamus to the dorsal periaqueductal 
gray region. There are other subcortical systems special-
ized for processing specific innate threats; for instance, 
the mouse superior colliculus is involved in detecting 
aerial predators, such as a hawk flying overhead.
It is difficult to study unconditioned emotional 
responses in humans because the possibility of learning 
begins right at birth and cannot be experimentally con-
trolled, and because there appear to be large individual 
differences. For instance, it is thought that threat-related 
stimuli such as snakes and spiders may be innately fear-
inducing stimuli for those people with phobias toward 
these animals but not for people who keep them as pets. 
These large individual differences, and the relative roles 
of innate and learned fear, are important topics for under-
standing psychiatric illnesses such as anxiety disorders.
The Amygdala Is Important for Fear in Humans
The basic findings from animal studies regarding the role 
of the amygdala in emotion have been confirmed in stud-
ies of humans. Patients with damage to the amygdala fail 
to show fear conditioning when presented with a neutral 
CS paired with a US (electric shock or loud noise). In nor-
mal human subjects, activity in the amygdala increases 
during CS–US pairing, as measured with fMRI.
Studies of rare human patients with bilateral 
amygdala lesions have led to the surprising finding 
of a dissociation in fear reactions to exteroceptive and 
interoceptive stimuli (Figure 42–6). Not only do such 
patients fail to show any autonomic fear reactions to 
exteroceptive stimuli, to either the CS or the US, but 
they also appear to lack any conscious experience of 
fear, as evidenced either from behavioral observation 
or through subjective verbal report on a questionnaire. 
In one study, such a patient was confronted with snakes 
and spiders in an exotic pet store, with monsters in a 
haunted house, and with autobiographical recollec-
tions of highly traumatic personal events (eg, being 
threatened with death by another person). In none of 
these instances was there any evidence of fear, and the 
patient reported feeling no fear at all (even though the 
patient was able to feel other emotions). These findings 
argue that the amygdala is necessary for the induction 
and experience of fear in humans.
By striking contrast, the very same patients with 
amygdala lesions report intense panic when they are 
made to feel as though they are suffocating (an intero-
ceptive fear cue, achieved by inhaling carbon dioxide, 
which lowers blood pH). The dissociation of fear reac-
tions to exteroceptive and interoceptive stimuli sup-
ports the idea that there are multiple fear systems in the 
human brain and that the amygdala cannot be the only 
structure essential for all forms of fear. Ongoing work is 
providing more insight, such as mapping out the specific 
amygdala nuclei that are damaged in these patients and 
which nuclei are responsible for what types of deficits. 
This level of resolution is standard in animal studies of 
the amygdala but has been difficult to achieve in humans, 
since the amygdala lesions cannot be made experimen-
tally but instead must rely on rare patients that reflect 
accidents of nature. Equally important, there are theoret-
ical frameworks for how to subdivide the different types 
of fear. For example, fear can be mapped onto a dimen-
sion of threat imminence, which may cover a range from 
threats that are very far away (perhaps evoking mild 
anxiety, and engaging monitoring and attention), to 
threats that are more proximal (evoking fear, and engag-
ing responses such as freezing), to threats that are about 
to cause death (evoking panic, and engaging defensive 
behaviors). Eventually, we will need to have a more fine-
grained mapping between brain systems and varieties of 
emotion that incorporates all of these details.
Certain forms of fear learning are relatively unique 
to humans. For example, simply telling a human subject 
that the CS may be followed by a shock is enough to 
allow the CS to elicit fear responses. The CS elicits char-
acteristic autonomic responses even though it was never 
associated with the delivery of the shock. Humans can 
also be conditioned by allowing them to observe some-
one else being conditioned—the observer learns to fear 
the CS even though the CS or US was never directly pre-
sented to the observing subject. Some other animals also 
are able to learn fear through such observational learn-
ing, although this seems to be more rare than is the case 
in humans. One form of learning that is ubiquitous in 
humans appears to be unique to our species: active ped-
agogy, whereby another person teaches somebody that 
a stimulus is dangerous. While learning what to avoid 


===== Page 3 =====
1054    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Figure 42–6  In humans, the amygdala is necessary for fear 
responses to external, but not internal, stimuli.
A. Magnetic resonance imaging scan of a subject’s brain with 
bilateral amygdala lesions. Lesions were relatively restricted to 
the entire amygdala, a very rare lesion in humans.
B. The subject with bilateral amygdala lesions, S.M., did not 
report feeling fear for any of the questionnaire-based measures 
normally used to assess fear and anxiety (percentage of maxi-
mum score possible [POMP]). This was consistent with other 
findings: She did not exhibit fear when watching horror movies, 
when confronted with large spiders and snakes, or when visit-
ing a haunted house during Halloween. These findings show 
that the human amygdala is necessary for inducing fear in 
response to these external stimuli. (Abbreviation: PANAS,  
Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.)
C. By contrast, a study of S.M. and two other subjects with 
bilateral amygdala lesions found that they exhibited strong 
panic when given an internal stimulus. They were asked to 
inhale carbon dioxide (CO2), which produces a feeling of suf-
focation. This caused all three patients with amygdala lesions 
and 3 out of 12 of the control subjects with intact amygdalae to 
experience panic attacks.
D. Change from baseline in maximum heart rate during  
CO2 inhalation relative to air trials. Both the amygdala  
lesion patients (n = 2) and the control subjects who panicked  
(n = 3) had higher increases in heart rate than the control sub-
jects who did not panic (n = 9). (Mean ± standard error of the 
mean.) (Adapted, with permission from Feinstein et al 2011, 
2013.)
A
Lesions of
the amygdala
B
C
D
Controls
Amygdala
lesion
PANAS-X Fear
(general)
Fear
Questionnaire
Fear Survey
Schedule II
Beck Anxiety
Inventory
Anxiety
Sensitivity Index
Social Avoidance
and Distress Scale
30
40
20
POMP score
10
0
0
25
50
75
100
Controls
Subjects experiencing panic attack (%)
Amygdala
lesion
*
0
10
20
30
40
Control
nonpanic
Control
panic
Max heart rate (∆beats/min, CO2-air)
Amygdala
lesion
and what to approach in the world is a large part of 
development in the young of all species, active teaching 
about the significance of stimuli has not been found in 
any species other than humans so far (learning through 
passive observation is more common).
The emotional learning and memory capacities of 
the human amygdala fall into the category of implicit 
learning and memory, which includes forms of memory 
such as the unconscious recall of perceptual and motor 
skills (Chapter 53). In situations of danger, however, 
the hippocampus and other components of the medial 
temporal lobe system that participate in explicit learning 
and memory (the conscious recall of people, places, and 
things) will be recruited as well and will encode aspects 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1055
of the learning episode. As a result, the learned indica-
tors of danger can also be recalled consciously, at least 
in humans and probably in some other species as well.
Studies of patients with bilateral damage to the 
amygdala or hippocampus illustrate the separate con-
tributions of these structures to implicit and explicit 
memory for emotional events, respectively. Patients 
with damage to the amygdala show no conditioned 
skin-conductance responses to a CS (suggesting no 
implicit emotional learning) but have normal declara-
tive memory of the conditioning experience (indicat-
ing intact explicit learning). By contrast, patients with 
hippocampal damage show normal conditioned skin-
conductance responses to the CS (suggesting intact 
implicit emotional learning) but have no conscious 
memory of the conditioning experience (indicating 
impaired explicit learning).
Amygdala function is altered in a number of 
psychiatric disorders in humans, especially disor-
ders of fear and anxiety (Chapter 61). In addition, 
the amygdala plays an important role in processing 
cues related to addictive drugs (Chapter 43). In all of 
these cases, the amygdala is but one component of a 
distributed neural network that includes other corti-
cal and subcortical regions. For instance, declarative 
memory for highly emotional events involves inter-
actions between the amygdala and hippocampus; 
motivational consequences of Pavlovian condition-
ing involve interactions between the amygdala and 
the ventral striatum; and learning that a previously 
dangerous stimulus is now safe involves interactions 
between the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex. An 
important future direction will be to go beyond exam-
ining each component in isolation in order to better 
understand how emotions are processed by complex 
multicomponent networks of brain regions. This level 
of analysis is common in studies of human emotion 
using fMRI (see below).
The Amygdala’s Role Extends to Positive Emotions
Although most work on the neural basis of emotion 
during the past half century has focused on aversive 
responses, especially fear, other studies have shown 
that the amygdala is also involved in positive emotions, 
in particular the processing of rewards. In monkeys 
and rodents, the amygdala participates in associating 
neutral stimuli with rewards (appetitive Pavlovian 
conditioning), just as it participates in associating neu-
tral stimuli with punishments, and there appear to be 
distinct populations of neurons that encode rewards 
and punishments in the amygdala. This is broadly sim-
ilar to findings from the rodent hypothalamus, where 
neurons involved in defense and in mating are also 
close together and only modern molecular techniques 
can test their independent roles.
Studies in nonhuman primates and rodents have 
investigated a suggestion first made by Larry Weiskrantz 
that the amygdala represents stimulus reward as well 
as punishment. For example, in a recent study, mon-
keys were trained to associate abstract visual images 
with rewarding or aversive USs. The meaning was 
then reversed (eg, by pairing an aversive outcome with 
a visual image that had previously been associated 
with a reward). In this way, it was possible to distin-
guish the role of the amygdala in representing visual 
information from its role in representing the reinforce-
ment (a rewarding or aversive stimulus) predicted by 
a visual image. Changes in the type of reinforcement 
associated with an image modulated neural activity in 
the amygdala, and the modulation occurred rapidly 
enough to account for behavioral learning.
Subsequent studies using modern molecular and 
genetic techniques have demonstrated that distinct 
circuitry within the amygdala mediates a neural rep-
resentation of rewarding USs, as well as rewarding 
experiences. The activation of a neural representa-
tion of an appetitive US in the amygdala is sufficient 
to induce innate valenced physiological responses as 
well as appetitive learning. Moreover, reactivation of 
neurons activated earlier by an enjoyable experience 
appears to be sufficient to elicit positive emotions. 
These findings are consistent with a growing number 
of functional imaging studies in humans that have 
shown that the amygdala is involved in emotions quite 
broadly. For example, the human amygdala is acti-
vated when subjects observe pictures of stimuli associ-
ated with food, sex, and money or when people make 
decisions based on the reward value of stimuli.
Emotional Responses Can Be Updated Through 
Extinction and Regulation
Once conditioned fear has been learned, it can be extin-
guished by later experiencing that the CS is now safe, 
for instance, by repeatedly presenting the CS without 
any US pairing. The circuitry underlying fear extinc-
tion has been studied in detail as it is highly relevant to 
psychiatric illnesses such as post-traumatic stress dis-
order (PTSD). Projections from the prefrontal cortex to 
the amygdala are required to override the conditioned 
fear in the amygdala. While conditioned fear responses 
decline during extinction, they are never completely 
erased, as demonstrated by the phenomenon of rein-
statement, where fear can suddenly reappear.


===== Page 5 =====
1056    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Cognitive therapies for changing emotion states have 
also been studied, primarily in humans. For instance, a 
focused effort to increase or decrease the intensity of an 
emotion like fear has some effect on the emotion state. 
Indeed, neuroimaging studies have found that people 
can, to some degree, change their amygdala activation to 
fear-inducing stimuli just by how they think about those 
stimuli. Emotion regulation is a complex phenomenon, 
since there are multiple strategies for changing the emo-
tion, ranging from just suppressing the motor behaviors 
to better control over how we evaluate a situation. These 
multiple sources of emotion regulation, especially in 
humans, highlight the fact that emotions must often be 
adjusted in keeping with complex social norms.
Emotion Can Influence Cognitive Processes
As evidenced in the above examples, emotion inter-
acts with many other aspects of cognition, including 
memory, decision making, and attention. We discussed 
above an example of nondeclarative emotional mem-
ory, Pavlovian fear conditioning, but emotions can 
also influence declarative memory. Projections from 
the amygdala to the hippocampus can influence how 
learning is encoded and consolidated into long-term 
declarative memory. This accounts for why we remem-
ber best those events in our lives that are the most emo-
tional, such as weddings and funerals.
Emotion has complex effects on decision making, 
as one might expect, since the subjective evaluation of 
such variables as risk, effort, and value is modulated by 
emotion. For instance, different choices with the same 
objective risk can elicit different behavioral decisions 
depending on whether they are framed as a win or a loss. 
For example, subjects typically prefer a sure gain of $5 to 
a 50% chance of winning $10, but prefer a 50% chance of 
losing $10 to a sure loss of $5. Interestingly, fMRI studies 
have revealed that such framing modulates amygdala 
activation. There is greater amygdala activation in the 
“win” frame when subjects choose a sure amount over 
a risky gamble, and greater amygdala activation in the 
“loss” frame when subjects choose the gamble over the 
sure amount. Thus, value representations in the amyg-
dala are not rigidly associated with stimuli but are mod-
ulated by context-dependent evaluation.
Because emotionally relevant stimuli are highly 
salient to an organism’s self-interest, they typically 
capture attention. For instance, people tend to orient 
toward, and look at, emotionally relevant visual stim-
uli, even when those stimuli are presented under con-
ditions where they cannot be consciously perceived. 
One intriguing finding is that patients with bilateral 
amygdala lesions are impaired not only in their expe-
rience and expression of fear, as described above, but 
also in their recognition of fear in other people. One 
such patient, a woman called S.M., was selectively 
impaired in recognizing fear from facial expressions. 
This impairment in turn appears to result from a more 
basic impairment in allocating visual attention to those 
regions of the face that normally signal fear. S.M. does 
not spontaneously fixate on the eye region of the face 
when she looks at facial expressions and therefore does 
not process detailed visual information from wide eyes 
that would normally contribute to the recognition of 
fear when one is looking at a fearful face (Figure 42–7).
These findings suggest an important role for the 
amygdala in attention and highlight the possibility that 
apparently specific deficits for certain emotions (like 
fear) might arise from more basic attentional or motiva-
tional effects. There is ongoing debate about the precise 
role of the human amygdala in attentional aspects of 
emotion processing: Some studies argue that it comes 
into play even for nonconscious threat-related stimuli 
and in a very automatic fashion; other studies argue that 
the amygdala requires more elaborated and conscious 
processing once attention has already been allocated. 
Single-neuron recordings from the human amygdala 
support the latter view, whereas some fMRI studies sup-
port the former view. All of the findings from human 
lesion studies will need to be more finely dissected; 
some recent work on patients who have damage only to 
specific amygdala subnuclei is yielding further insights.
Many Other Brain Areas Contribute to 
Emotional Processing
As seen in the case of conditioned and unconditioned 
fear, the amygdala contributes to emotional processing 
as part of a larger circuit, or set of circuits, that includes 
regions of the hypothalamus and brain stem, eg, the 
periaqueductal gray region in the brain stem. Cortical 
areas are also important components of this circuit.
A number of human studies have implicated the 
ventral region of the anterior cingulate cortex, the 
insular cortex, and the ventromedial prefrontal cor-
tex in various aspects of emotional processing. The 
medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala are closely 
connected with one another, and neurons in these 
brain regions show complex responses that encode 
information about many emotional and cognitive 
variables. These findings contribute to an emerg-
ing picture of a dynamic neural substrate for emo-
tion states: Individual states are not the outcome of 
a single structure or specific neurons, but are more 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1057
Figure 42–7  Bilateral amygdala lesions impair the recogni-
tion of fear in the facial expressions of others.  This impair-
ment may be due to abnormal processing of information from 
the face. (Reproduced, with permission, from Adolphs et al. 
2005.)
A. S.M. made significantly less use of information from the eye 
region of faces when judging emotion. These images show the 
regions of the face from which control subjects (left) or S.M. 
(right) were able to recognize fear. The results were obtained 
by showing subjects many trials with only small parts of the 
face revealed. All those trials in which subjects were able to 
recognize fear could then be summed to produce an image like 
this, which shows the regions of the face that viewers make 
use of in order to discriminate fearful from happy faces (these 
particular parts of the face allow viewers to tell apart fearful 
from happy faces, whereas other parts do not help with this 
discrimination).
B. While looking at whole faces, S.M. (right) exhibited abnormal 
face gaze (indicated by white lines), making far fewer fixations 
to the eyes than did controls (left). This shows that S.M. failed 
to attend to and hence process visual information from the eye 
region. This deficit was observed across all emotions, but was 
most important for fear recognition because wide eyes nor-
mally predict fear.
C. S.M. showed poor ability to recognize fear when freely 
observing whole faces (free viewing), but her performance 
improved remarkably when instructed to look at the eyes 
(attending to eyes). This result shows that the role of the 
amygdala in processing fearful expressions involves direct-
ing attention onto features that are particularly significant (the 
eyes), rather than the downstream process of interpreting the 
sensory input.
A
C
*
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Controls
Free
viewing
Face recognition accuracy
Attending
to eyes
Amygdala lesion
Controls
Amygdala lesion
B


===== Page 7 =====
1058    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Examination of patients with focal lesions complements 
neuroimaging studies of the neural correlates of emo-
tions. In addition to studies of the amygdala, lesion 
studies have provided insights into the role of several 
other brain regions in processing emotions.
One of the most famous set of studies harks back 
to the accident of Phineas Gage, who in 1848 suffered 
an injury to his ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Gage 
was working on constructing a railway in Vermont and 
was tamping gunpowder into a hole with a long metal 
rod, called a tamping iron. By accident, he struck a spark 
in the rock and the gunpowder exploded, shooting the 
tamping iron straight through his head.
Amazingly, Gage lived for many years after this 
horrible accident, but he was a changed person with 
notable changes in his social and emotional behavior. 
This was the first evidence that parts of the prefrontal 
cortex played a role in emotions. Since Gage, several 
patients with damage centered on the ventromedial pre-
frontal cortex have been described. These patients have 
poor insight and decision-making abilities and tend to 
have blunted or unusual emotional responses, espe-
cially for social emotions.
Unlike normal individuals, patients with these fron-
tal lesions do not exhibit changes in heart rate or degree 
of palm sweating when shown pictures that have emo-
tional content, although they can describe the pictures 
flawlessly. Likewise, patients with frontal lesions do not 
show skin conductance changes, a sign of sympathetic 
activation, during the period that precedes making risky 
and disadvantageous decisions, suggesting that their 
emotional memory is not engaged during that critical 
period. Also unlike normal subjects, these patients fail 
in tasks in which they have to make a decision under 
conditions of uncertainty, and in which reward and pun-
ishment are important factors.
Several brain regions are also more specifically 
involved in feelings. Damage to the right somatosensory 
cortex (primary and secondary somatosensory cortices 
and insula) impairs social feelings such as empathy. Con-
sistent with this finding, patients with lesions in the right 
somatosensory cortex fail to guess accurately the feelings 
behind the facial expressions of other individuals. This 
ability to read faces is not impaired in patients with com-
parable lesions of the left somatosensory cortex, indicat-
ing that the right cerebral hemisphere is dominant in the 
processing of at least some feelings. Body sensations such 
as pain and itch remain intact, as do feelings of basic emo-
tions such as fear, joy, and sadness.
On the other hand, damage to the human insular 
cortex, especially on the left, can suspend addictive 
behaviors, such as smoking. This suggests that the insu-
lar cortices play a role in associating external cues with 
internal states such as pleasure and desire. Interestingly, 
complete bilateral damage to the human insular corti-
ces, as caused by herpes simplex encephalitis, does not 
eliminate emotional feelings or body sensations, sug-
gesting that the somatosensory cortices and subcorti-
cal nuclei in the hypothalamus and brain stem are also 
involved in generating feeling states.
Box 42–2  Lesion Studies of Emotion
flexibly assembled over a distributed population of 
multifunction neurons.
Some emotions are associated with social inter-
action and range from empathy and pride to embar-
rassment and guilt. Like the primary emotions such as 
fear, pleasure, or sadness, these social emotions pro-
duce various bodily changes and behaviors and can be 
experienced consciously as distinct feelings. This class 
of emotions may depend especially on cortical regions 
in the prefrontal cortex.
Studies of patients with neurological disease and 
focal brain lesions have advanced the understanding of 
the neural circuitry of emotions (Box 42–2). For exam-
ple, damage to some sectors of the prefrontal cortex 
markedly impairs social emotions and related feelings. 
In addition, these patients show marked changes in 
social behavior that resemble the behavior of patients 
with developmental sociopathic personalities. Patients 
with damage to some sectors of the prefrontal cortex 
are unable to hold jobs, cannot maintain stable social 
relationships, are prone to violate social conventions, 
and cannot maintain financial independence. It is 
common for family ties and friendships to break after 
the onset of this condition. Recent studies reveal that, 
under controlled experimental conditions, the moral 
judgments of these patients can also be flawed.
Patients with medial and ventral frontal lobe dam-
age, unlike patients with more dorsal or lateral fron-
tal lobe damage, do not have motor defects such as 
limb paralysis or speech defects and thus may appear 
at first to be neurologically normal. Their perceptual 
abilities, attention, learning, recall, language, and 
motor abilities often show no signs of disturbance. 
Some patients have IQ scores in the superior range. 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 42 / Emotion    1059
For these reasons, they sometimes attempt to return to 
their work and social activities after their initial recov-
ery from brain damage. Only when they start to inter-
act with others are their defects noticed.
In the prefrontal cortex, the ventromedial sector is 
particularly important for such interactions. In most 
patients with impaired social emotions, this sector is 
damaged bilaterally, although damage restricted to the 
right side can be sufficient to cause impairments. The 
critical region encompasses Brodmann’s areas 12, 11, 
10, 25, and 32, which receive extensive projections from 
the dorsolateral and dorsomedial sectors of the pre-
frontal cortex. Some of these areas project extensively 
to subcortical areas related to emotions: the amygdala, 
the hypothalamus, and the periaqueductal gray region 
in the brain stem.
Interestingly, when asked about punishment, 
reward, or responsibility, adult patients with damage 
to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex often respond 
as if they still have the basic knowledge of the rules, 
but their actions indicate that they fail to use them 
in real-life situations. This dissociation suggests that 
their behavioral defects are not caused by a loss of 
factual knowledge but rather by impairment of the 
brain’s assignment of motivational value to factors 
that normally exert control over behavior. In some 
respects, this dissociation is similar to the dissociation 
between explicit and implicit emotional learning vis-
à-vis the hippocampus and the amygdala. An inter-
esting hypothesis arising from these dissociations is 
that one might find greater deficits following lesions 
to emotion-related structures, like the amygdala or 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, in other species, or in 
children, in whom explicit behavioral control has not 
yet evolved or developed to the degree that it has in 
adults. There is some support for this idea: Lesions to 
these structures early in life can result in more severe 
deficits in emotional and social behaviors than if the 
lesions are sustained in adulthood (a pattern opposite 
to that of most other lesions, which show better recov-
ery of function the earlier the onset). These findings 
also suggest hypotheses for neural dysfunction that 
may contribute to the emotional difficulties seen in 
developmental psychiatric disorders, such as autism.
The above lesion studies have been complemented 
by controlled experimental studies using fMRI, which 
provide further insight into mechanisms. Functional 
imaging of value-based decision making in healthy 
human subjects shows that the ventromedial prefron-
tal cortex is activated during the period before making 
a choice. That same region is activated also just by the 
administration of punishment and reward, supporting 
the notion that the emotional significance of anticipated 
punishments and rewards is computed as part of the 
mechanism that guides this kind of decision making. 
Punishment and reward are frequently featured in 
experiments involving economic and moral decisions, 
and such decision making prominently involves many 
of the same structures that are also involved in pro-
cessing emotions.
The prefrontal cortex, especially areas in the ven-
tromedial sector, operates in parallel with the amyg-
dala. During an emotional response, ventromedial 
areas govern the attention accorded to certain stimuli, 
influence the content retrieved from memory, and help 
shape mental plans for responding to the triggering 
stimulus. By influencing attention, both the amygdala 
and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex are also likely 
to alter cognitive processes, for example, by speeding 
up or slowing down the flow of sensory representa-
tions (Chapter 17).
Functional Neuroimaging Is Contributing to 
Our Understanding of Emotion in Humans
Neuroimaging studies of emotions typically use fMRI. 
These studies have contributed to our understanding 
of emotion in three important ways. First, they have 
begun to dissociate and experimentally manipulate 
specific aspects of emotion, such as feelings, value, 
or concepts of emotions. These studies are beginning 
to show how all these different aspects can be coordi-
nated by activity in different brain regions.
Second, fMRI studies on emotion have been accu-
mulating at an ever-increasing pace, and much of the 
data from such studies are now widely available. This 
provides the opportunity for meta-analyses of many 
studies, avoiding the limitations that may be inherent 
in any one study in isolation. For instance, some meta-
analyses have confirmed the role of the ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex in representing value for many differ-
ent kinds of stimuli, including food and money. Other 
meta-analyses have suggested that specific basic emo-
tions (eg, fear, anger, or happiness) activate a widely 
distributed and overlapping set of brain regions, con-
firming the view that no brain structure is responsible 
for a single emotion.
Finally, fMRI studies have begun to use novel 
methods in their analyses. For example, the pattern of 
activation seen across many voxels in a brain region, 
rather than the mean level of activation in that region, 
is used to train powerful machine-learning algorithms 
to classify emotion states. This approach is demon-
strating that it is possible to decode specific emotion 
states from distributed patterns of brain activation.


===== Page 9 =====
1060    Part VI / The Biology of Emotion, Motivation, and Homeostasis
Functional Imaging Has Identified Neural 
Correlates of Feelings
Conscious experiences of an emotion are generally 
referred to as feelings. Evidence for the neural corre-
lates of feelings comes primarily from functional imag-
ing studies of humans and from neuropsychological 
testing of patients with specific brain lesions. A main 
challenge for these studies is in dissociating the con-
scious experience of the emotion from other aspects 
of the emotion, such as the elicitation of physiological 
responses, since these tend to occur contemporane-
ously. Another challenge is how to connect such stud-
ies with studies of emotion in animals, where we have 
no agreed-upon dependent measures to assay what 
they consciously experience.
One early functional imaging study used positron 
emission tomography to test the idea that feelings are 
correlated with activity in those cortical and subcortical 
somatosensory regions that specifically receive inputs 
related to the internal environment—the viscera, endo-
crine glands, and musculoskeletal system. Healthy 
subjects were asked to recall personal episodes and to 
attempt to reexperience as closely as possible the emo-
tions that accompanied those events. Activity changed 
in many regions known to represent and regulate body 
states, such as the insular cortex, secondary somatosen-
sory cortex (S-II), cingulate cortex, hypothalamus, and 
upper brain stem. These results support the idea that at 
least a part of the neural substrate for feelings involves 
brain regions that regulate and represent bodily states, 
a finding that bears some resemblance to the hypoth-
esis of William James mentioned earlier, that feelings 
are based on an awareness of bodily reactions.
The importance of both cortical and subcortical 
structures in processing feelings is also borne out by 
more recent fMRI studies. One such study examined 
the feeling of fear induced by anticipation of electri-
cal shock (Figure 42–8). In this study, subjects lay in 
the scanner while they saw a game on a video screen 
in which a virtual predator (a red dot) gets closer to 
the subject. Once the predator caught them, they could 
receive a painful electric shock to the hand. The anxi-
ety produced when the predator was some distance 
away was associated with activation of the medial pre-
frontal cortex; as the predator closed in, the periaque-
ductal gray became activated, and this was correlated 
with reports by the subjects of a feeling of dread. This 
finding supports a role for the medial prefrontal cortex 
in planning and anticipation related to a distant threat 
and a role for the periaqueductal gray in mounting 
the defensive responses required for coping with an 
immediate threat.
Another brain region of interest in relation to feel-
ings is the subgenual sector of the anterior cingulate 
cortex (Brodmann’s area 25), which has been found in 
neuroimaging studies to be activated when subjects are 
experiencing sadness. This region is of special interest 
because it is also differentially activated in patients 
with bipolar depression, and it appears thinned in 
structural MRI scans of patients with chronic depres-
sion. Direct electrical stimulation of this brain region 
(deep brain stimulation) can dramatically improve the 
mood of some patients with severe depression.
Emotion Is Related to Homeostasis
While it seems clear that no brain region is special-
ized for any specific emotion, it is even doubtful that 
there are any brain regions specialized for emotions 
in general. It may be that all brain regions involved 
in emotions also carry out other functions. In fact, 
those nonemotional functions may give us clues about 
how emotions evolved and, indeed, may be the basic 
building blocks through which emotion states are 
assembled.
For example, sectors of the human insular cortex 
that are activated during recall of feelings are also 
activated during the conscious sensation of pain and 
temperature. The insular cortex receives homeostatic 
information (about temperature and pain, changes in 
blood pH, carbon dioxide, and oxygen) through path-
ways that originate in peripheral nerve fibers. These 
afferent fibers include, for example, the C and Aδ fibers 
that form synapses with neurons in lamina I of the pos-
terior horn of the spinal cord or the pars caudalis of the 
trigeminal nerve nucleus in the brain stem. The path-
ways from lamina I and the trigeminal nucleus project 
to brain stem nuclei (nucleus of the solitary tract and 
parabrachial nucleus) and from there to the thalamus 
and on to the insular cortex. The identification of this 
functional system is further support for the idea that 
signals in the afferent somatosensory pathways play a 
role in the processing of feelings.
Moreover, in patients with pure autonomic fail-
ure, a disease in which visceral afferent information 
is severely compromised, functional imaging studies 
reveal a blunting of emotional processes and attenu-
ation of activity in the somatosensory areas that con-
tribute to feelings. Like other feelings, social feelings 
engage the insular cortices and the primary and sec-
ondary somatosensory cortices (S-I and S-II), as has 
been found in functional neuroimaging experiments 
evaluating empathy for pain and, separately, admira-
tion and compassion.


