===== Page 1 =====
964    Part V / Movement
Figure 39–7  A communication brain–machine interface can 
control a computer cursor using a discrete decoder based 
on neural activity during the preparation epoch.
A. After a monkey touched a central target (large yellow 
square) and fixated a central point (red +), a peripheral target 
(small yellow square) appeared and the monkey prepared 
to reach to it. Spike counts were taken during the preparation 
epoch and fed into a discrete decoder. The duration of the 
period in which spike counts are taken (ie, width of light blue 
shading) affects decoding performance and information  
transfer rate (ITR) (see panel B). Based on the spike counts 
(blue square), the discrete decoder guessed the target the 
monkey was preparing to reach to.
B. Decoding accuracy (black) and information transfer rate (ITR, 
bits/s; red) are shown for different trial lengths and numbers of 
targets. Trial length was equal to the duration of the period in which 
spike counts were taken (varied during the experiment) plus 190 
ms (fixed during the experiment). The latter provided time for visual 
information of the peripheral target to reach the premotor cortex 
(150 ms), plus the time to decode the target location from neural 
activity and render the decoded target location on the screen  
(40 ms). (Adapted, with permission, from Santhanam et al. 2006.)
these differences aside, we focus below on how BMIs 
function and perform. We also highlight recent pilot 
clinical trials with people with paralysis.
Subjects Can Type Messages Using  
Communication BMIs
To investigate how quickly and accurately a commu-
nication BMI employing a discrete decoder and prepa-
ration activity can operate, monkeys were trained to 
fixate and touch central targets and prepare to reach to 
a peripheral target that could appear at one of several 
different locations on a computer screen. Spikes were 
recorded using electrodes implanted in the premotor 
cortex. The number of spikes occurring during a par-
ticular time window during the preparation epoch was 
used to predict where the monkey was preparing to 
reach (Figure 39–7A). If the decoded target matched 
the peripheral target, a liquid reward was provided to 
indicate a successful trial.
By varying the duration of the period in which 
spike counts are taken and the number of possible tar-
gets, it was possible to assess the speed and accuracy 
2 targets
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Decoding accuracy (% correct)
Neurons
200 300 400 500
4 targets
200 300 400 500
8 targets
200 300 400 500
Trial length (ms)
16 targets
200 300 400 500
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
ITR (bps)
Target
onset
Time
Discrete decoder
A  Experimental setup
B Single-trial decoding accuracy decreases and
ITR increases as more target locations are used
Down
Right
Up
Left
Neuron 1 (spikes/s)
Neuron 2
(spikes/s)
of target selections (Figure 39–7B). Decoding accuracy 
tended to increase with the period in which spike 
counts are taken because spiking noise is more easily 
averaged out in longer periods.
An important metric for efficient communication 
is information transfer rate (ITR), which measures 
how much information can be conveyed per unit time. 
A basic unit of information is a bit, which is specified 
by a binary value (0 or 1). For example, with three 
bits of information, one can specify which of 23 = 8  
possible targets or keys to press. Thus, the metric for 
ITR is bits per second (bps). ITR increases with the 
period in which spike counts are taken, then declines. 
The reason is that ITR takes into account both how accu-
rately and how quickly each target is selected. Beyond 
some point of diminishing returns of a longer period, 
accuracy fails to increase rapidly enough to overcome 
the slowdown in target-selection rate accompanying a 
longer period.
Overall performance (ITR) increases with the num-
ber of possible targets, despite a decrease in decoding 
accuracy, because each correct target selection conveys 
more information. Fast and accurate communication 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    965
has been demonstrated in BMIs with this design based 
on a discrete decoder applied to preparatory activity. 
The ITR of this BMI is approximately 6.5 bps, which 
corresponds to approximately two to three targets per 
second with greater than 90% accuracy.
Recent studies have also investigated how quickly 
and accurately a communication BMI employing a 
continuous decoder and execution activity can oper-
ate. Two different types of continuous decoders were 
evaluated: a standard Kalman filter decoding move-
ment velocity (V-KF) and a recalibrated feedback 
intention-trained Kalman filter (ReFIT-KF). The V-KF 
was calibrated using the neural activity recorded dur-
ing actual arm movements (ie, open-loop control). The 
ReFIT-KF incorporated the closed-loop nature of BMIs 
into decoder calibration by assuming that the user 
desired to move the cursor straight to the target at each 
time step.
To assess performance, both types of decoders 
were used in closed-loop BMI control (Figure 39–8A). 
Monkeys were required to move a computer cursor 
from a central location to eight peripheral locations 
and back. A gold standard for performance evaluation 
was established by having the monkeys also perform 
the same task using arm movements. The ReFIT-KF 
outperformed the V-KF in several ways: Cursor move-
ments using ReFIT-KF were straighter, producing less 
movement away from a straight line to the target; cur-
sor movements were faster, approaching the speed of 
arm movements (Figure 39–8B); and there were fewer 
(potentially frustrating) long trials.
Given its performance benefits, the ReFIT-KF is 
being used in clinical trials by people with paralysis 
(Figure 39–8C). Spiking activity was recorded using 
a 96-channel electrode array implanted in the hand 
control area of the left motor cortex. Signals were fil-
tered to extract action potentials and high-frequency 
local field potentials, which were decoded to provide 
“point-and-click” control of the BMI-controlled cursor. 
The subject was seated in front of a computer monitor 
and was asked, “How did you encourage your sons 
to practice music?” By attempting to move her right 
hand, the computer cursor moved across the screen 
and stopped over the desired letter. By attempting to 
squeeze her left hand, the letter beneath the cursor was 
selected, much like clicking a mouse button.
BMI performance in the clinical trials was assessed 
by measuring the number of intended characters sub-
jects were able to type (Figure 39–8D). Subjects were 
able to demonstrate that the letters they typed were 
intended by using the delete key to erase occasional 
mistakes. These clinical tests showed that it is possible 
to type at a rate of many words per minute using a BMI.
Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using  
BMI-Directed Prosthetic Arms
Patients with paralysis would like to pick up objects, 
feed themselves, and generally interact physically 
with the world. Motor BMIs with prosthetic limbs 
aim to restore this lost motor functionality. As before, 
neural activity is decoded from the brain but is now 
routed to a robotic arm where the wrist is moved in 
three dimensions (x, y, and z) and the hand is moved in 
an additional dimension (grip angle, ranging from an 
open hand to a closed hand).
In one test of a robotic arm, a patient with paralysis 
was able to use her neural activity to direct the robotic 
arm to reach out, grab a bottle of liquid, and bring it 
to her mouth (Figure 39–9). The three-dimensional 
reaches and gripping were slower and less accurate 
than natural arm and hand movements. Importantly, 
this demonstrated that the same BMI paradigm origi-
nally developed with animals, including measuring 
and decoding signals from motor cortex, works in peo-
ple even years after the onset of neural degeneration or 
the time of neural injury.
BMI devices directing prosthetic arms and hands 
are now able to do more than just control three-
dimensional movement or open and close the hand. 
They can also orient the hand and grasp, manipulate, 
and carry objects. A person with paralysis was able to 
move a prosthetic limb with 10 degrees of freedom to 
grasp objects of different shapes and sizes and move 
them from one place to another (Figure 39–10). Com-
pletion times for grasping and moving objects were 
considerably slower than natural arm movements, but 
the results are encouraging. These studies illustrate 
the existing capabilities of prosthetic arms and also the 
potential for even greater capabilities in the future.
Subjects Can Reach and Grasp Objects Using  
BMI-Directed Stimulation of Paralyzed Arms
An alternative to using a robotic arm is to restore lost 
motor function to the biological arm. Arm paralysis 
results from the loss of neural signaling from the spinal 
cord and brain, but the muscles themselves are often 
still intact and can be made to contract by electrical 
stimulation. This capacity underlies functional electri-
cal stimulation (FES), which sends electrical signals via 
internal or external electrodes to a set of muscle groups. 
By shaping and timing the electrical signals sent to the 
different muscle groups, FES is able to move the arm 
and hand in a coordinated fashion to pick up objects.
Laboratory studies in monkeys have demon-
strated that this basic approach is viable in principle. 


===== Page 3 =====
966    Part V / Movement
Figure 39–8  A communication brain–machine interface (BMI) 
can control a computer cursor using a continuous decoder 
based on neural activity during the execution epoch.
A. Comparison of cursor control by a monkey using its arm, 
a standard decoder that estimates velocity (BMI with Kalman 
filter decoding movement velocity [V-KF]), and a feedback 
intention-trained decoder (BMI with recalibrated feedback 
intention-trained Kalman filter [ReFIT-KF]). Traces show cursor 
movements to and from targets alternating in the sequence 
indicated by the numbers shown. Traces are continuous for the 
duration of all reaches. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Gilja et al. 2012.)
B. Time required to move the cursor between the central 
location and a peripheral location on successful trials (mean ± 
standard error of the mean). (Adapted, with permission, from 
Gilja et al. 2012.)
C. Pilot clinical trial participant T6 (53-year-old female with amyo-
trophic later sclerosis [ALS]) using a BMI to type the answer to a 
question. (Adapted, with permission, from Pandarinath et al. 2017.)
D. Performance in a typing task for three clinical trial partici-
pants. Performance can be sustained across days or even years 
after array implantation. (Adapted, with permission, from  
Pandarinath et al. 2017.)
A
C
B
Arm
V-KF
ReFIT-KF
Arm
5
1
5
7
4
2
6
8
3
1
7
6
8
4
2
3
V-KF
ReFIT-KF
Electrode array
Neural
signals
Continuous
and discrete
decoders
Cursor
velocity +
click state
Monitor
Q
K
C
G
V
J
DEL
DEL
S
I
N
D
J
W
T
H
E
A
M
Z
B
F
Y
P
U
O
R
L
X
How did you encourage your sons to practice music?
When they started their_
1
0
2
Time to target (s)
D
570
572
577
Days since implant
Subject T6 (with ALS)
588
591
20
30
40
0
10
50
Correct characters per min
68
70
Days since implant
Subject T5 (with spinal cord injury)
20
30
40
0
10
50
539
548
Days since implant
Subject T7 (with ALS)
20
30
40
0
10
50
5
1
4
7
2
8
3
6
5 cm


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    967
Figure 39–9  A subject with paralysis drinks from a bottle 
using a robotic arm controlled by a motor brain–machine 
interface using a continuous decoder.  Three sequential 
images from the first successful trial show the subject using 
the robotic arm to grasp the bottle, bring it to her mouth and 
drink coffee through a straw, and place the bottle back on the 
table. (Adapted from Hochberg et al. 2012.)
It is implemented by calibrating a continuous decoder 
to predict the intended activity of each of several of 
the muscles, transiently paralyzed with a nerve block. 
These predictions are then used to control the intensity 
of stimulation of the same paralyzed muscles, which 
in turn controls motor outputs such as a grip angle 
and force. This process in effect bypasses the spinal 
cord and restores some semblance of voluntary control 
of the paralyzed arm and hand. Similar results have 
recently been demonstrated in patients with paraly-
sis using either externally applied or fully implanted 
state-of-the-art FES electrodes. Intracortically recorded 
signals from motor cortex were decoded to restore 
movement via FES in a person with upper spinal cord 
injury (Figure 39–11). The subject was able to achieve 
control of different wrist and hand motions, including 
finger movements, and perform various activities of 
daily living.
Subjects Can Use Sensory Feedback Delivered 
by Cortical Stimulation During BMI Control
During arm movements, we rely on multiple sources of 
sensory feedback to guide the arm along a desired path 
or to a desired goal. These sources include visual, pro-
prioceptive, and somatosensory feedback. However, in 
most current BMI systems, the user receives only visual 
feedback about the movements of the computer cursor 
or robotic limb. In patients with normal motor out-
put pathways but lacking proprioception, arm move-
ments are substantially less accurate than in healthy 
individuals, both in terms of movement direction and 
extent. Furthermore, in tests of BMI cursor control in 
healthy nonhuman primate subjects, the arm contin-
ues to provide proprioceptive feedback even though 
arm movements are not required to move the cursor. 
BMI cursor control is more accurate when the arm is 
passively moved together with the BMI cursor along 
the same path, rather than along a different path. This 
demonstrates the importance of “correct” propriocep-
tive feedback. Based on these two lines of evidence, it is 
perhaps not surprising that BMI-directed movements 
relying solely on visual feedback are slower and less 
accurate than normal arm movements. This has moti-
vated recent attempts to demonstrate how providing 
surrogate (ie, artificial) proprioceptive or somatosen-
sory feedback can improve BMI performance.
Several studies have attempted to write in sen-
sory information by stimulating the brain using cor-
tical electrical microstimulation. Laboratory animals 
can discriminate current pulses of different frequen-
cies and amplitudes, and this ability can be utilized to 
provide proprioceptive or somatosensory information 
in BMIs by using different pulse frequencies to encode 
different physical locations (akin to proprioception) or 
different textures (akin to somatic sensation). Electrical 
microstimulation in the primary somatosensory cortex 
can be used by nonhuman primates to control a cur-
sor on a moment-by-moment basis without vision. In 
these subjects, the use of electrical microstimulation 


===== Page 5 =====
968    Part V / Movement
Figure 39–10  A motor brain–machine interface (BMI) can 
control a prosthetic arm with 10 degrees of freedom.
A. Examples of different hand configurations directed by the 
BMI. The 10 degrees of freedom are three-dimensional arm 
translation, three-dimensional wrist orientation, and four-
dimensional hand shaping.
B. A subject uses the prosthetic arm to pick up an object and 
move it.
C. Objects of different shapes and sizes are used to test the 
generalization ability of the BMI. (Adapted from Wodlinger  
et al. 2015.)
and visual feedback together led to more accurate 
movements than either type of sensory feedback alone.
Furthermore, electrical microstimulation in the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex can also be used to provide 
tactile information. Nonhuman primates moved a BMI-
directed cursor under visual feedback to hit different 
visual targets, each of which elicited a different stimula-
tion frequency. Subjects learned to use differences in the 
stimulation feedback to distinguish the rewarded target 
from the unrewarded targets. This demonstrates that 
electrical microstimulation can also be used to provide 
somatosensory feedback during BMI control.
Finally, surrogate somatosensory information was 
delivered via electrical microstimulation to a person 
with paralysis and compromised sensory afferents. 
The person reported naturalistic sensations at differ-
ent locations of his hand and fingers corresponding to 
different locations of stimulation in the primary soma-
tosensory cortex.
BMIs Can Be Used to Advance  
Basic Neuroscience
BMIs are becoming an increasingly important experi-
mental tool for addressing basic scientific questions 
about brain function. For example, cochlear implants 
have provided insight into how the brain processes 
sounds and speech, how the development of these 
mechanisms is shaped by language acquisition, and 
how neural plasticity allows the brain to interpret a 
few channels of stimulation carrying impoverished 
auditory information. Similarly, motor and communi-
cation BMIs are helping to elucidate the neural mecha-
nisms underlying sensorimotor control. Such scientific 
findings can then be used to refine the design of BMIs.
The key benefit of BMIs for basic science is that 
they can simplify the brain’s input and output interface 
with the outside world, without simplifying the com-
plexities of brain processing that one wishes to study. 
Scoop
Fingers spread
Thumb extension
Pinch
A  Robotic hand conﬁgurations
B  Using the robotic hand to grasp objects
C  Sample objects grasped by the robotic hand


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    969
Figure 39–11  A motor brain–machine interface (BMI) can 
control the muscles of a paralyzed arm using a continuous 
decoder and functional electrical stimulation. Neural activity 
recorded in the motor cortex is decoded into command signals 
that control the stimulation of deltoid, pectoralis major, biceps, 
triceps, forearm, and hand muscles. This enables cortical con-
trol of whole-arm movements and grasping. Muscle stimulation 
is performed through percutaneous intramuscular fine-wire 
electrodes. (Adapted, with permission, from Ajiboye et al. 2017. 
Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd.)
To illustrate this point, consider the output interface of 
the brain for controlling arm movements. Thousands 
of neurons from the motor cortex and other brain areas 
send signals down the spinal cord and to the arm, where 
they activate muscles that move the arm. Understand-
ing how the brain controls arm movement is challeng-
ing because one can typically record from only a small 
fraction of the output neurons that send signals down 
the spinal cord, the relationship between the activity of 
the output neurons and arm movements is unknown, 
and the arm has nonlinear dynamics that are difficult 
to measure. Furthermore, it is usually difficult to deter-
mine which recorded neurons are output neurons.
One way to ease this difficulty is to use a BMI. 
Because of the way a BMI is constructed, only those 
neurons that are recorded can directly affect the move-
ment of the cursor or robotic limb. Neurons through-
out the brain are still involved, but they can influence 
the cursor movements only indirectly through the 
recorded neurons. Thus, in contrast to arm and eye 
movement studies, one can record from the entire set 
of output neurons in a BMI, and BMI-directed move-
ments can be causally attributed to specific changes in 
the activity of the recorded neurons. Furthermore, the 
mapping between the activity of the recorded neurons 
and cursor movement is defined by the experimenter, 
so it is fully known. This mapping can be defined to be 
simple and can be easily altered by the experimenter 
during an experiment. In essence, a BMI defines a 
simplified sensorimotor loop, whose components are 
more concretely defined and more easily manipulated 
than for arm or eye movements.
These advantages of BMIs allow for studies of 
brain function that are currently difficult to perform 
using arm or eye movements. For example, one class 
of studies involves using BMIs to study how the brain 
learns. The BMI mapping defines which population 
activity patterns will allow the subject to successfully 
move the BMI-directed cursor to hit visual targets. By 
defining the BMI mapping appropriately, the experi-
menter can challenge the subject’s brain to produce 
novel neural activity patterns.
Motor cortex
Electrode
Percutaneous
lead connector
Electrode array
Decoding
algorithm
External
stimulator


===== Page 7 =====
970    Part V / Movement
A recent study explored what types of activity 
patterns are easier and more difficult for the brain to 
generate. They found that it was easier for subjects to 
learn new associations between existing activity pat-
terns and cursor movements than to generate novel 
activity patterns. This finding has implications for 
our ability to learn everyday skills. A second class of 
studies involves asking how the activity of neurons 
that directly control movement differ from those that 
do not directly control movement. In a BMI, one can 
choose to use only a subset of the recorded neurons 
(the output neurons) for controlling movements. At 
the same time, other neurons (the nonoutput neurons) 
can be passively monitored without being used for 
controlling movements. Comparing the activity of out-
put and nonoutput neurons can provide insight into 
how a network of neurons internally processes infor-
mation and relays only some of that information to 
other networks.
Using this paradigm, a recent study recorded 
neural activity simultaneously in the primary cortex 
and striatum and designated a subset of the M1 neu-
rons as the output neurons for controlling the BMI. 
They found that, during BMI learning, M1 neurons 
that were most relevant for behavior (the output 
neurons) preferentially increased their coordination 
with the striatum, which is known to play an impor-
tant role during natural behavior (Chapter 38).  
Identifying output versus nonoutput neurons in 
a study using arm or eye movements would be 
challenging.
BMIs Raise New Neuroethics Considerations
A growing number of biomedical ethics considerations 
centered on the brain have arisen from the dramatic 
expansion in our understanding of neuroscience and 
our capabilities with neurotechnology. These advances 
are driven by society’s curiosity about the function-
ing of the brain, the least-well understood organ in 
the body, as well as the desire to address the massive 
unmet need of those suffering from neurological dis-
ease and injury. The use of BMIs raises new ethical 
questions for four principal reasons.
First, recording high-fidelity signals (ie, spike 
trains) involves risk, including the risks associated 
with initial implantation of the electrodes as well 
as possible biological (immunological or infectious) 
responses during the lifetime of the electrodes and the 
associated implanted electronics. Electrodes implanted 
for long periods currently have functional lifetimes on 
the order of many months to a few years, during which 
time glial scar tissue can form around the electrodes 
and electrode materials can fail. Efforts to increase the 
functional lifetime of electrodes range from nanoscale 
flexible electrodes made with new materials to mitigat-
ing immunological responses, as is done with cardiac 
stents.
For these reasons, patients considering receiving 
implanted recording technologies will need to evalu-
ate the risks and benefits of a BMI, as is the case for 
all medical interventions. It is important for patients to 
have options, as each person has personal preferences 
involving willingness to undergo surgery, desire for 
functional restoration and outcome, and cosmesis—be 
it while deliberating cancer treatment or BMI treat-
ment. BMIs based on different neural sensors (Figure 
39–2) have different risks and benefits.
Second, because BMIs can read out movement 
information from the brain at fine temporal resolu-
tion, it seems plausible that they will be able to read 
out more personal and private types of information as 
well. Future neuroethics questions that may arise as 
the technology becomes more sophisticated include 
whether it is acceptable, even with patient consent, 
to read out memories that may otherwise be lost to 
Alzheimer disease; promote long-term memory con-
solidation by recording fleeting short-term memories 
and playing them back directly into the brain; read 
out subconscious fears or emotional states to assist 
desensitization psychotherapy; or read out potential 
intended movements, including speech, that would 
not naturally be enacted.
Third, intracortical write-in BMIs, similar to DBS 
systems currently used to reduce tremor, may one day 
evoke naturalistic spatial-temporal activity patterns 
across large populations of neurons. In the extreme 
it may not be possible for a person to distinguish 
self-produced and volitional neural activity patterns 
from artificial or surrogate patterns. Although there 
are numerous therapeutic and beneficial reasons for 
embracing this technology, such as reducing tremor 
or averting an epileptic seizure, more dubious uses 
can be envisioned such as commandeering a person’s 
motor, sensory, decision making, or emotional valence 
circuits.
Finally, ethical questions also involve the limits 
within which BMIs should operate. Current BMIs 
focus on restoring lost function, but it is possible for 
BMIs to be made to enhance function beyond natu-
ral levels. This is as familiar as prescribing a pair 
of glasses that confer better than normal vision, or 
overprescribing a pain medication, which can cause 
euphoria that is often addictive. Should BMIs be 
allowed, if and when it becomes technically possible, 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 39 / Brain–Machine Interfaces    971
to move a robotic arm faster and more accurately 
than a native arm? Should continuous neural record-
ings from BMIs, covering hours, days, or weeks, be 
saved for future analysis, and are the security and 
privacy issues the same or different from personal 
genomics data? Should BMIs with preset content be 
available for purchase, for example, to skip a grade 
of mathematics in high school? Should an able-bodied 
person be able to elect to receive an implanted motor 
BMI? While the safe and ethical limits of such sen-
sory, motor, and cognitive BMI treatments might 
seem readily apparent, society continues to wrestle 
with these same questions concerning other currently 
available medical treatments. These include steroids 
that enhance musculature, energy drinks (eg, caffeine) 
that enhance alertness, and elective plastic surgery that 
alters appearance.
Although many of these ideas and questions may 
appear far-fetched at present, as mechanisms of brain 
function and dysfunction continue to be revealed, BMI 
systems could build on these discoveries and create 
even more daunting ethical quandaries. But equally 
important is the immediate need to help people suf-
fering from profound neurological disease and injury 
through restorative BMIs. In order to achieve the right 
balance, it is imperative that physicians, scientists, and 
engineers proceed in close conversation and partner-
ship with ethicists, government oversight agencies, 
and patient advocacy groups.
Highlights
  1.  Brain–machine interfaces (BMIs) are medical 
devices that read out and/or alter electrophysi-
ological activity at the level of populations of 
neurons. BMIs can help to restore lost sensory, 
motor, or brain processing capabilities, as well as 
regulate pathological neural activity.
  2.  BMIs can help to restore lost sensory capabilities 
by stimulating neurons to convey sensory infor-
mation to the brain. Examples include cochlear 
implants to restore audition or retinal prostheses 
to restore vision.
  3.  BMIs can help to restore lost motor capabilities 
by measuring the activity from many individual 
neurons, converting this neural information into 
control signals, and guiding a paralyzed limb, 
robotic limb, or computer cursor.
  4.  Whereas motor BMIs aim to provide control of a 
robotic limb or paralyzed limb, communication 
BMIs aim to provide a fast and accurate interface 
with a computer or other electronic devices.
  5.  BMIs can help to regulate pathological neural 
activity by measuring neural activity, processing 
the neural activity, and subsequently stimulating 
neurons. Examples include deep brain stimula-
tors and antiseizure systems.
  6.  Neural signals can be measured using different 
technologies, 
including 
electroencephalogra-
phy, electrocorticography, and intracortical elec-
trodes. Intracortical electrodes record the activity 
of neurons near the electrode tip and can also be 
used to deliver electrical stimulation.
  7.  To study movement encoding, one usually 
considers the activity of an individual neuron 
across many experimental trials. In contrast, for 
movement decoding, one needs to consider the 
activity of many neurons across an individual 
experimental trial.
  8.  A discrete decoder estimates one of several pos-
sible movement goals from neural population 
activity. In contrast, a continuous decoder esti-
mates the moment-by-moment details of a move-
ment from neural population activity.
  9.  The field is making substantial progress in 
increasing the performance of BMIs, measured in 
terms of the speed and accuracy of the estimated 
movements. It is now possible to move a com-
puter cursor in a way that approaches the speed 
and accuracy of arm movements.
10.  In addition to controlling computer cursors, BMIs 
can also guide a robotic limb or a paralyzed limb 
using functional electrical stimulation. Develop-
ments from preclinical experiments with able-
bodied, nonhuman primates have subsequently 
been tested in clinical trials with paralyzed people.
11.  Future advances of BMI will depend, in part, on 
developments in neurotechnology. These include 
advances in hardware (eg, neural sensors and 
low-power electronics), software (eg, supervisory 
systems), and statistical methods (eg, decoding 
algorithms).
12.  An important direction for improving BMI per-
formance is to provide the user with additional 
forms of sensory feedback in addition to visual 
feedback. An area of current investigation uses 
stimulation of neurons to provide surrogate sen-
sory feedback, representing somatosensation and 
proprioception, during ongoing use.
13.  Beyond helping paralyzed patients and ampu-
tees, BMI is being increasingly used as a tool for 
understanding brain function. BMIs simplify the 
brain’s input and output interfaces and allow 
the experimenter to define a causal relationship 
between neural activity and movement.


===== Page 9 =====
972    Part V / Movement
14.  BMIs raise new neuroethics questions, which 
need to be considered together with the ben-
efits provided by BMIs to people with injury or 
disease.
 Krishna V. Shenoy 
 Byron M. Yu 
Selected Reading
Andersen RA, Hwang EJ, Mulliken GH. 2010. Cognitive neu-
ral prosthetics. Annu Rev Psychol 61:169–190.
Donoghue JP, Nurmikko A, Black M, Hochberg LR. 2007. 
Assistive technology and robotic control using motor cor-
tex ensemble-based neural interface systems in humans 
with tetraplegia. J Physiol 579:603–611.
Fetz EE. 2007. Volitional control of neural activity: implica-
tions for brain-computer interfaces. J Physiol 579:571–579.
Green AM, Kalaska JF. 2011. Learning to move machines 
with the mind. Trends Neurosci 34:61–75.
Hatsopoulos NG, Donoghue JP. 2009. The science of neural 
interface systems. Annu Rev Neurosci 32:249–266.
Kao JC, Stavisky SD, Sussillo D, Nuyujukian P, Shenoy KV. 
2014. Information systems opportunities in brain-machine 
interface decoders. Proc IEEE 102:666–682.
Nicolelis MAL, Lebedev MA. 2009. Principles of neural 
ensemble physiology underlying the operation of brain-
machine interfaces. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:530–540.
Schwartz AB. 2016. Movement: how the brain communicates 
with the world. Cell 164:1122–1135.
Shenoy KV, Carmena JM. 2014. Combining decoder design 
and neural adaptation in brain-machine interfaces. Neuron 
84:665–680.
References
Aflalo T, Kellis S, Klaes C, et al. 2015. Decoding motor 
imagery from the posterior parietal cortex of a tetraplegic 
human. Science 348:906–910.
Ajiboye AB, Willett FR, Young DR, et al. 2017. Restoration of 
reaching and grasping movements through brain-controlled 
muscle stimulation in a person with tetraplegia: a proof-
of-concept demonstration. Lancet 389:1821–1830.
Anumanchipalli GK, Chartier J, Chang EF. 2019. Speech syn-
thesis from neural decoding of spoken sentences. Nature 
568:493–498.
Blabe CH, Gilja V, Chestek CA, Shenoy KV, Anderson KD, 
Henderson JM. 2015. Assessment of brain-machine inter-
faces from the perspective of people with paralysis. J Neural 
Eng 12:043002.
Bouton CE, Shaikhouni A, Annetta NV, et al. 2016. Restoring 
cortical control of functional movement in a human with 
quadriplegia. Nature 533:247–250.
Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Crist RE, et al. 2003. Learning to 
control a brain-machine interface for reaching and grasp-
ing by primates. PLoS Biol 1:E42.
Chapin JK, Moxon KA, Markowitz RS, Nicolelis MA. 1999. Real-
time control of a robot arm using simultaneously recorded 
neurons in the motor cortex. Nat Neurosci 2:664–670.
Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, et al. 2013. High-
performance neuroprosthetic control by an individual 
with tetraplegia. Lancet 381:557–564.
Dadarlat MC, O’Dohert JE, Sabes PN. 2015. A learning-based 
approach to artificial sensory feedback leads to optimal 
integration. Nat Neurosci 18:138–144.
Ethier C, Oby ER, Bauman MJ, Miller LE. 2012. Restoration of 
grasp following paralysis through brain-controlled stimu-
lation of muscles. Nature 485:368–371.
Fetz EE. 1969. Operant conditioning of cortical unit activity. 
Science 163:955–958.
Flesher SN, Collinger JL, Foldes ST, et al. 2016. Intracortical 
microstimulation of human somatosensory cortex. Sci 
Transl Med 8:361ra141.
Ganguly K, Carmena JM. 2009. Emergence of a stable corti-
cal map for neuroprosthetic control. PLoS Biol 7:e1000153.
Gilja V, Nuyujukian P, Chestek CA, et al. 2012. A high-
performance neural prosthesis enabled by control algo-
rithm design. Nat Neurosci 15:1752–1757.
Gilja V, Pandarinath C, Blabe CH, et al. 2015. Clinical trans-
lation of a high-performance neural prosthesis. Nat Med 
21:1142–1145.
Golub MD, Chase SM, Batista AP, Yu BM. 2016. Brain-
computer interfaces for dissecting cognitive processes 
underlying sensorimotor control. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
37:53–58.
Hochberg LR, Bacher D, Jarosiewicz B, et al. 2012. Reach and 
grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally con-
trolled robotic arm. Nature 485:372–375.
Hochberg LR, Serruya MD, Friehs GM, et al. 2006. Neuronal 
ensemble control of prosthetic devices by a human with 
tetraplegia. Nature 442:164–171.
Humphrey DR, Schmidt EM, Thompson WD. 1970. Predict-
ing measures of motor performance from multiple corti-
cal spike trains. Science 170:758–762.
Jackson A, Mavoori J, Fetz EE. 2006. Long-term motor cortex 
plasticity induced by an electronic neural implant. Nature 
444:56–60.
Jarosiewicz B, Sarma AA, Bacher D, et al. 2015. Virtual typ-
ing by people with tetraplegia using a self-calibrating 
intracortical brain-computer interface. Sci Transl Med 
7:313ra179.
Kennedy PR, Bakay RA. 1998. Restoration of neural output 
from a paralyzed patient by a direct brain connection. 
Neuroreport 9:1707–1711.
Kim SP, Simeral JD, Hochberg LR, Donoghue JP, Black MJ. 
2008. Neural control of computer cursor velocity by 
decoding motor cortical spiking activity in humans with 
tetraplegia. J Neural Eng 5:455–476.


