===== Page 1 =====
1308    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Unlike most other forms of conditioning, taste aver-
sion develops even when the unconditioned response 
(poison-induced nausea) occurs after a long delay, up 
to hours after the CS (specific taste). This makes bio-
logical sense because the ill effects of infected foods 
and naturally occurring toxins usually follow inges-
tion only after some delay. For most species, including 
humans, taste-aversion conditioning occurs only when 
certain tastes are associated with illness. Taste aversion 
develops poorly if a taste is followed by a painful stim-
ulus that does not produce nausea. Also, animals do 
not develop an aversion to a visual or auditory stimu-
lus that has been paired with nausea.
Errors and Imperfections in Memory Shed 
Light on Normal Memory Processes
Memory allows us to revisit our personal past; pro-
vides access to a vast network of facts, associations, 
and concepts; and supports learning and adaptive 
behavior. But memory is not perfect. We often forget 
events rapidly or gradually, sometimes distort the 
past, and occasionally remember events that we would 
prefer to forget. In the 1930s, the British psychologist 
Frederic Bartlett reported experiments in which peo-
ple read and tried to remember complex stories. He 
showed that people often misremember many features 
of the stories, often distorting information based on 
their expectations of what should have happened. For-
getting and distortion can provide important insights 
into the workings of memory.
Memory’s imperfections have been classified 
into seven basic categories, dubbed the “seven sins of 
memory”: transience, absent-mindedness, blocking, 
misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence. 
Here, we focus on six of these.
Absent-mindedness results from a lack of attention 
to immediate experience. Absent-mindedness during 
encoding is a likely source of common memory fail-
ures such as forgetting where one recently placed an 
object. Absent-mindedness also occurs when we forget 
to carry out a particular task such as picking up grocer-
ies on the way home from the office, even though we 
initially encoded the relevant information.
Blocking refers to a temporary inability to access 
information stored in memory. People often have par-
tial awareness of a sought-after word or image but are 
nonetheless unable to recall the entire word accurately 
or completely. Sometimes, it feels like a blocked word 
is on “the tip of the tongue”—we are aware of the ini-
tial letter of the word, the number of syllables in it, or 
a like-sounding word. Determining which information 
is correct and which is incorrect requires a great deal of 
conscious effort.
Absent-mindedness and blocking are sins of omis-
sion: At a moment when we need to remember infor-
mation, it is inaccessible. However, memory is also 
characterized by sins of commission, situations in 
which some form of memory is present but wrong.
Misattribution refers to the association of a memory 
with an incorrect time, place, or person. False recogni-
tion, a type of misattribution, occurs when individu-
als report that they “remember” items or events that 
never happened. Such false memories have been docu-
mented in controlled experiments where people claim 
to have seen or heard words or objects that had not 
been presented previously but are similar in meaning 
or appearance to what was actually presented. Stud-
ies using positron emission tomography imaging and 
fMRI have shown that many brain regions show simi-
lar levels of activity during both true and false recog-
nition, which may be one reason why false memories 
sometimes feel like real ones.
Suggestibility refers to the tendency to incorporate 
new information into memory, usually as a result of 
leading questions or suggestions about what may have 
been experienced. Research using hypnotic suggestion 
indicates that various kinds of false memories can be 
implanted in highly suggestible individuals, such as 
remembering hearing loud noises at night. Studies 
with young adults have also shown that repeated sug-
gestions about a childhood experience can produce 
memories of events that never occurred. These find-
ings are important theoretically because they highlight 
that memory is not simply a “playback” of past experi-
ences (Box 52–1). Despite these important theoretical 
and practical implications, next to nothing is known 
about the neural bases of suggestibility.
Bias refers to distortions and unconscious influ-
ences on memory that reflect one’s general knowl-
edge and beliefs. People often misremember the past 
to make it consistent with what they presently believe, 
know, or feel. This idea is consistent with the idea of 
“predictive coding” supported by studies showing 
that even low-level neural mechanisms of perception 
and sensation are shaped by expectations. The specific 
brain mechanisms by which expectations influence 
memory are not well understood.
Persistence refers to obsessive memory, constant 
remembering of information or events that we might 
want to forget. Neuroimaging studies have illuminated 
some neurobiological factors that contribute to persis-
tent emotional memories. Some key results implicate 
the amygdala, the almond-shaped structure near the 
hippocampus long known to be involved in emotional 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1309
processing (Chapter 42). Studies indicate that the level 
of recall of emotional components of a story is corre-
lated with the level of activity in the amygdala during 
presentation of the story. Related studies implicate the 
amygdala in the encoding and retrieval of emotionally 
charged experiences that can repeatedly intrude into 
consciousness.
Although persistence can be disabling, it also has 
adaptive value. The persistence of memories of dis-
turbing experiences increases the likelihood that we 
will recall information about arousing or traumatic 
events at times when it may be crucial for survival.
Indeed, many memory imperfections may have 
adaptive value. False memories and suggestibility 
may both be related to one of the most basic adaptive 
functions of memory: the integration of experiences 
separated in time into a network of learned associa-
tions. For memory to play an important role in guiding 
future behavior, it must be flexible so that we can lev-
erage past experiences to make inferences about future 
events even when the circumstances have changed. 
Similarly, although the various forms of forgetting 
(transience, absent-mindedness, and blocking) can be 
annoying, a memory system that automatically retains 
every detail of every experience could result in an over-
whelming clutter of useless trivia. This is exactly what 
happened in the fascinating case of Shereshevski, a 
mnemonist studied by the Russian neuropsychologist 
Alexander Luria and described in the book The Mind 
of a Mnemonist. Shereshevski was filled with highly 
detailed memories of his past experiences but was 
unable to generalize or to think at an abstract level. A 
healthy memory system does not encode, store, and 
retrieve all the details of every experience. Thus, tran-
sience, absent-mindedness, and blocking allow us to 
avoid the unfortunate fate of Shereshevski.
Highlights
1.	 Different forms of learning and memory can be 
distinguished behaviorally and neurally. Work-
ing memory maintains goal-relevant information 
for short periods. Explicit (or declarative) mem-
ory involves two classes of knowledge: episodic 
memory, which represents personal experiences, 
and semantic memory, which represents general 
knowledge and facts. Implicit memory includes 
forms of perceptual and conceptual priming, as 
well as the learning of motor and perceptual skills, 
perceptual regularities, and reinforced habits.
2.	 Encoding, storage, retrieval, and consolidation 
of new explicit memories depend on interactions 
between specific regions within the neocortex and 
medial temporal lobe and specific hippocampal 
subregions. The initiation of long-term storage of 
explicit memory requires the temporal lobe sys-
tem, as highlighted by studies of amnesic patients 
such as H.M. Consolidation processes stabilize 
stored representations, rendering explicit memo-
ries less dependent on the medial temporal lobe. 
Retrieval of explicit memories involves the medial 
temporal lobe, as well as frontoparietal networks 
that subserve attention and cognitive control.
3.	 Multiple processes interact to support memory-
guided behavior. Retrieval of episodic memory 
guides the imagining of future events, which 
is important for making decisions about future 
choices and actions. Motivationally significant 
events are prioritized in memory through the 
enhancement of encoding, storage, and con-
solidation processes. Motivation also impacts 
retrieval, perhaps through different mechanisms 
of prioritization.
4.	 Implicit memory emerges automatically in the 
course of perceiving, thinking, and acting. It 
tends to be inflexible and expressed in the per-
formance of tasks even without conscious aware-
ness. Implicit memory involves a wide variety of 
brain regions and circuits, including cortical areas 
that support the specific perceptual, conceptual, 
or motor systems recruited to process a stimu-
lus or perform a task, as well as the striatum and 
the amygdala. Implicit learning that involves the 
encoding of relational associations additionally 
involves the hippocampus.
5.	 Imperfections and errors in remembering provide 
telltale clues about learning and memory mecha-
nisms. The past can be forgotten or distorted, indi-
cating that memory is not a faithful record of all 
details of every experience. Retrieved memories 
are the result of a complex interplay among vari-
ous brain regions and can be reshaped over time 
by multiple influences. Various forms of forget-
ting and distortion tell us much about the flexibil-
ity of memory that allows the brain to adapt to the 
physical and social environment.
 Daphna Shohamy 
  Daniel L. Schacter 
  Anthony D. Wagner 


===== Page 3 =====
1310    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, and Cognition
Suggested Reading
Baddeley AD. 1986. Working Memory. Oxford: Oxford Univ. 
Press.
Eichenbaum H. 2017. Prefrontal-hippocampal interactions in 
episodic memory. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:547–558.
Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2001. From Conditioning to Con-
scious Recollection: Memory Systems of the Brain. Oxford: 
Oxford Univ. Press.
Kamin LJ. 1969. Predictability, surprise, attention, and 
conditioning. In: BA Campbell, RM Church (eds). Pun-
ishment and Aversive Behavior, pp. 279–296. New York: 
Appleton–Century–Crofts.
Kumaran D, Hassabis D, McClelland JL. 2016. What learn-
ing systems do intelligent agents need? Complemen-
tary learning systems theory updated. Trends Cog Sci 
20:512–534.
Milner B, Squire LR, Kandel ER. 1998. Cognitive neurosci-
ence and the study of memory. Neuron 20:445–468.
Schacter DL, Benoit RG, Szpunar KK. 2017. Episodic future 
thinking: mechanisms and functions. Curr Opin Behav 
Sci 17:41–50.
Shohamy D, Turk-Browne NB. 2013. Mechanisms for wide-
spread hippocampal involvement in cognition. J Exp 
Psychol Gen 142:1159–1170.
Tulving E. 1983. Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford: Oxford 
Univ. Press.
Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C, Ekstrom A, Wiltgen B. 2019. A 
contextual binding theory of episodic memory: systems 
consolidation reconsidered. Nat Rev Neurosci 20:364–375.
References
Adcock RA, Thangavel A, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Knutson B, 
Gabrieli JD. 2006. Reward motivated learning: mesolimbic 
activation precedes memory formation. Neuron 50:507–517.
Bartlett FC. 1932. Remembering: A Study in Experimental and 
Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Blakemore C. 1977. Mechanics of the Mind. Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univ. Press.
Brewer JB, Zhao Z, Desmond JE, et al. 1998. Making memo-
ries: brain activity that predicts how well visual experi-
ence will be remembered. Science 281:1185–1187.
Brown TI, Carr VA, LaRocque KF, et al. 2016. Prospective rep-
resentation of navigational goals in the human hippocam-
pus. Science 352:1323–1326.
Corkin S. 2002. What’s new with the amnesic patient H.M.? 
Nat Rev Neurosci 3:153–160.
Corkin S, Amaral DG, González RG, et al. 1997. H.M.’s 
medial temporal lobe lesion: findings from magnetic reso-
nance imaging. J Neurosci 17:3964–3979.
Craik FIM, Lockhart RS. 1972. Levels of processing: a frame-
work for memory research. J Verb Learn Verb Behav 
11:671–684.
Duncan K, Doll BB, Daw ND, Shohamy D. 2018. More than 
the sum of its parts: a role for the hippocampus in con-
figural reinforcement learning. Neuron 98:646–657.
Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ. 2014. Can we reconcile the declar-
ative memory and spatial navigation views on hippocam-
pal function? Neuron 83:764–770.
Eldridge LL, Knowlton BJ, Furmanski CS, et al. 2000. Remem-
bering episodes: a selective role for the hippocampus dur-
ing retrieval. Nat Neurosci 3:1149–1152.
Hebb DO. 1966. A Textbook of Psychology. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Luria AR. 1968. The Mind of a Mnemonist. New York: Basic 
Books.
Naya Y, Yoshida M, Miyashita Y. 2001. Backward spreading 
of memory-related signal in the primate temporal cortex. 
Science 291:661–664.
Nyberg L, Habib R, McIntosh AR, Tulving E. 2000. Reacti-
vation of encoding-related brain activity during memory 
retrieval. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11120–11124.
Pavlov IP. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes: Investigation of the 
Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. GV Anrep 
(transl). London: Oxford Univ. Press.
Penfield W. 1958. Functional localization in temporal and deep 
sylvian areas. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis 36:210–226.
Petrides M. 1994. Frontal lobes and behavior. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol 4:207–211.
Poldrack RA, Clark J, Pare-Blagoev EJ, et al. 2001. Interactive 
memory systems in the human brain. Nature 414:546–550.
Rainer G, Asaad WF, Miller EK. 1998. Memory fields of neu-
rons in the primate prefrontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 95:15008–15013.
Rescorla RA. 1968. Probability of shock in the presence 
and absence of CS in fear conditioning. J Comp Physiol 
Psychol 66:1–5.
Rescorla RA. 1988. Behavioral studies of Pavlovian condi-
tioning. Annu Rev Neurosci 11:329–352.
Schacter DL. 2001. The Seven Sins of Memory: How the Mind 
Forgets and Remembers. Boston and New York: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Schacter DL, Addis DR. 2007. The cognitive neuroscience of 
constructive memory: remembering the past and imagin-
ing the future. Philos Trans Roy Soc B 362:773–786.
Schacter DL, Addis DR, Buckner RL. 2007. Remembering the 
past to imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nat Rev 
Neurosci 8:657–661.
Schacter DL, Guerin SA, St. Jacques PL. 2011. Memory distor-
tion: an adaptive perspective. Trends Cog Sci 15:467–474.
Sestieri C, Shulman GL, Corbetta M. 2017. The contribution 
of the human posterior parietal cortex to episodic mem-
ory. Nat Rev Neurosci 18:183–192.
Shohamy D, Adcock RA. 2010. Dopamine and adaptive 
memory. Trends Cog Sci 14:464–472.
Skinner BF. 1938. The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental 
Analysis. New York: Appleton–Century–Crofts.
Squire LR. 1987. Memory and Brain. New York: Oxford Univ. 
Press.
Thorndike EL. 1911. Animal Intelligence: Experimental Studies. 
New York: Macmillan.
Tomita H, Ohbayashi M, Nakahara K, et al. 1999. Top-down 
signal from prefrontal cortex in executive control of mem-
ory retrieval. Nature 401:699–703.


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 52 / Learning and Memory    1311
Tulving E, Schacter DL. 1990. Priming and human memory 
systems. Science 247:301–306.
Uncapher M, Wagner AD. 2009. Posterior parietal cortex and 
episodic encoding: insights from fMRI subsequent mem-
ory effects and dual attention theory. Neurobiol Learn 
Mem 91:139–154.
Vaidya CJ, Gabrieli JD, Verfaellie M, et al. 1998. Font-specific 
priming following global amnesia and occipital lobe dam-
age. Neuropsychology 12:183–192.
Vaz AP Inati SK, Brunel N, Zaghloul KA. 2019. Coupled 
ripple oscillations between the medial temporal lobe 
and neocortex retrieve human memory. Science 363: 
975–978.
Wagner AD. 2002. Cognitive control and episodic memory: 
contributions from prefrontal cortex. In: LR Squire, DL 
Schacter (eds). Neuropsychology of Memory, 3rd ed., pp. 
174–192. New York: Guilford Press.
Wagner AD, Schacter DL, Rotte M, et al. 1998. Building mem-
ories: remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences 
as predicted by brain activity. Science 281:1188–1191.
Wheeler ME, Petersen SE, Buckner RL. 2000. Memory’s echo: 
vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:11125–11129.
Wimmer GE, Shohamy D. 2012. Preference by association: 
how memory mechanisms in the hippocampus bias deci-
sions. Science 338:270–273.


===== Page 5 =====
53
Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage 
and the Biological Basis of Individuality
disturbances of behavior. Behavior is also shaped by 
experience. How does experience act on the neural 
circuits of the brain to change behavior? How is new 
information acquired by the brain, and once acquired, 
how is it stored, retrieved, and remembered?
In the previous chapter, we saw that memory is 
not a single process but has at least two major forms. 
Implicit memory operates unconsciously and automat-
ically, as in the memory for conditioned responses, hab-
its, and perceptual and motor skills, whereas explicit 
memory operates consciously, as in the memory for 
people, places, and objects. The circuitry for long-term 
memory storage differs between explicit and implicit 
memory. Long-term storage of explicit memory begins 
in the hippocampus and the medial temporal lobe of 
the neocortex, whereas long-term storage of different 
types of implicit memory requires a family of neural 
structures: the neocortex for priming, the striatum for 
skills and habits, the amygdala for Pavlovian threat 
conditioning (also known as fear conditioning), the 
cerebellum for learned motor skills, and certain reflex 
pathways for nonassociative learning such as habitua-
tion and sensitization (Figure 53–1).
Over time, explicit memories are transferred to differ-
ent regions of the neocortex. In addition, many cogni-
tive, motor, and perceptual skills that we initially store 
as explicit memory ultimately become so ingrained 
with practice that they become stored as implicit 
memory. The transference from explicit to implicit mem-
ory and the difference between them is dramatically 
demonstrated in the case of the English musician and 
conductor Clive Waring, who in 1985 sustained a viral 
infection of his brain (herpes encephalitis) that affected 
Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Changes in the 
Effectiveness of Synaptic Transmission
Habituation Results From Presynaptic Depression of 
Synaptic Transmission
Sensitization Involves Presynaptic Facilitation of 
Synaptic Transmission
Classical Threat Conditioning Involves Facilitation of 
Synaptic Transmission
Long-Term Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Synaptic 
Changes Mediated by the cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway
Cyclic AMP Signaling Has a Role in Long-Term 
Sensitization
The Role of Noncoding RNAs in the Regulation of 
Transcription
Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Is Synapse Specific
Maintaining Long-Term Synaptic Facilitation Requires a 
Prion-Like Protein Regulator of Local Protein Synthesis
Memory Stored in a Sensory-Motor Synapse Becomes 
Destabilized Following Retrieval but Can Be Restabilized
Classical Threat Conditioning of Defensive Responses in 
Flies Also Uses the cAMP-PKA-CREB Pathway
Memory of Threat Learning in Mammals Involves  
the Amygdala
Learning-Induced Changes in the Structure of the Brain 
Contribute to the Biological Basis of Individuality
Highlights
T
hroughout this book we have emphasized that 
all behavior is a function of the brain and that 
malfunctions of the brain produce characteristic 


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1313
Figure 53–1  Two forms of long-term memory involve dif-
ferent brain systems. Implicit memory involves the neocortex, 
striatum, amygdala, cerebellum, and, in the simplest cases, 
the reflex pathways themselves. Explicit memory requires the 
medial temporal lobe and the hippocampus, as well as certain 
areas of neocortex (not shown).
Two forms of
long-term memory
Implicit
(nondeclarative)
Explicit
(declarative)
Facts
(semantic)
Medial temporal lobe
Medial 
temporal 
lobe
Neocortex
Striatum
Amygdala
Cerebellum
Emotional
responses
Skeletal
musculature
Reﬂex pathways
Events
(episodic)
Priming
Procedural
(skills and
habits)
Associative learning:
classical and
operant conditioning
Nonassociative learning:
habituation and
sensitization
Reﬂex 
pathways
Neocortex
Cerebellum
Amygdala
Hippocampus
Striatum
the hippocampus and temporal cortex. Waring was 
left with a devastating loss of memory for events or 
people he had encountered even a minute or two 
earlier, but his ability to read music, play the piano, 
or conduct a chorale was unaffected. Once a perfor-
mance was completed, however, he could not remem-
ber a thing about it.
Similarly, the abstract expressionist painter William 
de Kooning developed severe disturbances of explicit 
memory as a result of Alzheimer disease. As the dis-
ease progressed and his memory for people, places, and 
objects deteriorated, he nevertheless continued to pro-
duce important and interesting paintings. This aspect of 
his creative personality was relatively untouched.
In this chapter, we examine the cellular and molec-
ular mechanisms that underlie implicit memory stor-
age in invertebrate and vertebrate animals. We focus 
on learning about threats (sometimes called fear learn-
ing). Implicit memory for motor skills and habits in 
mammals involving the cerebellum and basal gan-
glia was considered in Chapters 37 and 38. In the next 
chapter, we examine the biology of explicit memory in 
mammals.
Storage of Implicit Memory Involves Changes 
in the Effectiveness of Synaptic Transmission
Studies of elementary forms of implicit learning—
habituation, sensitization, and classical conditioning—
provided the conceptual framework for investigating 
the neural mechanisms of memory storage. Such learn-
ing has been analyzed in simple invertebrates and in a 
variety of vertebrate behaviors, such as the flexion and 


===== Page 7 =====
1314    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
eye blink reflexes, and also defensive behaviors such 
as freezing. These simple forms of implicit memory 
involve changes in the effectiveness of the synaptic 
pathways that mediate the behavior.
Habituation Results From Presynaptic Depression 
of Synaptic Transmission
Habituation is the simplest form of implicit learning. It 
occurs, for example, when an animal learns to ignore 
a novel stimulus. An animal reacts to a new stimulus 
with a series of orienting responses. If the stimulus is 
neither beneficial nor harmful, the animal learns to 
ignore it after repeated exposure.
The physiological basis of this behavior was first 
investigated by Charles Sherrington while studying 
posture and locomotion in cats. Sherrington observed a 
decrease in the intensity of certain reflexes in response 
to repeated electrical stimulation of the motor path-
ways. He suggested that this decrease, which he called 
habituation, is caused by diminished synaptic effective-
ness in the stimulated pathways.
Habituation was later investigated at the cellular 
level by Alden Spencer and Richard Thompson. They 
found close cellular and behavioral parallels between 
habituation of a spinal flexion reflex in cats (the with-
drawal of a limb from a noxious stimulus) and habitu-
ation of more complex human behaviors. They showed 
that during habituation the strength of the input from 
local excitatory interneurons onto motor neurons in 
the spinal cord decreased, whereas the input to the 
same interneurons from sensory neurons innervating 
the skin was unchanged.
Because the organization of interneurons in the 
vertebrate spinal cord is quite complex, it was difficult 
to analyze further the cellular mechanisms of habitu-
ation in the flexion reflex. Progress required a simpler 
system. The marine mollusk Aplysia californica, which 
has a simple nervous system of about 20,000 central 
neurons, proved to be an excellent system for studying 
implicit forms of memory.
Aplysia has a repertory of defensive reflexes for 
withdrawing its respiratory gill and siphon, a small 
fleshy spout above the gill used to expel seawater and 
waste (Figure 53–2A). These reflexes are similar to the 
withdrawal reflex of the leg studied by Spencer and 
Thompson. Mild touching of the siphon elicits reflex 
withdrawal of both the siphon and gill. With repeated 
stimulation, these reflexes habituate. As we shall see, 
these responses can also be dishabituated, sensitized, 
and classically conditioned.
The neural circuit mediating the gill-withdrawal 
reflex in Aplysia has been studied in detail. Touching 
the siphon excites a population of mechanoreceptor 
sensory neurons that innervate the siphon. The release 
of glutamate from sensory neuron terminals gener-
ates fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) 
in interneurons and motor cells. The EPSPs from the 
sensory cells and interneurons summate on motor 
cells both temporally and spatially, causing them to 
discharge strongly, thereby producing vigorous with-
drawal of the gill. If the siphon is repeatedly touched, 
however, the monosynaptic EPSPs produced by sen-
sory neurons in both interneurons and motor cells 
decrease progressively, paralleling the habituation 
of gill withdrawal. In addition, repeated stimulation 
also leads to a decrease in the strength of synaptic 
transmission from the excitatory interneurons to the 
motor neurons; the net result is that the reflex response 
diminishes (Figure 53–2B,C).
What reduces the effectiveness of synaptic trans-
mission between the sensory neurons and their post-
synaptic cells during repeated stimulation? Quantal 
analysis (Chapter 15) revealed that the amount of syn-
aptic glutamate released from presynaptic terminals 
of sensory neurons decreases. That is, fewer synaptic 
vesicles are released with each action potential in the 
sensory neuron; the sensitivity of the postsynaptic glu-
tamate receptors does not change. Because the reduc-
tion in transmission occurs in the activated pathway 
itself and does not require another modulatory cell, the 
reduction is referred to as homosynaptic depression. This 
depression lasts many minutes.
An enduring change in the functional strength 
of synaptic connections thus constitutes the cellu-
lar mechanism mediating short-term habituation. As 
change of this type occurs at several sites in the gill-
withdrawal reflex circuit, memory is distributed and 
stored throughout the circuit. Depression of synaptic 
transmission by sensory neurons, interneurons, or 
both is a common mechanism underlying habituation 
of escape responses of crayfish and cockroaches as well 
as startle reflexes in vertebrates.
How long can the effectiveness of a synapse 
change last? In Aplysia, a single session of 10 stimuli 
leads to short-term habituation of the withdrawal 
reflex lasting minutes. Four sessions separated by 
periods ranging from several hours to 1 day produce 
long-term habituation, lasting as long as 3 weeks  
(Figure 53–3).
Anatomical studies indicate that long-term habit-
uation is caused by a decrease in the number of syn-
aptic contacts between sensory and motor neurons. 
In naïve animals, 90% of the sensory neurons make 
physiologically detectable connections with identi-
fied motor neurons. In contrast, in animals trained for 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 53 / Cellular Mechanisms of Implicit Memory Storage and the Biological Basis of Individuality    1315
Figure 53–2  Short-term habituation of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex of the marine snail Aplysia.
A. A dorsal view of Aplysia illustrates the respiratory organ (gill) 
and the mantle shelf, which ends in the siphon, a fleshy spout 
used to expel seawater and waste. Touching the siphon elicits the 
gill-withdrawal reflex. Repeated stimulation leads to habituation.
B. Simplified diagrams of the gill-withdrawal reflex circuit and 
sites involved in habituation. Approximately 24 mechanorecep-
tor neurons in the abdominal ganglion innervate the siphon 
skin. These sensory cells make excitatory synapses onto a clus-
ter of six motor neurons that innervate the gill, as well as on 
interneurons that modulate the firing of the motor neurons. (For 
simplicity, only one of each type of neuron is illustrated here.) 
Touching the siphon leads to withdrawal of the gill (dashed 
outline shows original gill size; solid outline shows maximal 
withdrawal).
C. Repeated stimulation of the siphon sensory neuron (top 
traces) leads to a progressive depression of synaptic transmis-
sion between the sensory and motor neurons. The size of the 
motor neuron excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) gradually 
decreases despite no change in the presynaptic action potential 
(AP). In a separate experiment, repeated stimulation of the 
siphon results in a decrease in gill withdrawal (habituation). 
One hour after repetitive stimulation, both the EPSP and gill 
withdrawal have recovered. Habituation involves a decrease in 
transmitter release at many synaptic sites throughout the reflex 
circuit. (Adapted, with permission, from Pinsker et al. 1970; 
Castellucci and Kandel 1974.)
B  Gill-withdrawal reﬂex circuit
C  Habituation
Control
Habituated
Sensory
neuron
Interneuron
Siphon
Motor
neuron
Gill
Stimulus
AP
EPSP
Gill
withdrawal
1 h
rest
60 ms
2 mV
20 mV
Siphon
Mantle 
shelf
Tactile
stimulus
A  Experimental setup
Respiratory
organ (gill)
Stimulus
Stimulus
Recovery
10 s
long-term habituation, the incidence of connections is 
reduced to 30%; the reduction in number of synapses 
persists for a week and does not fully recover even 
3 weeks later (see Figure 53–9). As we shall see, the 
converse occurs with long-term sensitization, where 
synaptic transmission is associated with an increase in 
the number of synapses between sensory and motor 
neurons.
Not all classes of synapses are equally modifi-
able. In Aplysia, the strength of some synapses rarely 
changes, even with repeated activation. In synapses 
specifically involved in learning (such as the connec-
tions between sensory and motor neurons in the with-
drawal reflex circuit), a relatively small amount of 
training can produce large and enduring changes in 
synaptic strength.


===== Page 9 =====
1316    Part VIII / Learning, Memory, Language and Cognition
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
A  Depression of synaptic potentials by long-term habituation
Control
Habituated (1 week)
B  Inactivation of synaptic connections by long-term habituation
50 ms
10 mV
5 mV
0
100
80
60
Mean percent of detectable connections
40
20
1 day
Control
1 week
Habituated
3 weeks
Figure 53–3  Long-term habituation of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex in Aplysia. (Adapted, with permission, from Castellucci, 
Carew, and Kandel 1978.)
A. Comparison of action potentials in sensory neurons and the 
postsynaptic potential in motor neurons in an untrained animal 
(control) and one that has been subjected to long-term habitua-
tion. In the habituated animal 1 week after training, no synaptic 
potential occurs in the motor neuron in response to the sen-
sory neuron action potential.
B. After long-term habituation training, the mean percentage of 
sensory neurons making physiologically detectable connections 
with motor neurons is reduced even at 3 weeks.
Sensitization Involves Presynaptic Facilitation of 
Synaptic Transmission
The ability to recognize and respond to danger is nec-
essary for survival. Not only snails and flies, but all 
animals, including humans, must distinguish preda-
tors from prey and hostile environments from safe 
ones. Because the ability to respond to threats is a 
universal requirement of survival, it has been con-
served throughout evolution, allowing studies of 
invertebrates to shed light on neural mechanisms in 
mammals.
At the beginning of the 20th century, both Freud 
and Pavlov appreciated that anticipatory defensive 
responses to danger signals are biologically adaptive, 
a fact that likely accounts for the profound conserva-
tion of this capacity throughout vertebrates and inver-
tebrates. In the laboratory, threat (fear) conditioning 
is typically studied by presenting a neutral stimulus, 
such as a tone, prior to the onset of an aversive stimu-
lus, such as electrical shock. The two stimuli become 
associated such that the tone leads to the elicitation 
of defensive behaviors that protect against the harm-
ful consequences predicted by the tone. Freud called 
this “signal anxiety,” which prepares the individual 
for fight or flight when there is even the suggestion of 
external danger.
When an animal repeatedly encounters a harmless 
stimulus, its responsiveness to the stimulus habituates, 
as seen above. In contrast, when the animal confronts 
a harmful stimulus, it typically learns to respond more 
vigorously to a subsequent presentation of the same 
stimulus. Presentation of a harmful stimulus can even 
cause an animal to mount a defensive response to a 
subsequent harmless stimulus. As a result, defensive 
reflexes for withdrawal and escape become height-
ened. This enhancement of reflex responses is called 
sensitization.
Like habituation, sensitization can be transient or 
long lasting. A single shock to the tail of an Aplysia pro-
duces short-term sensitization of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex that lasts minutes; five or more shocks to the tail 
produce sensitization lasting days to weeks. Tail shock 
is also sufficient to overcome the effects of habituation 
and enhance a habituated gill-withdrawal reflex, a 
process termed dishabituation.
Sensitization and dishabituation result from an 
enhancement in synaptic transmission at several con-
nections in the neural circuit of the gill-withdrawal 
reflex, including the connections made by sensory neu-
rons with motor neurons and interneurons—the same 
synapses depressed by habituation (Figure 53–4A). 
Typically, modifiable synapses can be regulated 
bidirectionally, participate in more than one type of 
learning, and store more than one type of memory. The 
bidirectional synaptic changes that underlie habitu-
ation and sensitization are the result of different cel-
lular mechanisms. In Aplysia, the same synapses that 
are weakened by habituation through a homosynaptic 
process can be strengthened by sensitization through 
a heterosynaptic process that depends on modulatory 


