===== Page 1 =====
1468    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–15  Channelopathies are a major, but not the 
only, cause of monogenic human epilepsies.  The human 
epilepsy genes discovered so far can affect multiple phases of 
synaptic transmission including the migration of interneurons 
(1), upstream activation of interneurons (2), γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) levels within interneurons (3), the excitability of excita-
tory and inhibitory neurons (4), the release of neurotransmitters 
(5), and the postsynaptic response to neurotransmitters (6). 
The inset shows that the impact of mutations in these genes on 
neuronal excitability can affect the shape of the action potential 
as well as the afterpotentials and synaptic events that follow. 
Mutations indicated near the spike (a) affect the repolarization of 
the action potential. Other mutations shown in (b) affect the afte-
rhyperpolarization, synaptic conductances, or interspike interval.
1  Interneuron
    migration
2  Upstream
    activation
3  GABA
    levels
5  Neurotransmitter
    release
6  Response to
    neurotransmitter
    (channelopathies)
4  Excitability (channelopathies)
CaV 2.1
KCNQ2/3
CLCN2
KV 1.1
CaV 1.1
NaV 1.1, 
NaV 1.2, 
β1
α1, β3, γ2
Voltage-gated K+
Voltage-gated Ca2+
M-type K+
Cl–
Voltage-gated Na+
Ca2+-activated K+
Channel
Subunits affected
Epilepsy
Generalized epilepsy with febrile
 seizures plus (GEFS+)
Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy
Benign infantile epilepsy
GEFS+
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
Childhood absence epilepsy
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Absence epilepsy
Absence epilepsy
GABAA receptor
a
a
b
b
Benign neonatal epilepsy
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
secondary action on cell migration, network forma-
tion, or patterns of gene expression.
In the early days of research on epilepsy genes, 
it was widely expected that the genes would mostly 
underlie generalized epilepsies, based on the idea 
that a gene mutation (eg, in an ion channel) would be 
expected to affect most neurons. However, the very 
first autosomal dominant epilepsy gene discovered by 
Steinlein and colleagues caused a focal onset (frontal 
lobe) epilepsy, and another gives rise to seizures origi-
nating in the temporal lobe with an auditory aura. In 
retrospect, this should not be so surprising because 
channel subunits are rarely expressed uniformly in the 
brain, and some brain regions are more likely to gener-
ate seizures than other regions.
Timing of gene expression is also important. For 
example, totterer mice with mutations in the pore-
forming CaV2.1 subunit of P/Q-type Ca2+ channels 
show spike-wave–type seizures that begin in the third 
postnatal week, presumably because N-type Ca2+ 
channels are the predominant functional isoform ear-
lier in development, whereas P/Q-type Ca2+ channels 
predominate later. The neurological phenotype begins 
once the mutant channel is functionally required dur-
ing development.
Moreover, one mutation can give rise to differ-
ent epilepsy phenotypes, or different mutant genes 
can cause the same epilepsy phenotype. As an exam-
ple of the latter, the ADNFLE syndrome, first discov-
ered as a mutation in the α4-subunit of the nicotinic 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1469
ACh receptor, can also be caused by a mutation in the 
α2-subunit. But not all family members who carry this 
autosomal dominant mutation have epilepsy, indicat-
ing that even in this form of monogenic epilepsy other 
genes as well as nongenetic factors can influence the 
phenotype. The GEFS+ syndrome (generalized epi-
lepsy with febrile seizures plus) is a good example 
of this heterogeneity. It is a childhood syndrome and 
can involve different seizure types in different family 
members. GEFS+ is seen in families with mutations in 
the genes for one of three different Na+ channel subu-
nits or one of two GABAA receptors. Family studies of 
generalized onset epilepsy suggest that seizure types 
may be heritable within families. These findings indi-
cate that even monogenic epilepsies are likely modi-
fied by other genes, environmental influences, and 
even experience-dependent changes in synapses.
Altered cortical development may be a common 
cause of epilepsy. The increased resolution of MRI scans 
has revealed an unexpectedly large number of cortical 
malformations and localized areas of abnormal corti-
cal folding in patients with epilepsy. Thus, mutations 
that disturb the normal formation of the cortex or net-
work wiring are candidate genes for epilepsy. This idea 
is supported by the mapping of two X-linked corti-
cal malformations with epileptic phenotypes: familial 
periventricular heterotopia and familial subcortical 
band heterotopia. The genes responsible for these two 
disorders that encode filamin A and doublecortin, 
respectively, are presumably important in neuronal 
migration. Small focal cortical dysplasias can function 
as seizure foci that give rise to partial and secondarily 
generalized seizures, whereas more extensive cortical 
malformations can cause a variety of seizure types and 
usually are associated with other neurological problems.
Another X-linked gene, aristaless related home-
obox (ARX), is an example of a cell type–specific 
transcription factor altering migration, because it 
is expressed only in interneuron precursors. A par-
ticularly instructive example is the association of 
epilepsy with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), an 
autosomal dominant genetic disorder that results 
from the lack of the functional Tsc1-Tsc2 complex, 
leading to hyperactivity of the mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling 
pathway. Early clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors as 
treatment for refractory epilepsy in these patients 
have been promising. Such examples provide hope 
for linking the underlying biology of epilepsy syn-
dromes to clinically relevant treatments.
The epilepsy genome is rapidly expanding, driven 
by clinical exome sequencing and an appreciation of 
the biological pathways leading to neural network 
instability. Unfortunately, the vast majority of cases of 
epilepsy cannot yet be explained by even the recent 
surge in the identification of epilepsy genes. The iden-
tification of large numbers of patients through online 
registries may provide the population samples needed 
to evaluate susceptibility genes that underlie complex 
inheritance patterns.
The Genesis of Acquired Epilepsies Is a 
Maladaptive Response to Injury
Epilepsy often develops following a discrete cortical 
injury such as a penetrating head wound. This injury 
serves as the nidus for a seizure focus, leading at some 
later point to seizures. This has led to the idea that the 
early insult triggers a set of progressive physiological or 
anatomical changes that lead to chronic seizures. That 
is, the characteristic “silent” interval (usually months 
or years) between the insult and the onset of recurrent 
seizures may reflect progressive maladaptive molecular 
and cellular changes that might be amenable to thera-
peutic manipulation. Although an attractive hypothesis, 
a unified picture of this process has yet to emerge. The 
most promising evidence has come from studies of tis-
sue removed from patients undergoing temporal lobec-
tomy and rodent models of limbic seizures.
In one experimental model, hyperexcitability 
is induced by repeated stimulation of limbic struc-
tures, such as the amygdala or hippocampus. The 
initial stimulus is followed by an electrical response 
(the afterdischarge) that becomes more extensive and 
prolonged with repeated stimuli until a generalized 
seizure occurs. This process, called kindling, can be 
induced by electrical or chemical stimuli. Many inves-
tigators believe that kindling may contribute to the 
development of epilepsy in humans.
Kindling is thought to involve synaptic changes 
in the hippocampal formation that resemble those 
important in learning and memory (Chapters 53  
and 54). These include short-term changes in excitabil-
ity and persistent morphological changes, including 
generation of adult-born neurons, axonal sprouting, 
and synaptic reorganization. Rearrangements of synaptic 
connections have been observed in the dentate gyrus 
of patients with long-standing temporal lobe seizures 
as well as following kindling in experimental ani-
mals. In addition to axonal sprouting (Figure 58–16), 
changes include alterations in dendritic structure, 
control of transmitter release, and novel expression 
and alterations in subunit stoichiometry of ion chan-
nels and pumps.
The long-term changes that lead to epilepsy 
also are likely to involve specific patterns of gene 


===== Page 3 =====
1470    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 58–16  Mossy fiber synaptic reorganization (sprout-
ing) in the human temporal lobe may cause hyperexcit-
ability.  (Reproduced, with permission, from Sutula et al. 1989. 
Copyright © 1989 American Neurological Association.)
A. Timm stain of a transverse section of hippocampus removed 
from a patient with epilepsy at the time of temporal lobectomy 
for control of epilepsy. The stain appears black in the axons of 
the dentate granule cells (mossy fibers) due to the presence 
of zinc in these axons. The mossy fibers normally pass through 
the dentate hilus (H) on their way to synapse on CA3 pyramidal 
cells. In the epileptic tissue shown here, stained fibers appear 
in the supragranular layer of the dentate gyrus (SG,  
arrowheads), which now contains not only the granule cell 
dendrites but also newly sprouted mossy fibers. These  
aberrant sprouts of mossy fibers form new recurrent  
excitatory synapses on dentate granule cells.
B. This high magnification of a segment of the supragranular 
layer shows the Timm-stained mossy fibers in greater detail.
A
SG
B
SG
H
H
expression. For example, the proto-oncogene c-fos and 
other immediate early genes as well as growth factors 
can be activated by seizures. Because many immediate 
early genes encode transcription factors that control 
other genes, the gene products that result from epilep-
tiform activity could initiate changes that contribute to 
or suppress the development of epilepsy by altering 
such mechanisms as cell fate, axon targeting, dendritic 
outgrowth, and synapse formation.
Highlights
1.	 Seizures are one of the most dramatic examples 
of the collective electrical behavior of the mam-
malian brain. The distinctive clinical pattern of 
partial seizures and generalized seizures can be 
attributed to the distinctly different patterns of 
activity of cortical neurons.
2.	 Studies of focal onset seizures in animals reveal a 
series of events—from the activity of neurons in 
the seizure focus to synchronization and subse-
quent spread of epileptiform activity throughout 
the cortex. The gradual loss of GABAergic sur-
round inhibition is critical to the early steps in 
this progression. In contrast, generalized onset 
seizures are thought to arise from activity in 
thalamocortical circuits, perhaps combined with a 
general abnormality in the membrane excitability 
of all cortical neurons.
3.	 The electroencephalogram (EEG) has long pro-
vided a window on the electrical activity of the 
cortex, both in normal phases of arousal and dur-
ing abnormal activities such as seizures. The EEG 


===== Page 4 =====
Chapter 58 / Seizures and Epilepsy    1471
can be used to identify certain electrical activity 
patterns associated with seizures, but it provides 
limited insight into the pathophysiology of sei-
zures. Several much more powerful and nonin-
vasive approaches are now available to locate the 
focus of a partial seizure. This has led to the wide-
spread and successful use of epilepsy surgery for 
selected patients, particularly those with complex 
partial seizures of hippocampal onset. The prom-
ise of invasive approaches to seizure detection and 
seizure prevention provides additional hope for 
improved control of seizures.
4.	 The increasing power of genetic, molecular, and 
modern cell-physiological approaches applied to 
the study of  seizures and epilepsy also gives new 
hope that an understanding of these disruptions 
of normal brain activity will provide new thera-
peutic options for patients afflicted with epilepsy, 
as well as new insights into the function of the 
mammalian brain.
5.	 Further neurobiological studies of the progres-
sion from an acute seizure to the development of 
epilepsy should provide alternative strategies for 
treatment beyond the standard options of anticon-
vulsants or epilepsy surgery.
 Gary Westbrook 
Selected Reading
Cascino GD. 2004. Surgical treatment for epilepsy. Epilepsy 
Res 60:179–186.
Engel J. 1989. Seizures and Epilepsy. Philadelphia: Davis.
Kleen JK, Lowenstein DH. 2017. Progress in epilepsy: latest 
waves of discovery. JAMA Neurol 74:139–140.
Krook-Magnuson E, Soltesz I. 2015. Beyond the hammer and 
the scalpel: selective circuit control for the epilepsies. Nat 
Neurosci 18:331–338.
Krueger DA, Wilfong AA, Holland-Bouley K, et al. 2013. 
Everolimus treatment of refractory epilepsy in tuberous 
sclerosis complex. Ann Neurol 74:679–687.
Kullmann DM, Schorge S, Walker MC, Wykes RC. 2014. 
Gene therapy in epilepsy—is it time for clinical trials? Nat 
Rev Neurol 10:300–304.
Lennox WG, Lennox MA. 1960. Epilepsy and Related Disorders. 
Boston: Little, Brown.
Lennox WG, Mattson RH. 2003. Overview: idiopathic gener-
alized epilepsies. Epilepsia 44(Suppl 2):2–6.
Lerche H, Shah M, Beck H, Noebels J, Johnston D, Vincent A. 
2013. Ion channels in genetic and acquired forms of epi-
lepsy. J Physiol 591:753–764.
Lowenstein DH. 2015. Decade in review-epilepsy: edging 
toward breakthroughs in epilepsy diagnostics and care. 
Nat Rev Neurol 11:616–617.
Maheshwari A, Noebels JL. 2014. Monogenic models of 
absence epilepsy: windows into the complex balance 
between inhibition and excitation in thalamocortical 
microcircuits. Prog Brain Res 213:223–252.
Noebels J. 2015. Pathway-driven discovery of epilepsy genes. 
Nat Neurosci 18:344–350.
Paz JT, Huguenard JR. 2015. Optogenetics and epilepsy: past, 
present and future. Epilepsy Curr 15:34–38.
Penfield W, Jasper H. 1954. Epilepsy and the Functional 
Anatomy of the Human Brain. Boston: Little, Brown.
Snowball A, Schorge S. 2015. Changing channels in pain and 
epilepsy: exploring ion channel gene therapy for disorders 
of neuronal hyperexcitability. FEBS Letters 589:1620–1624.
Stables JP, Bertram EH, White HS, et al. 2002. Models for 
epilepsy and epileptogenesis: report from the NIH work-
shop. Epilepsia 43:1410–1420.
Stafstrom CE, Carmant L. 2015. Seizures and epilepsy: an 
overview for neuroscientists. Cold Spring Harb Perspect 
Med 5:a022426.
References
Bagnall RD, Crompton DE, Petrovski S, et al. 2016. Exome-
based analysis of cardiac arrhythmia, respiratory control 
and epilepsy genes in sudden unexpected death in epi-
lepsy. Ann Neurol 79:522–534.
Berenyi A, Belluscio M, Mao D, Buzsaki G. 2012. Closed-loop 
control of epilepsy by transcranial electrical stimulation. 
Science 337:735–737.
Bergey GK, Morrell MJ, Mizrahi EM, et al. 2015. Long-term 
treatment with responsive brain stimulation in adults 
with refractory partial seizures. Neurology 84:810–817.
Biervert C, Schroeder BC, Kubisch C, et al. 1998. A potassium 
channel mutation in neonatal human epilepsy. Science 
279:403–406.
Fisher RS, Cross JH, D’Souza C, et al. 2017. Instruction man-
ual for the ILAE 2017 operational classification of seizure 
types. Epilepsia 58:531–542.
Gadhoumi K, Lina J-M, Mormann F, Gotman J. 2016. Seizure 
prediction for therapeutic devices: a review. J Neurosci 
Methods 260:270–282.
Haug K, Warnstedt M, Alekov AK, et al. 2003. Mutations in 
CLCN2 encoding a voltage-gated chloride channel are 
associated with idiopathic generalized epilepsies. Nat 
Genet 33:527–532.
Heck CN, King-Stephens D, Massey AD, et al. 2014. Two-year 
reduction in adults with medically intractable partial onset 
epilepsy treated with responsive neurostimulation: final 
results of the RNS system pivotal trial. Epilepsia 55:432–441.
Kätzel D, Nicholson E, Schorge S, Walker MC, Kullmann 
DM. 2013. Chemical-genetic attenuation of focal neocorti-
cal seizures. Nat Commun 5:3847.
Kramer MA, Eden UT, Kolaczyk E, et al. 2010. Coalescence 
and fragmentation of cortical networks during focal sei-
zures. J Neurosci 30:10076–10085.


===== Page 5 =====
1472    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Lothman EW. 1993a. The neurobiology of epileptiform dis-
charges. Am J EEG Technol 33:93–112.
Lothman EW. 1993b. Pathophysiology of seizures and epi-
lepsy in the mature and immature brain: cells, synapses 
and circuits. In: WE Dodson, JM Pellock (eds). Pediatric  
Epilepsy: Diagnosis and Therapy, pp. 1–15. New York: 
Demos Publications.
Lothman EW, Collins RC. 1990. Seizures and epilepsy. In: 
AL Pearlman, RC Collins (eds). Neurobiology of Disease, 
pp. 276–298. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mulley JC, Scheffer IE, Harkin LA, Berkovic SF, Dibbens LM. 
2005. Susceptibility genes for complex epilepsy. Hum Mol 
Genet 14:R243–R249.
Santhakumar V, Aradi S, Soltesz I. 2005. Role of mossy fiber 
sprouting and mossy cell loss in hyperexcitability: a net-
work model of the dentate gyrus incorporating cell types 
and axonal topography. J Neurophysiol 93:437–463.
Spencer WA, Kandel ER. 1968. Cellular and integrative prop-
erties of the hippocampal pyramidal cell and the compar-
ative electrophysiology of cortical neurons. Int J Neurol 
6:266–296.
Stacey WC, Litt B. 2008. Technology insight: neuroengineer-
ing and epilepsy-designing devices for epilepsy control. 
Nat Clin Pract Neurol 4:190–201.
Steinlein OK, Mulley JC, Propping P, et al. 1995. A missense 
mutation in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
alpha 4 subunit is associated with autosomal dominant 
nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. Nat Genet 11:201–203.
Sutula T, Cascino G, Cavazos J, Parada I, Ramirez L. 1989. 
Mossy fiber synaptic reorganization in the epileptic 
human temporal lobe. Ann Neurol 26:321–330.
Teitelbaum J, Zatorre RJ, Carpenter S, et al. 1990. Neurologic 
sequelae of domoic acid intoxication due to ingestion of 
contaminated mussels. N Engl J Med 322:1781–1787.
Tung JK, Berglund K, Gross RE. 2016. Optogenetic approaches 
for controlling seizure activity. Brain Stimul 9:801–810.
von Krosigk M, Bal T, McCormick DA. 1993. Cellular mech-
anisms of a synchronized oscillation in the thalamus. 
Science 261:361–364.
Walsh CA. 1999. Genetic malformations of the human cerebral 
cortex. Neuron 23:19–29.
Wiebe S, Blume WT, Girvin JP, Eliasziw M. 2001. Effective-
ness and efficiency of surgery for temporal lobe epilepsy 
study. A randomized, controlled trial of surgery for tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. N Engl J Med 14:211–216.
Winawer MR, Marini C, Grinton BE, et al. 2005. Familial clus-
tering of seizure types within the idiopathic generalized 
epilepsies. Neurology 65:523–528.
Zhao M, Alleva R, Ma H, Daniel AGS, Schwartz TH. 2015. 
Optogenetic tools for modulating and probing the epileptic 
network. Epilepsy Res 116:15–26.


===== Page 6 =====
59
Disorders of Conscious and  
Unconscious Mental Processes
At the other extreme, the term cognition refers to 
those higher-level processes fundamental to the for-
mation of conscious experience. This is what is meant 
by the term cognitive therapy, an approach to treatment 
pioneered by Aaron Beck and Albert Ellis and devel-
oped from behavior therapy. Rather than trying to 
change a patient’s behavior directly, cognitive therapy 
has the aim of changing the patient’s attitudes and 
beliefs (Box 59–1).
In common parlance, the term cognition means 
thinking and reasoning, a usage closer to its Latin root 
cognoscere (getting to know or perceiving). Thus, the 
Oxford English Dictionary defines it as “the action or fac-
ulty of knowing.” Indeed, we know the world by apply-
ing thinking and reasoning to the raw data of our senses.
This idea is implicit in our characterization of 
many kinds of disorders of cognition. After brain dam-
age, some patients can no longer process the input 
supplied by the senses. This type of disorder was first 
delineated by Sigmund Freud, who called it agnosia, 
or loss of knowledge (Chapter 17). Agnosias can take 
many forms. A patient with visual agnosia can see per-
fectly well but is no longer able to recognize or make 
sense of what he sees. A patient with prosopagnosia 
has a specific problem recognizing faces. A patient 
with auditory agnosia might hear perfectly well but is 
unable to recognize spoken words.
Cognition is sometimes impaired from birth so 
that a person has difficulty in acquiring knowledge. 
This might lead to general mental retardation or, if the 
problem is more localized, to specific learning difficul-
ties such as dyslexia (difficulty learning about written 
Conscious and Unconscious Cognitive Processes Have 
Distinct Neural Correlates
Differences Between Conscious and Unconscious  
Processes in Perception Can Be Seen in Exaggerated Form 
After Brain Damage
The Control of Action Is Largely Unconscious
The Conscious Recall of Memories Is a Creative Process
Behavioral Observation Needs to Be Supplemented With 
Subjective Reports
Verification of Subjective Reports Is Challenging
Malingering and Hysteria Can Lead to Unreliable 
Subjective Reports
Highlights
A
lthough cognitive neuroscience  emerged 
at the end of the 20th century as a major 
new discipline, a precise meaning of the 
term cognition remains elusive. The term is used in 
different ways in different contexts. At one extreme, 
the term cognitive in cognitive neuroscience connotes 
what was meant by the older term information pro-
cessing. In this sense, cognition is simply what the 
brain does. When cognitive neuroscientists say that 
visual features or motor acts are represented by neu-
ral activity, they are using concepts from information 
processing. From this point of view, the language of 
cognition provides a bridge between descriptions of 
neural activity and behavior because the same terms 
can be applied in both domains.


===== Page 7 =====
1474    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Box 59–1  Cognitive Therapy
Dissatisfaction with psychological treatments based on 
Freud’s theories of unconscious motivation intensified 
in the middle of the 20th century. Not only did these the-
ories have no relevance to experimental psychology, but 
there was no empirical evidence that psychodynamic 
treatments actually worked.
The first form of alternative psychological therapy 
to emerge from laboratory studies is known as behavior 
therapy. The fundamental assumption of this approach is 
that maladaptive behavior is learned and can therefore 
be eliminated by applying the Pavlovian and Skinnerian 
principles of stimulus-response learning. So, for exam-
ple, a child who has been attacked by a dog can become 
fearful of all dogs, but this fearful response can be extin-
guished if the child learns that the conditioned stimulus 
(the sight of a dog) is not followed by the unconditioned 
stimulus (being bitten).
Behavior therapy was shown to be quick and effec-
tive for phobias, but many mental disorders are better 
characterized in terms of maladaptive thinking rather 
than maladaptive behavior. In the 1960s, Aaron Beck 
and Albert Ellis initiated a new kind of therapy in which 
the principles of learning are used to change thoughts 
rather than behavior. This is known as cognitive therapy 
or cognitive behavior therapy.
This form of therapy has been particularly success-
ful in the treatment of depression. Depression is typi-
cally associated with negative thoughts (eg, a person 
remembering only the bad things that have happened to 
him/her) and negative attitudes (eg, a person believing 
that he/she will never achieve his/her goals). Cogni-
tive therapists teach their clients methods for reducing 
the frequency of negative thoughts and changing their 
negative attitudes into positive ones.
language) or autism (difficulty in learning about other 
minds). Finally, cognition can become dysfunctional so 
that the knowledge acquired about the world is false. 
These disorders of thinking lead to the sort of false 
perceptions (hallucinations) and false beliefs (delu-
sions) associated with major mental illnesses such as 
schizophrenia.
Conscious and Unconscious Cognitive 
Processes Have Distinct Neural Correlates
Cognition—deriving knowledge through thinking 
and reasoning—is one of three components of con-
sciousness (see Chapter 42 for discussion of the con-
scious aspects of emotions, often called feelings). The 
other two are emotion and will. It used to be taken for 
granted that thinking and reasoning were under con-
scious voluntary control and that cognition was not 
possible without consciousness. By the end of the 19th 
century, however, Freud developed a theory of uncon-
scious mental processes and suggested that much 
human behavior is guided by internal processes of 
which we are not aware.
Of more direct importance for neuroscience was 
the idea of unconscious inference, originally proposed 
by Helmholtz. Helmholtz was the first to carry out 
quantitative psychophysical experiments and to meas-
ure the speed with which afferent signals in periph-
eral nerves are conducted. Prior to these experiments, 
sensory signals were assumed to arrive in the brain 
immediately (with the speed of light), but Helmholtz 
showed that nerve conduction was actually quite slow. 
He also noted that reaction times were even slower. 
These observations implied that a great deal of brain 
work intervened between sensory stimuli and con-
scious perception of an object. Helmholtz concluded 
that much of what goes on in the brain is not conscious 
and that what does enter consciousness (ie, what is 
perceived) depends on unconscious inferences. In 
other words, the brain uses evidence from the senses 
to decide on the most likely identity of the object that 
is causing activity in the sensory organs but does this 
without our awareness.
This view was extremely unpopular with 
Helmholtz’s contemporaries and, indeed, still is today. 
Most people believe that consciousness is necessary for 
making inferences and that moral responsibility can be 
assigned only to decisions that are based on conscious 
inference. If inferences could be made without con-
sciousness, there could be no ethical basis for praise 
or blame. Helmholtz’s ideas about unconscious infer-
ences were largely ignored.
Nevertheless, by the middle of the 20th century, 
evidence began to accumulate in favor of the idea that 
most cognitive processing never enters consciousness. 
After the development of electronic computers and 
the emergence of the study of artificial intelligence, 
researchers began to study how, and to what extent, 
machines could perceive the world beyond themselves. 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 59 / Disorders of Conscious and Unconscious Mental Processes     1475
It rapidly became clear that many perceptual processes 
that at first seem simple are actually very complex 
when defined as a set of computations.
Visual perception is the prime example. In the 
1960s, almost no one realized how difficult it would 
be to build machines that could recognize the shape 
and appearance of objects, because it seems so easy 
for us. I look out of the window and I see buildings, 
trees, flowers, and people. I am not aware of any men-
tal processes behind this perception; my awareness of 
all these objects seems instantaneous and direct. It 
turns out that teaching a machine how to work out 
which edges go with which object in a typical clut-
tered visual scene containing many overlapping 
objects is exceptionally difficult. The computational 
approach to vision revealed the underlying neural 
processes on which our seemingly effortless percep-
tion of the world depends. Similar processes underlie 
all sensory perception and especially the perception 
of sounds as speech. Most neuroscientists now believe 
that we are not conscious of cognitive processes, only 
our perceptions.
The evidence for unconscious cognitive processes 
comes not only from artificial intelligence studies but 
also studies of cognition in people with brain damage. 
The effects of unconscious processes on behavior can 
be demonstrated most strikingly in certain patients 
with “blind sight,” a disorder first delineated in the 
1970s by Lawrence Weiskrantz. These patients have 
lesions in the primary visual cortex and claim to see noth-
ing in the part of the visual field served by the damaged 
area. Nevertheless, when asked to guess, they are able 
to detect simple visual properties such as movement 
or color far better than is expected by chance. Despite 
having no sensory-based perception of objects in the 
blind parts of the visual field, these patients do possess 
unconscious information about the objects, and this 
information is available to guide their behavior.
Another example is unilateral neglect caused by 
lesions in the right parietal lobe (Chapter 17). Patients 
with this disorder have normal vision, but they seem 
unware of objects on the left side of the space in front 
of them. Some patients even ignore the left side of 
individual objects. In one experiment by John Marshall 
and Peter Halligan, patients were shown two draw-
ings of a house. The left side of one house was on fire 
(Figure 59–1). When asked if there were any differ-
ences between the houses, patients replied “no.” But 
when asked which house they would prefer to live 
in, they chose the house that was not burning. This 
choice was thus made based on information that was 
not represented in consciousness. Blind sight and uni-
lateral neglect are just two examples of the abundant 
Right posterior 
parietal cortex
Figure 59–1  Unconscious processing in cases of spatial 
neglect. After damage to the right parietal lobe, many patients 
seem to be unaware of the left side of space (unilateral neglect 
syndrome). When such patients are shown the two drawings 
reproduced here, they say that the two houses look the same. 
However, they also say that they would prefer to live in the 
lower house, indicating that they have unconsciously processed 
the image of the fire in the other house. (Adapted from Marshall 
and Halligan 1988.)
empirical evidence for the existence of unconscious 
cognitive processes, evidence not available to us 
through introspection.
Currently, one of the most exciting areas of 
investigation in neuroscience concerns the search for 
the neural correlates of consciousness initiated by Fran-
cis Crick and Christopher Koch. The aim is to dem-
onstrate qualitative differences between the neural 
activity associated with conscious and unconscious 
cognitive processes. This research is important not only 
because it may give us answers to the difficult ques-
tion of the function of consciousness but also because 
it is relevant to our understanding of many neurologi-
cal and psychiatric disorders. The weird experiences 


===== Page 9 =====
1476    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 59–2  Ambiguous figures. If you stare at the figure  
on the left (the Rubin figure), you sometimes see a vase and 
sometimes two faces looking at each other. If you stare at  
the figure on the right (the Necker cube), you see a three-
dimensional cube, but the front face of the cube is  
sometimes seen at the bottom left and sometimes at the top 
right. In each figure, the brain finds two equally good, but mutu-
ally exclusive, interpretations of what is there. Our conscious 
perception spontaneously alternates between these two 
interpretations.
and delusional beliefs of patients with certain cogni-
tive disorders were once dismissed as beyond under-
standing. Cognitive neuroscience provides us with a 
framework for understanding how these experiences 
and beliefs can arise from specific alterations in normal 
cognitive mechanisms.
Differences Between Conscious and 
Unconscious Processes in Perception Can Be 
Seen in Exaggerated Form After Brain Damage
The relationship between sensory stimulation and 
perception is far from direct. Perception can change 
without any change in sensory stimulation, as illus-
trated by ambiguous figures such as the Rubin figure 
and the Necker cube (Figure 59–2). Conversely, a big 
change in sensory stimulation can occur without the 
observer being aware of this change—the perception 
remains constant. A compelling example of this is 
change blindness.
To demonstrate change blindness, two versions of 
a complex scene are constructed. In one well-known 
example developed by Ron Rensink, the picture con-
sists of a military transport plane standing on an air-
port runway. In one of the two versions, an engine is 
missing. If these two pictures are shown in alternation 
on a computer screen, but critically interspersed with 
a blank screen, it can take minutes to notice the dif-
ference even though it is immediately obvious when 
pointed out. (See Figure 25-8 for another example.)
In light of these phenomena, we can explore the 
neural activity associated with changes in perception 
when there is no change in sensory stimulation. Like-
wise, we can discover whether changes in sensory 
input are registered in the brain even if not repre-
sented in consciousness. We can ask whether there is 
some qualitative difference between the neural activity 
associated with conscious as opposed to unconscious 
processes.
Two important results have emerged from studies 
of the neural activity associated with specific types of 
conscious percepts. First, certain kinds of percepts are 
related to neural activity in specific areas of the brain. 
Those brain areas that are specialized for recognition 
of certain kinds of objects (eg, faces, words, land-
scapes) or for certain visual features (eg, color, motion) 
are more active when the object or the feature is con-
sciously perceived (Figure 59–3). For example, when 
we perceive the faces in the Rubin figure, there is more 
activity in the area of the fusiform gyrus, which is spe-
cialized for the processing of faces.
This observation also applies to deviant percep-
tion (hallucinations). After degeneration of the periph-
eral visual system leading to blindness, some patients 
experience intermittent visual hallucinations (Charles 
Bonnet syndrome). These hallucinations vary from one 
patient to another: Some patients see colored patches, 
others see grid-like patterns, and some even see faces. 
Dominic ffytche found that these hallucinations are 
associated with increased activity in the secondary 
visual cortex, and the content of the hallucination is 
related to the specific locus of activity (Figure 59–4). 
Schizophrenic patients frequently experience com-
plex auditory hallucinations, which usually have the 
form of voices talking to or about the patient. These 


