===== Page 1 =====
1428    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
In the past 10 years, it has also become clear that 
motor neuron pathophysiology is modulated by the 
reactions of nonneural cells to degeneration in the motor 
neuron. Thus, in most cases of ALS, there are varying 
degrees of proliferation and activation of microglia, 
astrocytes, and some populations of lymphocytes, which 
may begin as compensatory responses but can eventu-
ally adversely affect the injured motor neurons. Genetic 
studies have underscored the importance of non–cell-
autonomous factors, such as variants that reduce func-
tion of the microglial gene TREM-2 and enhance the risk 
of developing not only ALS but also other neurodegen-
erative disorders (eg, Alzheimer disease).
Progressive bulbar palsy is a type of motor neuron 
disease in which damage is restricted to muscles inner-
vated by cranial nerves, causing dysarthria (difficulty 
speaking) and dysphagia (difficulty swallowing). (The 
term “bulb” is used interchangeably with “pons,” the 
structure at the base of the brain where motor neurons 
that innervate the face and swallowing muscles reside, 
and “palsy” means weakness). If only lower motor 
neurons are involved, the syndrome is called progres-
sive spinal muscular atrophy.
Progressive spinal muscular atrophy is actually a 
developmental motor neuron disorder characterized 
by weakness, wasting, loss of reflexes, and fascicula-
tions. Most cases arise in infancy and are caused by 
recessively inherited mutations in the gene encoding 
a protein called survival motor neuron (SMN). Sur-
vival in these cases is very short, although there are 
rare cases that begin in late childhood or even early 
adulthood and are associated with longer survival of 
many years. The SMN protein is implicated in traffick-
ing RNA in and out of the nucleus and in the forma-
tion of complexes that are important in RNA splicing. 
The SMN locus on chromosome 5 in humans has two 
almost identical copies of the SMN gene: SMN1 pro-
duces a full-length SMN protein, while alternative 
splicing of SMN2 causes omission of the seventh exon 
in the gene, leading to expression of a small amount 
of full-length SMN and a shortened SMN. The clinical 
effect of the loss of full-length SMN from mutations at 
the main locus can be mitigated to some degree by the 
shortened SMN protein expressed by the SMN2 gene 
(Figure 57–4A,B).
Two treatment strategies have achieved extraordi-
nary benefits in spinal muscular atrophy. In one, small 
strings of approximately 20 nucleic acids (antisense 
oligonucleotides [ASO]s) are administered to alter 
splicing of the SMN2 gene so that it produces higher 
levels of the full-length SMN protein (Figure 57-4A). 
This occurs because the ASO is targeted to bind to the 
SMN2 RNA and inhibit the action of the RNA binding 
protein hnRNPA1/A2 that normally leads the splic-
ing machinery to skip exon 7. By blocking the binding 
of hnRNPA1/A2, the ASO blocks the inhibitory effect  
of hnRNPA1/A2 on splicing, promoting expression of 
full-length SMN protein (Figure 57–4B). It seems likely 
that ASOs will become powerful therapeutic tools with 
many applications. In this example, ASO is used to pro-
mote exon inclusion; as noted below in the discussion 
on muscle dystrophy, ASO can also be used to promote 
exon skipping. It can also be used in other paradigms 
to inhibit or enhance levels of target gene expression.
The second approach to treating spinal muscular 
atrophy has been to deliver the missing SMN gene to spi-
nal motor neurons and muscle using high doses of intra-
venously infused adeno-associated virus carrying the 
SMN1 gene. This, too, dramatically augments survival in 
infantile spinal muscular atrophy (Figure 57–4B).
ALS and its variants are restricted to motor neu-
rons; they do not affect sensory neurons or autonomic 
neurons. The acute viral disease poliomyelitis is also 
confined to motor neurons. These diseases illustrate 
the individuality of nerve cells and the principle of 
selective vulnerability. The basis of this selectivity is, 
in general, not understood.
Diseases of Peripheral Nerves Affect Conduction of 
the Action Potential
Diseases of peripheral nerves may affect either axons 
or myelin. Because motor and sensory axons are bun-
dled together in the same peripheral nerves, disorders 
of peripheral nerves usually affect both motor and 
sensory functions. Some patients with peripheral neu-
ropathy report abnormal, frequently unpleasant, sen-
sory experiences such as numbness, pins-and-needles 
prickling, or tingling. When these sensations occur 
spontaneously without an external sensory stimulus, 
they are called paresthesias.
Patients with paresthesias usually have impaired 
perception of cutaneous sensations (pain and temper-
ature), often because the small fibers that carry these 
sensations are selectively affected. This is not always 
the case, however. Proprioceptive sensations (position 
and vibration) can be lost without loss of cutaneous 
sensation. Lack of pain perception may lead to inju-
ries. The sensory deficits are more prominent distally 
(called a glove-and-stocking pattern), likely because 
the distal portions of the nerves are most remote from 
the cell body and therefore most susceptible to disor-
ders that interfere with axonal transport of essential 
metabolites and proteins.
Peripheral neuropathy is first manifested by weak-
ness that is usually distal. Tendon reflexes are usually 


===== Page 2 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1429
Figure 57–4  Spinal motor atrophy caused by defective sur-
vival motor neuron gene (SMN1) can be treated by gene 
replacement therapy or by manipulating splicing of SMN2.
A. Normally, most of the survival motor neuron (SMN) protein 
is produced from the SMN1 gene, whose mRNA is spliced 
from eight exons. In normal circumstances, about 90% of the 
mRNA has all eight exons, yielding normal levels of the SMN 
protein. In the adjacent sister gene, SMN2, binding of the 
protein hnRNPA1/A2 to the SMN2 transcript excludes exon 7; 
SMN2 therefore makes a shortened SMN protein.
B. In spinal muscular atrophy, genetic lesions (commonly dele-
tions) in SMN1 lead to a marked reduction in levels of total 
SMN protein.
C. When SMN1 protein is absent, one therapeutic approach is to 
replace the missing SMN1 gene using an adeno-associated viral 
vector (AAV) to deliver the missing gene to the central nervous 
system and muscle. An alternative approach is to deliver an anti-
sense oligonucleotide (ASO) that blocks the effect of hnRNPA1/A2, 
thereby enhancing production of a full-length mRNA (with all eight 
exons) from SMN2. This restores SMN protein levels.
A  Production of normal levels of the SMN protein
B  Protein production in spinal muscular atrophy
C  Restoration of therapeutic levels of the SMN protein
SMN1 gene
SMN2 gene
1
2
4
3
5
6
8
7
Normal protein 
from full-length 
mRNA (exons 1-8)
Abnormal protein
from short mRNA
(missing exon 7)
1
2
4
3
5
6
8
7
Presplicing RNA
Proteins
hnRNPA1/A2
SMN1 gene
SMN2 gene
SMN2 gene
1
8
1
2
4
3
5
6
8
7
Presplicing RNA
Proteins
hnRNPA1/A2
No proteins
produced
ASO-mediated exon skipping therapy
Gene therapy
Therapeutic levels of
full-length mRNA
generate normal protein
ASO
1
2
4
3
5
6
8
7
hnRNPA1/A2
Mutation such 
as deletion
AAV with 
SMN cDNA
depressed or lost, fasciculation is seen only rarely, and 
wasting does not ensue unless the weakness has been 
present for many weeks.
Neuropathies may be either acute or chronic. 
The best-known acute neuropathy is Guillain-Barré 
syndrome. Most cases follow respiratory infection 
or infectious diarrhea, but the syndrome may occur 
without apparent preceding illness. The condition 
may be mild or so severe that mechanical ventilation 
is required. Cranial nerves may be affected, leading to 
paralysis of ocular, facial, and oropharyngeal muscles. 
The disorder is attributed to an autoimmune attack on 
peripheral nerves by circulating antibodies. It is there-
fore treated by removing the offending antibodies by 


===== Page 3 =====
1430    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
infusions of gamma globulin and plasmapheresis (a 
procedure in which blood is removed from a patient, 
cells are separated from the antibody-carrying plasma, 
and the cells alone are returned to the patient).
The chronic neuropathies vary from mild to inca-
pacitating or even fatal conditions. There are many 
varieties, including genetic diseases (acute intermittent 
porphyria, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease), metabolic 
disorders (diabetes, vitamin B12 deficiency), toxicities 
(lead), nutritional disorders (alcoholism, thiamine 
deficiency), carcinomas (especially carcinoma of the 
lung), and immunological disorders (plasma cell dis-
eases, amyloidosis). Some chronic disorders, such as 
neuropathy due to vitamin B12 deficiency in pernicious 
anemia, are amenable to therapy.
In addition to being acute or chronic, neuropathies 
may be categorized as demyelinating (in which the 
myelin sheath breaks down) or axonal (in which the 
axon is affected). In demyelinating neuropathies, as 
might be expected from the role of the myelin sheath in 
saltatory conduction, conduction velocity is slowed. In 
axonal neuropathies, the myelin sheath is not affected 
and conduction velocity is normal.
Axonal and demyelinating neuropathies may lead 
to positive or negative symptoms and signs. The nega-
tive signs consist of weakness or paralysis, loss of ten-
don reflexes, and impaired sensation resulting from 
loss of motor and sensory nerves. The positive symp-
toms of peripheral neuropathies consist of paresthesias 
that arise from abnormal impulse activity in sensory 
fibers and either spontaneous activity of injured nerve 
fibers or electrical interaction (cross-talk) between 
abnormal axons, a process called ephaptic transmission 
to distinguish it from normal synaptic transmission. 
It is not known why damaged nerves become hyper-
excitable. Even lightly tapping the site of injury can 
evoke a burst of painful sensations in the region over 
which the nerve is distributed.
Negative symptoms, which have been studied 
more thoroughly than positive symptoms, can be 
attributed to three basic mechanisms: conduction 
block, slowed conduction, and impaired ability to 
conduct impulses at higher frequencies. Conduction 
block was first recognized in 1876 when the German 
neurologist Wilhelm Erb observed that stimulation of 
an injured peripheral nerve below the site of injury 
evoked a muscle response, whereas stimulation above 
the site of injury produced no response. He deduced 
that the lesion blocked conduction of impulses of 
central origin, even when the segment of the nerve 
distal to the lesion was still functional. Later studies 
confirmed this conclusion by showing that selective 
application of diphtheria and other toxins produces 
conduction block by causing demyelination only at the 
site of application (Figure 57–5).
Why does demyelination produce nerve block, 
and how does it lead to slowing of conduction velocity? 
Conduction velocity is much more rapid in myeli-
nated fibers than in unmyelinated axons for two rea-
sons (Chapter 9). First, there is a direct relationship 
between conduction velocity and axon diameter, and 
myelinated axons tend to be larger in diameter. Second, 
membrane capacitance in the myelinated regions of 
the axon is lower than at the unmyelinated nodes of 
Ranvier, greatly speeding up the rate of depolarization 
and thus conduction. With demyelination, the spatial 
distribution of ion channels along the denuded axon 
is not optimal for supporting action potential propaga-
tion and may even cause a failure of conduction. When 
myelin is disrupted by disease, the action potentials in 
different axons of a nerve begin to conduct at slightly 
different velocities. As a result, the nerve loses its nor-
mal synchrony of conduction in response to a single 
stimulus. (Figure 57–2 shows how conduction veloci-
ties are measured in peripheral nerves.)
This slowing and loss of synchrony are thought to 
account for some of the early clinical signs of demy-
elinating neuropathy. For example, functions that nor-
mally depend on the arrival of synchronous bursts of 
neural activity, such as tendon reflexes and vibratory 
sensation, are lost soon after the onset of a chronic 
neuropathy. As demyelination becomes more severe, 
conduction becomes blocked. This block may be inter-
mittent, occurring only at high frequencies of neural 
firing, or complete (Figure 57–3).
The Molecular Basis of Some Inherited Peripheral 
Neuropathies Has Been Defined
Myelin proteins are affected in a group of demyelinat-
ing hereditary peripheral neuropathies collectively 
termed Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease. CMT is 
characterized by muscle weakness and wasting, loss of 
reflexes, and loss of sensation in the distal parts of the 
limbs. These symptoms appear in childhood or adoles-
cence and are slowly progressive.
One form (type 1) has the features of a demyelinat-
ing neuropathy (Figure 57–5). Conduction in peripheral 
nerves is slow, with histological evidence of demyelina-
tion followed by remyelination. Sometimes, the remy-
elination leads to gross hypertrophy of the nerves. Type 1  
disorders are inexorably progressive, without remis-
sions or exacerbations. Another form (type 2) has nor-
mal nerve conduction velocity and is considered an 
axonal neuropathy without demyelination. Both types 
1 and 2 are inherited as autosomal dominant diseases.


===== Page 4 =====
Figure 57–5  Gene defects in components of myelin cause 
demyelinating neuropathies.
A. Myelin production and function in the Schwann cell can be 
adversely affected by many genetic defects, including abnor-
malities in transcription factors, ABC (ATP-binding cassette) 
transporters in peroxisomes, and multiple proteins implicated 
in organizing myelin. Viewed microscopically at high power, the 
site of apposition of the intracellular faces of the Schwann cell 
membrane appears as a dense line, whereas the apposed extra-
cellular faces are described as the “intraperiod line” (see part C). 
(Adapted from Lupski 1998.)
B. Peripheral axons are wrapped in multiple layers of thin 
sheaths of myelin that are processes of Schwann cells. The 
myelin is compact and tight except near the nodes of Ranvier 
and at focal sites described as “incisures” by Schmidt and 
Lanterman. Three myelin-associated proteins are defective in 
three different demyelinating neuropathies: P0 (Dejerine-Sottas 
infantile neuropathy), peripheral myelin protein (PMP22) (Char-
cot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 1), and connexin-32 (Cx32) 
(X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy). (Adapted from Lupski 
1998.)
C. The rim of cytoplasm in which myelin basic protein (MBP) is 
located defines the major dense line, whereas the thin layer of 
residual extracellular space defines the intraperiod line. Muta-
tions in PMP22 and P0 genes adversely affect the organization 
of compact myelin. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and 
Amato 2002.)
Transcription
factors
Enzymes
Myelin sheath
Schwann cells
PMP22
PMP22
P0
P0
P0
P0
Nucleus
Peroxisome
Cx32
(gap-junction 
channel)
Schwann 
cell body
Major
dense line
Intraperiod
line
Major
dense line
Incisure
Axon
A
A
B
C
B
Compact 
myelin
Periaxin
Extracellular
side
Cytoplasmic
side
Cytoplasmic
side
ABC
transporters
Cx32
(gap-junction 
channel)
Node of
Ranvier
MBP


===== Page 5 =====
1432    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–6  Gene defects that cause axonal neuropa-
thies.  These include defects in receptors for growth factors, 
ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transporters in peroxisomes,  
cytosolic enzymes, microtubule motor proteins like the  
kinesins, neurofilament proteins, and other structural proteins 
such as gigaxonin. (Adapted, with permission, from Brown and 
Amato 2002.)
Type 1 disease is attributed to mutations on two 
different chromosomes (locus heterogeneity). The more 
common form (type 1A) is linked to chromosome 17, 
while the less common form (1B) is localized to chro-
mosome 1. The genes at these loci have been directly 
implicated in myelin physiology (Figure 57–5). Type 1A 
involves a defect in peripheral myelin protein 22, and type 
1B the myelin protein P0. Moreover, an X-linked form of 
demyelinating neuropathy occurs because of mutations 
in the gene expressing connexin-32, a subunit of the gap-
junction channels that interconnect myelin folds near the 
nodes of Ranvier (Figure 57–5B,C). Still other genes have 
been implicated in inherited demyelination.
Some of the genes and proteins implicated in 
axonal neuropathies are shown in Figure 57–6 and 
Table 57–3. Genes encoding the neurofilament light 
subunit and an axonal motor protein related to kinesin, 
which is important for transport along microtubules, 
are mutated in two types of axonal neuropathies. 
Defects in these genes are associated with peripheral 
neuropathies with prominent weakness. The mecha-
nisms by which genes alter axonal function in other 
axonal neuropathies are less evident.
As noted above, a wide range of problems other 
than genetic mutations lead to peripheral neuropa-
thies. Particularly striking are nerve defects associated 
with the presence of autoantibodies directed against 
ion channels in distal peripheral nerves. For example, 
some individuals with motor unit instability (cramps 
and fasciculations), as well as sustained or exaggerated 
muscle contractions caused by hyperexcitability of 
motor nerves, have serum antibodies directed against 
one or more axonal voltage-gated K+ channels. The 
prevailing view is that binding of the autoantibodies 
to the channels reduces K+ conductance and thereby 
depolarizes the axon, leading to augmented and sus-
tained firing of the distal motor nerve and associated 
muscle contractions. Alterations in ion channel func-
tion underlie a variety of neurological disorders, as in 
acquired disorders of channels in the neuromuscular 
junction and inherited defects in voltage-gated chan-
nels in muscle (discussed below).
Disorders of Synaptic Transmission at the 
Neuromuscular Junction Have Multiple Causes
Many diseases involve disruption of chemical trans-
mission between neurons and their target cells. By ana-
lyzing such abnormalities, researchers have learned a 
great deal about the mechanisms underlying normal 
synaptic transmission as well as disorders caused by 
dysfunction at the synapse.
Nucleus
Growth
factor 
receptors 
Transcription
factors
ABC 
transporters
Enzymes
Kinesin 
motors 
Neuroﬁlament
light subunit
Gigaxonin
Peroxisome


===== Page 6 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1433
Table 57–3  Representative Peripheral Neuropathy Genes
Site of 
primary 
defect
Protein
Disease
Myelin
Proteolipid myelin 
protein 22
Charcot-Marie-Tooth  
disease (CMT)
 
Proteolipid  
protein P0
Infantile CMT (Dejerine-
Sottas neuropathy)
 
Connexin-32
X-linked CMT
Axon
Kinesin KIF1Bβ 
motor protein
Motor predominant 
neuropathy
 
Heat shock  
protein 27
Motor predominant 
neuropathy
 
Neurofilament 
light subunit
Motor predominant 
neuropathy
 
Tyrosine kinase A 
receptor
Congenital sensory 
neuropathy
 
ABC1 transporter
Tangier disease
 
Transthyretin
Amyloid neuropathy
Diseases that disrupt transmission at the neu-
romuscular junction fall into two broad categories: 
those that affect the presynaptic terminal and those 
that primarily involve the postsynaptic membrane. In 
both categories, the most intensively studied cases are 
autoimmune and inherited defects in critical synaptic 
proteins.
Myasthenia Gravis Is the Best-Studied Example of a 
Neuromuscular Junction Disease
The most common and extensively studied disease 
affecting synaptic transmission is myasthenia gravis, 
a disorder at the neuromuscular junction in skeletal 
muscle. Myasthenia gravis (the term means severe 
weakness of muscle) has two major forms. The most 
prevalent is the autoimmune form. The second is con-
genital and heritable; it is not an autoimmune disorder 
and is heterogeneous. Fewer than 500 of these congeni-
tal cases have been identified, but they have provided 
information about the organization and function of 
the human neuromuscular junction. This form is dis-
cussed later in the chapter.
In autoimmune myasthenia gravis, antibodies 
are produced against components of the postsynaptic 
end-plate in muscle, such as the nicotinic acetylcholine 
(ACh) receptor and muscle-specific tyrosine kinase 
(MuSK). Anti–ACh receptor antibodies interfere 
with synaptic transmission by reducing the number 
of functional receptors or by impeding the interac-
tion of ACh with its receptors. As a result, commu-
nication between the motor neuron and the skeletal 
muscle becomes weakened. This weakness always 
affects cranial muscles—eyelids, eye muscles, and 
oropharyngeal muscles—as well as limb muscles. Its 
severity of symptoms varies over the course of a sin-
gle day, from day to day, or over longer periods (giving 
rise to periods of remission or exacerbation), making 
myasthenia gravis unlike most other diseases of mus-
cle or nerve. The weakness is reversed by drugs that 
inhibit acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that degrades 
ACh. As one example, when patients are asked to 
look upward in a sustained gaze, the eyelids tire after 
several seconds and droop downward (ptosis). Like 
decremental responses on EMG, this fatiguability and 
drooping reverse after treatment with inhibitors of ace-
tylcholinesterase (Figure 57–7).
When a motor nerve is stimulated at rates of two to 
five stimuli per second, the amplitude of the compound 
Figure 57–7  Myasthenia gravis often selectively affects the 
cranial muscles. (Reproduced, with permission, from  
Rowland, Hoefer, and Aranow 1960.)
A. Severe drooping of the eyelids, or ptosis, is characteristic of 
myasthenia gravis. This patient also could not move his eyes to 
look to either side.
B. One minute after an intravenous injection of 10 mg of edro-
phonium, an inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase, both eyes are 
open and can be moved freely.
A
B


===== Page 7 =====
1434    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
Figure 57–8  Synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular 
junction fails in myasthenia gravis. (Reproduced, with per-
mission, from Lisak and Barchi 1982.)
A. In the normal neuromuscular junction, the amplitude of 
the end-plate potential is so large that all fluctuations in 
the efficiency of transmitter release occur well above the 
threshold for a muscle action potential. This results in a large 
safety factor for synaptic transmission (1). Therefore, during 
repetitive stimulation of the motor nerve, the amplitude of 
the compound action potentials, representing the contribu-
tions from all muscle fibers in which synaptic transmission is 
successful in triggering an action potential, is constant and 
invariant (2).
B. In the myasthenic neuromuscular junction, postsynaptic 
changes reduce the amplitude of the end-plate potential so that 
under optimal circumstances the end-plate potential may be just 
sufficient to produce a muscle action potential. Fluctuations in 
transmitter release that normally accompany repeated stimulation 
now cause the end-plate potential to drop below this threshold, 
leading to conduction failure at that junction (1). The amplitude of 
the compound action potentials in the muscle declines progres-
sively and shows only a small and variable recovery (2).
A  Normal muscle 
1
1
Safety factor of
transmission
Threshold
–45
–90
Amplitude of end-plate 
potential (mV)
B  Myasthenic muscle
Reduced 
safety factor
Threshold
–45
–90
Failure at single
junctions
2
2
1
2
3
Time (s)
1
2
3
Time (s)
Muscle compound
action potential
action potential evoked in normal human muscle 
remains constant. In myasthenia gravis, the amplitude 
of the evoked compound action potential decreases 
rapidly. This pattern of decremental response of the 
compound muscle action potential to repetitive stimu-
lation of the motor nerve mirrors the clinical symptom 
of fatiguability in myasthenia. Moreover, this abnor-
mality resembles the pattern induced in normal mus-
cle by d-tubocurarine (the active compound in curare), 
which blocks nicotinic ACh receptors and inhibits the 
action of ACh at the neuromuscular junction. Neostig-
mine (Prostigmin), which inhibits acetylcholinester-
ase and thus increases the duration of action of ACh 
at the neuromuscular junction, reverses the decrease 
in amplitude of evoked compound action potentials in 
myasthenic patients (Figure 57–8).
About 15% of adult patients with myasthenia 
have benign tumors of the thymus (thymomas). As the 
symptoms in myasthenic patients are often improved 
by removal of these tumors, some element of the thy-
moma may stimulate autoimmune pathology. Indeed, 
myasthenia gravis often affects people who have other 
autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, or Graves disease 
(hyperthyroidism).
Normally, an action potential in a motor axon 
releases enough ACh from synaptic vesicles to induce 
a large excitatory end-plate potential with an ampli-
tude of about 70 to 80 mV relative to the resting poten-
tial of –90 mV (Chapter 12). Thus, the normal end-plate 
potential is greater than the threshold needed to initi-
ate an action potential, about –45 mV. In normal mus-
cle, the difference between the threshold and the actual 
end-plate potential amplitude—the safety factor—is 
therefore quite large (Figure 57–8). In fact, in many 
muscles, the amount of ACh released during synaptic 
transmission can be reduced to as little as 25% of nor-
mal before it fails to initiate an action potential.
The density of ACh receptors is reduced over time 
in myasthenia. This reduces the probability that a mol-
ecule of ACh will find a receptor before it is hydrolyzed 
by the acetylcholinesterase. In addition, the geom-
etry of the end-plate is also disturbed in myasthenia  
(Figure 57–9). The normal infolding at the junctional 
folds is reduced and the synaptic cleft is enlarged. 
These morphological changes increase the diffusion of 


===== Page 8 =====
Chapter 57 / Diseases of the Peripheral Nerve and Motor Unit    1435
Figure 57–9  Morphological abnormali-
ties of the neuromuscular junction are 
characteristic of myasthenia gravis. At 
the neuromuscular junction, acetylcho-
line (ACh) is released by exocytosis 
of synaptic vesicles at active zones in 
the nerve terminal. Acetylcholine flows 
across the synaptic cleft to reach ACh 
receptors that are concentrated at the 
peaks of junctional folds. Acetylcho-
linesterase in the cleft rapidly terminates 
transmission by hydrolyzing ACh. The 
myasthenic junction has reduced num-
bers of ACh receptors, simplified synap-
tic folds, a widened synaptic space, but a 
normal nerve terminal.
Normal
Muscle
ﬁber
Synaptic
vesicle
Mitochondrion
Axon
Myasthenia gravis
ACh
receptors
Nerve
terminal
Junctional
folds
ACh away from the synaptic cleft and further reduce 
the probability of ACh interacting with the few remain-
ing functional receptors. As a result, the amplitude of 
the end-plate potential is reduced to the point where it 
is barely above threshold (Figure 57–8).
Thus, in myasthenia, synaptic transmission is 
readily blocked even though the vesicles in the presyn-
aptic terminals contain normal amounts of ACh and 
the process of transmitter release is intact. Both the 
physiological abnormality (the decremental response) 
and the clinical symptoms (muscle weakness) are par-
tially reversed by drugs that inhibit acetylcholinester-
ase. This is because the released ACh molecules remain 
unhydrolyzed for a longer time, and this increases the 
probability that they will interact with receptors.
How do antibodies cause the symptoms of myas-
thenia? The antibodies do not simply occupy the ACh 
binding site. Rather, they appear to react with epitopes 
elsewhere on the receptor molecule. This increases the 
turnover of nicotinic ACh receptors, probably because 
myasthenic antibodies bind and cross-link the recep-
tors, triggering their degradation (Figure 57–9). In 
addition, some myasthenic antibodies bind proteins of 
the complement cascade of the immune system, caus-
ing lysis of the postsynaptic membrane.
Despite the evidence documenting the primary 
role of antibodies against the nicotinic ACh receptor in 
myasthenia, about one-fifth of patients with myasthe-
nia do not have these antibodies—including some who 
respond to anti-immune therapy like plasmapheresis. 
Instead, the majority of these patients have antibodies 
to other postsynaptic proteins, such as MuSK (muscle-
specific trk-related receptor with a Kringle domain) 
and lipoprotein-related protein 4 (LPR4), which is an 
activator of MuSK. MuSK is a muscle-specific recep-
tor tyrosine kinase that interacts with another post-
synaptic protein, agrin, to organize the nicotinic ACh 
receptors into clusters at the neuromuscular junction 
(Chapter 48); it appears to be functionally important 
both during development and in the adult. The anti-
MuSK antibodies block some of the normal clustering 
of the nicotinic ACh receptors following the interaction 
of agrin with MuSK. Anti-LPR4 antibodies also block 
ACh receptor clustering.
Treatment of Myasthenia Is Based on the 
Physiological Effects and Autoimmune 
Pathogenesis of the Disease
Anticholinesterases, especially pyridostigmine, pro-
vide some symptomatic relief but do not alter the basic 
disease. Immunosuppressive therapies such as corti-
costeroids and azathioprine or related drugs suppress 
antibody synthesis. Intravenous infusions of pooled 
immunoglobulins reduce levels of the pathogenic 
autoantibodies and ameliorate symptoms, often within 
a few days. An analogous benefit is achieved by plasma-
pheresis, which involves filtering the plasma. Although 
the benefit of these interventions is short-lived, it may 
be sufficient to prepare a patient for thymectomy or to 
support the patient through more severe episodes.
There Are Two Distinct Congenital Forms of 
Myasthenia Gravis
In two distinct types of myasthenia, symptoms may 
be present from birth or shortly thereafter. In neonatal 


===== Page 9 =====
1436    Part IX / Diseases of the Nervous System
myasthenia, the mother herself has autoimmune myas-
thenia that is transmitted passively to the newborn via 
the immune system. In congenital myasthenia, the 
infant has an inherited defect in some component of 
the neuromuscular junction, rather than an autoim-
mune disease, and thus does not have serum antibod-
ies to the nicotinic ACh receptor or MuSK.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes fall into three 
broad groups based on the site of the defect in the neu-
romuscular synapse: presynaptic, synaptic cleft, and 
postsynaptic forms. Clinical features common to all 
three types include a positive family history, weakness 
with easy fatigability (present since infancy), droop-
ing of the eyelids (ptosis), a decremental response to 
repetitive stimulation on EMG, and negative screening 
for anti-nicotinic ACh receptor antibodies. Subnormal 
development of the skeletal muscles reflects the fact 
that normal function at the neuromuscular synapse is 
required to maintain normal muscle bulk.
In one presynaptic form of congenital myasthe-
nia, the enzyme choline acetyltransferase is absent or 
reduced in the distal motor terminal. This enzyme is 
essential for the synthesis of ACh from choline and 
acetyl-CoA (Chapter 16). In its absence, the synthesis 
of ACh is impaired. The result is weakness that usu-
ally begins in infancy or early childhood. In another 
presynaptic form of congenital myasthenia, the num-
ber of quanta of ACh released after an action potential 
is less than normal; the molecular basis for this defect 
is not known.
Congenital myasthenia may also result from the 
absence of acetylcholinesterase in the synaptic cleft. In 
this circumstance, end-plate potentials and miniature 
end-plate potentials are not small, as in autoimmune 
myasthenia, but are markedly prolonged, which may 
explain the repetitive response of the evoked muscle 
potential in those patients. Cytochemical studies indi-
cate that ACh-esterase is absent from the basement 
membranes. At the same time, nicotinic ACh receptors 
are preserved.
The physiological consequence of ACh-esterase 
deficiency is sustained action of ACh on the end-plate 
and ultimately the development of an end-plate myo-
pathy. This myopathy indicates that skeletal muscle 
can react adversely to excessive stimulation at the 
neuromuscular junction. In treating this disorder, it is 
critical to avoid using agents that inhibit ACh-esterase, 
which can increase the electrical firing at the end-plate 
and thereby exacerbate the muscle weakness.
The majority of congenital myasthenia cases are 
caused by primary mutations in the genes encod-
ing different subunits of the ACh receptor. The slow 
channel syndrome is characterized by prominent limb 
weakness but little weakness of cranial muscles (the 
reverse of the pattern usually seen in autoimmune 
myasthenia, where muscles of the eyes and orophar-
ynx are almost always affected). End-plate currents are 
slow to decay, and there is abnormal prolongation of 
channel opening. The mutations probably act both by 
increasing the affinity of the nicotinic ACh receptor for 
ACh, thereby prolonging the effects of this transmit-
ter, and by directly slowing the channel closing rate. In 
some instances, quinidine is effective therapy for slow 
channel syndrome because it blocks the open receptor-
channel. As with ACh-esterase mutations, end-plate 
function degenerates due to excessive postsynaptic 
stimulation, so anticholinesterase medications are 
potentially dangerous.
In the fast channel syndrome, a different set of 
mutations in one or more nicotinic ACh receptor subu-
nits leads to an accelerated rate of channel closing and 
end-plate current decay. The fast channel syndrome 
may respond to either acetylcholinesterase inhibitors 
or 3,4-diaminopyridine. The latter blocks a presynap-
tic potassium conductance and thereby increases the 
probability of quantal release of ACh, probably by pro-
longing the action potential.
Lambert-Eaton Syndrome and Botulism Also Alter 
Neuromuscular Transmission
Some patients with cancer, especially small-cell cancer 
of the lung, have a syndrome of proximal limb weak-
ness and a neuromuscular disorder with characteristics 
that are the opposite of those seen in myasthenia gravis. 
Instead of a decline in synaptic response to repetitive 
nerve stimulation, the amplitude of the evoked poten-
tial increases; that is, neuromuscular transmission 
is facilitated. Here, the first postsynaptic potential is 
abnormally small, but subsequent responses increase 
in amplitude so that the final summated potential is 
two to four times the amplitude of the first potential.
This disorder, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, is attributed 
to the action of antibodies against voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels in the presynaptic terminals. It is thought that 
these antibodies react with the channels, degrading the 
channels as the antibody–antigen complex is internal-
ized. Calcium channels similar to those of presynaptic 
terminals are found in cultured cells from the small-
cell carcinoma of the lung; development of antibodies 
against these antigens in the tumor might be followed 
by pathogenic action against nerve terminals, another 
kind of molecular mimicry.
A facilitating neuromuscular block is also found in 
human botulism, as the botulinum toxin also impairs 
release of ACh from nerve terminals. Both botulism 


